SPRING HILL, TENNESSEE
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-6 supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 25-14, passed 6-2-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 17-16
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF SPRING HILL,
TENNESSEE, REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN
EXISTING GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF SPRING HILL, TENNESSEE DEALING WITH
SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF ORDINANCES.
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substances for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
   WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of Tennessee, empower and
authorize the political subdivision to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinance into one ordinance in book form;
and
   WHEREAS, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Spring Hill,
Tennessee has authorized a general compilation, revision and codification of
the ordinances of the City of Spring Hill, Tennessee of a general and permanent
nature and publication of such ordinances in book form; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN OF THE CITY
OF SPRING HILL, TENNESSEE:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the city as revised, amended, restated,
codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted as and shall constitute
the "Code of Ordinances of the City of Spring Hill, Tennessee."
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of
the following Titles:
   (See Attached Exhibit A)
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting the boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Spring Hill,
Tennessee and the City Recorder is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy
of such Code of Ordinances in the Office of the City Recorder.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be an emergency measure necessary
for the immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare
of the people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.   
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the Legislative Authority of the Political Subdivision on
this 18th day of September, 2017.
                                       __________________
                                       Rick Graham, Mayor
ATTEST:
April Goad /s/
April Goad, City Recorder
LEGAL FORM APPROVED:
Patrick Carter /s/
Patrick Carter, City Attorney
Passed on First Reading: August 21, 2017
Passed on Second Reading: September 18, 2017
ORDINANCE 19-04
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SPRING HILL, TENNESSEE, ENACTING AND ADOPTING A
SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, the City of Spring Hill Board of Mayor and Aldermen adopted an
updated Municipal Code completed by American Legal Publishing Corporation on
September 18, 2017; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has completed the first
supplement, 2018 S-1 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Spring
Hill, Tennessee, which supplement contains all Ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior codification; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
upon approval.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF SPRING HILL, TENNESSEE, BOARD OF
MAYOR AND ALDERMEN:
Section 1.   That 2018 S-1 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Spring Hill, Tennessee as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation,
and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as if
set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Such Supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen and the City Recorder
is hereby ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of
Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the City Recorder.
Passed and adopted by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Spring
Hill on this 19th day of February, 2019.
                                       Rick Graham /s/
                                       Rick Graham, Mayor
ATTEST:
April Goad /s/
April Goad, City Recorder
LEGAL FORM APPROVED:                  Passed on First Reading: January 22, 2019
Patrick M. Carter /s/                   Passed on Second Reading: February 19,
2019
Patrick M. Carter, City Attorney
ORDINANCE 20-08
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SPRING HILL, TENNESSEE, ENACTING AND ADOPTING A
SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, the City of Spring Hill Board of Mayor and Aldermen adopted an
updated Municipal Code completed by American Legal Publishing Corporation on
September 18, 2017 and approved the first supplement 2018 S-1; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has completed the second
supplement, 2019 S-2 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Spring
Hill, Tennessee, which supplement contains all Ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior codification; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
upon approval.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF SPRING HILL, TENNESSEE, BOARD OF
MAYOR AND ALDERMEN:
Section 1.   That 2019 S-2 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Spring Hill, Tennessee as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation,
and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as if
set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Such Supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen and the City Recorder
is hereby ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of
Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the City Recorder.
Passed and adopted by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Spring
Hill on this 18th day of May, 2020.
            Rick Graham /s/
            Rick Graham, Mayor
ATTEST:
April Goad /s/
April Goad, City Recorder
LEGAL FORM APPROVED:         Passed on First Reading: 5- 18-2020
Patrick M. Carter /s/          Passed on Second Reading: 6-15-2020
Patrick M. Carter, City Attorney
ORDINANCE 21-12
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SPRING HILL, TENNESSEE, ENACTING AND ADOPTING A
SUPPLEMENT TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, the City of Spring Hill Board of Mayor and Aldermen adopted an
updated Municipal Code completed by American Legal Publishing Corporation on
September 18, 2017 and approved supplements 2018 S-1 and 2019 S-2; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has completed the third
supplement, 2020 S-3 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Spring
Hill, Tennessee, which supplement contains all Ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior codification; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
upon approval.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT BE ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF SPRING HILL, TENNESSEE,
BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN:
Section 1.   That 2020 S-3 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Spring Hill, Tennessee as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation,
and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as if
set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Such Supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen and the City Recorder
is hereby ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of
Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the City Recorder.
Passed and adopted by the Board of Mayor and Alderman of the City of Spring
Hill on this 21st day of June, 2021.
 
                                                                      
                              Jim Hagaman, Mayor
ATTEST:
                                         
April Goad, City Recorder
LEGAL FORM APPROVED:            Passed on First Reading: 05-17-2021
__________________________
Patrick M. Carter, City Attorney            Passed on Second Reading: 06-21-
2021
ORDINANCE 23-01
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SPRING HILL, TENNESSEE, ENACTING AND ADOPTING A
SUPPLEMENT (S-4) TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, the City of Spring Hill Board of Mayor and Aldermen adopted an
updated Municipal Code completed by American Legal Publishing Corporation on
September 18, 2017 and approved supplements 2018 S-1, and 2019 S-2, and 2020 S-
3; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has completed the third
supplement, 2022 S-4 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Spring
Hill, Tennessee, which supplement contains all Ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior codification; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
upon approval.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT BE ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF SPRING HILL, TENNESSEE,
BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN:
Section 1.   That 2022 S-4 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Spring Hill, Tennessee as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation,
and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as if
set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Such Supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen and the City Recorder
is hereby ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of
Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the City Recorder.
Passed and adopted by the Board of Mayor and Alderman of the City of Spring
Hill on this 17th day of January 2023.
                                       /s/ Jim Hagaman
                                       Jim Hagaman, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/ April Goad
April Goad, City Recorder
LEGAL FORM APPROVED:                  Passed on First Reading: 01-03-2023
/s/ Patrick M. Carter         
Patrick M. Carter, City Attorney                  Passed on Second Reading: 01-
17-2023
ORDINANCE 24-17
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF SPRING HILL, TENNESSEE, ENACTING AND
ADOPTING A SUPPLEMENT (S-5) TO THE CODE OF ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, the City of Spring Hill Board of Mayor and Aldermen adopted an
updated Municipal Code completed by American Legal Publishing Corporation on
September 18, 2017 and subsequently approved supplements 2018 S-1, 2019 S-2,
2020 S-3, and 2022 S-4; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Publishing Corporation has completed the fifth
supplement, 2024 S-5 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of Spring
Hill, Tennessee, which supplement contains all Ordinances of a general and
permanent nature enacted since the prior codification; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
upon approval.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT BE ORDAINED BY THE CITY OF SPRING HILL, TENNESSEE,
BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN:
Section 1.   That 2024 S-5 Supplement to the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Spring Hill, Tennessee as submitted by American Legal Publishing Corporation,
and as attached hereto, be and the same is hereby adopted by reference as if
set out in its entirety.
Section 2.   Such Supplement shall be deemed published as of the day of its
adoption and approval by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen and the City Recorder
is hereby ordered to insert such supplement into the copy of the Code of
Ordinances kept on file in the Office of the City Recorder.
Passed and adopted by the Board of Mayor and Alderman of the City of Spring
Hill on this 3rd day of September 2024.
      /s/ Jim Hagaman
         Jim Hagaman, Mayor
ATTEST:
 /s/ April Goad
April Goad, City Recorder
LEGAL FORM APPROVED:         Passed on First Reading: 08-19-2024
/s/ Patrick M. Carter         
Patrick M. Carter, City Attorney         Passed on Second Reading: 09-03-2024
MAYOR-ALDERMANIC CHARTER
Editor’s note:
   This compilation includes Tenn. Code Ann. Title 6, Ch. 1 through 17, which
contain the basic organizational provisions for this form of government.
Important note: there are many other general laws affecting municipalities
organized under this charter which have been omitted because they apply to all
municipalities. These are found in various parts of the Tennessee Code
Annotated. This compilation has been amended to reflect legislation passed in
the 2010 session of the Tennessee General Assembly.
   If the city has adopted any related acts, those acts will follow the general
law charter.
CHAPTER 1: ADOPTION AND SURRENDER
Section
PART 1 — DEFINITIONS
   
6-1-101   Definitions
   
6-1-102   Use of “shall” and “may”
   
6-1-103   [Repealed]
PART 2 — ADOPTION OF CHARTER
   
6-1-201   Right to adopt charter—Incorporation within specified distances from
existing cities
   
6-1-202   Election to adopt charter
   
6-1-203   Petition to incorporate under this charter
   
6-1-204   Registration of voters—Qualifications to vote—Certification of result
   
6-1-205   Effect of vote
   
6-1-206   Certification to secretary of state
   
6-1-207   Election of officers upon incorporation
   
6-1-208   Succession to old corporation
   
6-1-209   Sample petition for adoption
   
6-1-210   General validation provision
   
6-1-211   Elections valid despite informalities
   6-1-212 — 6-1-218   [Repealed]
   
6-1-219   New incorporations—situs based taxes
PART 3 — SURRENDER
   
6-1-301   Surrender of charter
   
6-1-302   Conduct of surrender election
   
6-1-303   Termination of charter—New charter
   
6-1-304   Election of new officers when charter is surrendered
   
6-1-305   Succession to assets and liabilities after surrender of charter
   
6-1-306   Liquidation of affairs
PART 4 — OFFICERS
   6-1-401—6-1-406   [Repealed]
PART 5 — CHANGE OF CORPORATE NAME
   
6-1-501   Right to change corporate name
   
6-1-502   Manner of changing corporate name
   
6-1-503   Obligations and liabilities unaffected by change of name
PART 1 — DEFINITIONS
§ 6-1-101 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions apply in chapters 1-4 of this title unless the
context otherwise requires:
   (1)   “Board” means the mayor and the aldermen;
   (2)   “Department head” means the city administrator, city recorder,
treasurer, police chief and any other department heads appointed by the board
or mayor;
   (3)   “Officer” means the mayor, aldermen, city attorney and city judge;
   (4)   “This charter” refers to chapters 1-4 of this title; and
   (5)   “Wards” means a geographical subdivision of the municipality
established for the purpose of securing representation on the board.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1992, ch. 612, § 1.]
§ 6-1-102 USE OF “SHALL” AND “MAY”.
   As used in this charter, “shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1.]
§ 6-1-103 [REPEALED].
PART 2 — ADOPTION OF CHARTER
§ 6-1-201 RIGHT TO ADOPT CHARTER—INCORPORATION WITHIN SPECIFIED DISTANCES FROM
EXISTING CITIES.
   (a)   (1)   The residents of any incorporated municipality or of any
territory wanting to incorporate under this charter may adopt the provisions of
this chapter and chapters 2-4 of this title in the manner provided in this
chapter. Thereupon the municipality or territory shall be and become
incorporated and be governed as herein set forth. No unincorporated territory
shall be incorporated under the provisions of this charter unless such
territory contains not fewer than one thousand five hundred (1,500) persons,
who shall be actual residents of the territory.
      (2)   No unincorporated territory shall be allowed to hold a referendum
on the question of whether or not to incorporate under this charter until a
plan of services is documented setting forth the identification and projected
timing of municipal services proposed to be provided and the revenue from
purely local sources to be payable annually. The plan of services shall be
attached to the petition to incorporate when such petition is filed with the
county election commission. The plan of services shall include, but not be
limited to: police protection, fire protection, water service, sanitary sewage
system, solid waste disposal, road and street construction and repair,
recreational facilities, a proposed five-year operational budget, including
projected revenues and expenditures, and the revenue from purely local sources
to be payable annually. Municipalities that are first incorporated on or after
July 1, 1993, that produce no local own source revenues in any fiscal year
shall not receive any state-shared revenues during the next fiscal year.
      (3)   Prior to filing the petition with the county election commission, a
public hearing on the referendum on the question of whether or not to
incorporate under this charter and plan of services shall be conducted. The
public hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of general circulation for
two (2) consecutive weeks.
   (b)   (1)   If any part of the unincorporated territory proposed for
incorporation is within five (5) miles of an existing municipality of one
hundred thousand (100,000) or more according to the most recent federal census
and if the governing body of such municipality adopts a resolution by a two-
thirds (2/3) vote indicating that the municipality has no desire to annex the
territory, such territory may be included in a proposed new municipality. A
petition for incorporation shall include a certified copy of such resolution
from the affected municipality.
      (2)   In any county having a population of more than eighteen thousand
two hundred (18,200) and less than eighteen thousand five hundred (18,500)
according to the 1990 federal census or any subsequent federal census, if any
part of the unincorporated territory proposed for incorporation is within five
(5) miles of an existing municipality of one hundred thousand (100,000) or more
in population or within two (2) miles of an existing municipality of more than
one thousand (1,000) and fewer than one hundred thousand (100,000) in
population, according to the 1990 federal census or any subsequent census, then
action on the petition as provided in §§
6-1-202 and
6-1-204 shall be held in abeyance for fifteen (15) months from the date of
filing the petition. If, within this period, the existing municipality does not
annex at least twenty percent (20%) of the land area or twenty percent (20%) of
the population of the territory proposed for incorporation, then proceedings
shall be continued as provided in §§
6-1-202 and
6-1-204 as though the petition had been filed at the conclusion of the fifteen
(15) month period. If the existing municipality annexes at least that part of
the territory within this period, then the petition shall be null and void.
   (c)—(e)   [Deleted by 1993 amendment].
   (f)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) or (b) to the
contrary, a territory may be incorporated if the following conditions are
fulfilled:
      (1)   The territory contains two hundred twenty-five (225) residents or
more;
      (2)   The territory is composed of property which is sixteen hundred
(1600) feet or more above sea level on the western border of the territory and
contiguous with a county boundary on the eastern border of the territory;
      (3)   The territory is located within an area which is bordered on the
west, north and east by the Tennessee River and on the south by the border
between Tennessee and another State; and
      (4)   The territory is located within a metropolitan statistical area.
   (g)   (1)   Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this section to the
contrary, a territory may be incorporated that meets the following conditions:
         (A)   The territory contains three hundred (300) residents or more;
         (B)   The territory’s western boundary is contiguous with the western
boundary of the county in which it is located;
         (C)   The territory is located within an area bordered on the north by
the Loosahatchie River, on the south of the Wolf River;
         (D)   The territory’s eastern boundary is approximately parallel with
the western boundary, but in no place is more than eight (8) miles from the
western boundary; and
         (E)   The territory is located within a metropolitan statistical area.
      (2)   The territory described in this subsection may incorporate
notwithstanding the provisions and restrictions in subsections (a) and (b).
   (h)   Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, or §§
6-1-202,
6-1-203, and
6-1-209, or any other provision of law to the contrary, a petition for
incorporation may consist of a letter from a resident of the territory desiring
to incorporate to the county election commission requesting that the question
of incorporating the territory be placed on the ballot. The letter shall
describe the exact boundaries of the proposed municipality, indicate the name
of the proposed municipality, and indicate under which charter the territory
desires to incorporate. The letter shall be treated as a petition meeting all
the requirements of law.
   (i)   (1)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, whenever
the governing body of any existing city affected by this section, by a
resolution adopted by a majority vote of its governing body, indicates that it
has no interest in annexing the property to be incorporated, and when a
certified copy of such resolution and a petition requesting that an
incorporation election be held are filed with the county election commission,
then the proceedings shall continue as provided in this chapter as though the
proposed new incorporation were not within the specified distance of such
existing city as provided in this section.
      (2)   The provisions of this subsection shall only apply in counties
having a population of not less than 80,000 nor more than 83,000 according to
the 1990 federal census or any subsequent federal census; provided, that in an
adjoining county an existing municipality that is within the specified distance
may also use the procedure authorized by this subsection.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1993, ch. 320, §§ 1, 2; Acts 1995, ch. 13, § 1;
Acts 1995, ch. 202; Acts 1996, ch. 666, §§ 1, 4,; Acts 1996, ch. 708, § 1, § 3;
Acts 1998, ch. 1101, § 27]
§ 6-1-202 ELECTION TO ADOPT CHARTER.
   (a)   The county election commission shall hold an election for the purpose
of determining whether this charter shall become effective for any municipality
or newly incorporating territory upon the petition in writing of at least
thirty-three and one-third percent (33 1/3%) of the registered voters of the
municipality or territory. The petition shall include a current list of the
registered voters who live within the proposed territory. The petition shall
state in a sufficient manner the boundaries of the proposed municipal
corporation, which may be done by a general reference to the boundaries then
existing if there is one. Upon receipt of the petition the county election
commission shall examine the petition to determine the validity of the
signatures in accordance with Section 2-1-107. The county election commission
shall have a period of twenty (20) days to certify whether the petition has the
sufficient number of signatures of registered voters. If the petition is
sufficient to call for an election on the issue of incorporation, the county
election commission shall hold an election, providing options to vote “FOR” or
“AGAINST” the incorporation of the new charter, not less than forty-five (45)
days nor more than sixty (60) days after the petition is certified. The date of
the election shall be set in accordance with Section 2-3-204. The county
election commission shall, in addition to all other notices required by law,
publish one (1) notice of the election in a newspaper of general circulation
within the territory of the municipality or of the proposed municipality, and
post the notice in at least three (3) places in the territory.
   (b)   At any time not less than thirty (30) days prior to the election
provided for in this part, the petition may be withdrawn or may be amended to
call for a smaller territory for the proposed municipal corporation so long as
all of the proposed smaller territory is contained within the boundaries of the
territory described in the first petition. The withdrawal or amendment shall be
valid if filed with the county election commission in writing, and if signed by
not fewer than fifty-one percent (51%) of those who signed the original
petition. In the event such an amended petition is filed, all provisions
relating to time periods in §
6-1-201, shall be controlled by the date of the filing of the original
petition, notwithstanding the filing of the amended petition, and the county
election commission shall publish the notice of election as provided for
herein. A petition to withdraw, when filed with and validated by the county
election commission, shall render the original petition null and void.
   (c)   A cash bond equivalent to the costs of the election to incorporate
under this charter shall be filed by the petitioners with the county election
commission along with the petition for incorporation.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1998, ch. 1101, § 28]
§ 6-1-203 PETITION TO INCORPORATE UNDER THIS CHARTER.
   The petition filed in accordance with §
6-1-202 shall be in substantially the form provided in §
6-1-209 and shall include a description of the boundaries of the proposed
municipal corporation and the boundaries of the proposed wards, if there is
only one (1) alderman to be elected per ward, the wards that will carry the
initial two-year term, the proposed name of the municipality and whether it is
a city or town. The petition shall include a plan of services setting forth the
identification and projected timing of municipal services proposed to be
provided and the revenue from purely local sources to be payable annually. The
plan of services shall include, but not be limited to: police protection, fire
protection, water service, sanitary sewage system, solid waste disposal, road
and street construction and repair, recreational facilities, a proposed five-
year operational budget, including projected revenues and expenditures, and a
property tax rate to be annually levied upon all taxable property in the area
to be incorporated. Boundary descriptions shall contain references to tax maps
kept in the office of the county assessor.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1993, ch. 320, § 3; Acts 1995, ch. 13, § 2]
§ 6-1-204 REGISTRATION OF VOTERS—QUALIFICATIONS TO VOTE— CERTIFICATION OF
RESULT.
   (a)   All registered voters of the municipality or of the territory of the
proposed municipality are eligible to vote in the election.
   (b)   The county election commission shall determine and declare the result
of the election and shall certify the result in accordance with § 2-8-105(3)
within forty-eight (48) hours after the election. It shall publish the results
in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality or territory and, if
the municipality is already incorporated, shall file the results with the
legislative body or the municipality at its first meeting after the
certification. The results shall be entered at large on the minutes of the body
with which it is filed.
   (c)   In any election held by municipalities incorporated under this charter
registered voters of the municipality may vote in accordance with this
subsection. Upon adoption of a resolution approved by two-thirds (2/3) vote of
the board of commissioners of any municipality incorporated under this charter
which has a population of not less than seven thousand seven hundred ten
(7,710) nor more than seven thousand seven hundred twenty (7,720) according to
the 2000 federal census or any subsequent federal census, registered voters who
own real property located in any such municipality shall be entitled to vote in
all municipal elections and municipal referenda held in such municipality. The
provisions of § 2-2-107(a)(3) shall apply to such property rights voting within
such municipality. The approval or nonapproval of such resolution shall be
proclaimed by the presiding officer of such board and certified by such
presiding officer to the secretary of state.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 2007, ch. 88, § 1]
§ 6-1-205 EFFECT OF VOTE.
   (a)   If the majority of the votes cast are in favor of the adoption of this
charter it shall be deemed to have been adopted. The newly adopted charter
shall not be effective until the first board takes office as provided in § 6-1-
207. Except for the provisions of this charter that are adopted by reference in
other municipal charters, the provisions of this charter apply only to those
municipalities that have adopted this charter by referendum as authorized by
law.
   (b)   Following the defeat of an incorporation in an election held pursuant
to §
6-1-202, no new petition for an election may be filed until after the
expiration of four (4) years. If, however, the territory included in the
boundaries of the newly proposed municipal corporation includes less than fifty
percent (50%) of the actual territory subject to incorporation in the previous
election the new petition may be filed after the expiration of two (2) years.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1995, ch. 13, § 3]
§ 6-1-206 CERTIFICATION TO SECRETARY OF STATE.
   After certification of the election results, if at least a majority of the
votes cast are “for charter,” the county election commission shall certify to
the secretary of state that notice was duly given, and application in due form
of law made, the description of boundaries, the entire number of votes cast,
the number of votes cast “for charter,” the number of votes cast for “against
charter,” and the corporate name of the municipality.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
§ 6-1-207 ELECTION OF OFFICERS UPON INCORPORATION.
   (a)   The county election commission shall call an election not later than
sixty-two (62) days following the election for adoption of this charter, at
which time municipal officials shall be chosen who shall take office
immediately following the election. The qualifying deadline for filing
nominating petitions shall be as described in § 2-5-101.
   (b)   In the election held pursuant to subsection (a), where there is more
than one (1) alderman to be elected per ward, the alderman receiving the higher
number of votes in each ward shall serve a four-year term. The alderman
receiving the second higher number of votes shall serve an initial two-year
term. All terms thereafter will be four (4) years.
   (c)   The mayor and each alderman shall serve for the term for which elected
or until their successors are elected and qualified.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
§ 6-1-208 SUCCESSION TO OLD CORPORATION.
   (a)   (1)   This charter shall take effect in any municipality immediately
after the election and qualification of the first board of mayor and aldermen
and any then-existing charter of the municipality shall immediately become null
and void.
      (2)   The right, title and ownership of all property of the municipality
and all of its uncollected taxes, dues, claims, judgments, and choses in
action, and all of its rights of every kind whatsoever, shall immediately
become vested in the new corporation chartered under chapters 1-4 of this
title.
      (3)   The new corporation shall answer and be liable for all debts,
contracts and obligations of the corporation it succeeds in the same manner and
proportion and to the same extent as the former corporation was liable under
existing laws.
      (4)   All ordinances, resolutions, and bylaws duly enacted and in force
under the preexisting charter and not inconsistent with this charter shall
remain in full force until repealed, modified, or amended.
   (b)   Any zoning ordinance applicable to any territory incorporated under
this charter shall continue to apply to that territory until the municipality
enacts a zoning ordinance, or enacts an ordinance rescinding the zoning that
applied to such territory.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
§ 6-1-209 SAMPLE PETITION FOR ADOPTION.
   Petitions for adoption of this charter shall be in substantially the
following form:
 
PETITION FOR INCORPORATION ELECTION FOR TOWN (CITY)                                                                                             , TENNESSEE TO: The County Election
Commission,                                   County, Tennessee
We the undersigned, being registered voters and residents of the territory herein proposed for incorporation, and being in number in excess of 33-1/3% of the registered voters of the
herein described territory hereby request the county election commission to hold an election on the question of whether or not the herein described territory shall be incorporated under
the terms of Tenn. Code Ann. Title 6, Ch. 1-4, and be known by the name and style of the “Town (City) of                                                                , Tennessee”, all
as prescribed in Tenn. Code Ann. Title 6, Chs. 1-4.
The territory in question, being part of the                                     , Civil District(s) of                                         County, Tennessee is further described
as:  (here insert a description of boundaries with references to tax maps)                                                                            
The wards of the Town (City) shall be as follows:  (here insert a description of wards, and if there is only one ward state that the boundaries are as described above)
                                                      
Wards that will carry an initial two-year term:  (for those municipalities incorporating with more than four wards)
The proposed plan of services is as follows:  (here insert a description of the Plan of Services, as defined in Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-1-203)
 
 
PETITIONERS’ SIGNATURES
                                                                                                                                
Name            Residence Address            Date
(List name and residence as on registration records)
Certificate
I,                                                                                          , hereby certify that I, personally, solicited the signatures of the persons appearing on this page and that they, in fact, signed their names to this petition in
my presence.
Name                                                                                                                  
Address                                                                                                               
Date                                                                                                                    
STATE OF TENNESSEE
COUNTY OF                                                                      
On this                     day of                                          , 20           , before me personally appeared                                       , to me known to be the person described in, and who executed, the foregoing instrument, and
acknowledged that he (she) executed it as his (her) free act and deed.
Signature and Seal of Notary Public                                                                            
My commission expires:                                                                                            
 
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1993, ch. 320, § 4]
§ 6-1-210 GENERAL VALIDATION PROVISION.
   (a)   The adoption, heretofore accomplished, of chapters 1-3 of this title,
before June 30, 1991, by any territory or municipality is hereby ratified and
validated in all respects. No flaw or defect or failure to comply with any
technical requirement of incorporation shall invalidate any ordinance passed by
any municipality incorporating under chapters 1-4 of this title, after June 30,
1991.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any other law to the
contrary,
      IF the registered voters of any unincorporated territory approved a
mayor-aldermanic charter and elected municipal officials, acting pursuant to
the provisions of this chapter on or before December 31, 1999; AND
      IF from the election of such officials until April 26, 2001, the
territory has continuously functioned as a mayor-aldermanic municipality; AND
      IF the territory, between the date of such election and April 26, 2001,
received and expended state funding allocated for municipalities; THEN The
adoption of such charter, the incorporation of such territory as a mayor-
aldermanic municipality and the election of such officials are hereby ratified
and validated in all respects; and no flaw or defect or failure to comply with
any requirement of incorporation, set forth in §
6-1-201(b), shall invalidate the territory’s status as an incorporated
municipality or invalidate any ordinance passed by the board.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 2001, ch. 129, § 1]
§ 6-1-211 ELECTIONS VALID DESPITE INFORMALITIES.
   No informalities in conducting any election held under this chapter shall
invalidate it if the election is conducted fairly and in substantial conformity
with the requirements of this chapter and the general election law.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
§§ 6-1-212—6-1-218 [REPEALED].
§ 6-1-219 NEW INCORPORATIONS—SITUS BASED TAXES.
   (a)   Notwithstanding any provisions of law to the contrary, whenever a new
municipality incorporates under any form of charter, the county or counties in
which the new municipality is located shall continue to receive the revenue
from all state and local taxes distributed on the basis of situs of collection,
generated within the newly incorporated area, until July 1 following the
incorporation, unless the incorporation takes effect on July 1.
   (b)   If the incorporation takes effect on July 1, then the municipality
shall begin receiving revenue from such taxes generated within its corporate
boundaries for the period beginning July 1.
   (c)   Whenever a municipality incorporates, the municipality shall notify
the Department of Revenue of such incorporation prior to the incorporation
becoming effective for the purpose of tax administration.
   (d)   Such taxes shall include the local sales tax authorized in § 67-6-103,
the income tax on dividends authorized in § 67-2-102, and all other such taxes
distributed to counties and municipalities based on the situs of their
collection.
[Acts 1998, ch. 651, § 1]
PART 3 — SURRENDER
§ 6-1-301 SURRENDER OF CHARTER.
   (a)   After the adoption of this charter and the election of the first board
of mayor and aldermen, no election for the surrender of this charter shall be
called or held for a period of four (4) years from the date the first board
takes office.
   (b)   After the expiration of the four-year period, an election to surrender
the charter may be held. In order for a surrender election to be held, a
petition requesting surrender of the charter must be filed in the same manner
and contain the signatures of the same number of registered voters as provided
for the adoption of this charter. The petition must pray for a surrender of the
charter and must be accompanied by a cash bond to be posted by the petitioners
to cover the cost of the election. In case of a failure to surrender the
charter, future elections to surrender it shall not be held more frequently
than at four-year intervals.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
§ 6-1-302 CONDUCT OF SURRENDER ELECTION.
   The county election commission has the same duties with respect to an
election for the surrender of a charter as it has with respect to an election
to adopt a charter under this title.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
§ 6-1-303 TERMINATION OF CHARTER—NEW CHARTER.
   If a majority of the votes cast in the election favor the termination of
this form of government the provisions of this charter shall terminate at 12:01
A.M. on the sixtieth day next following the date of the election unless this
falls upon Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall terminate at 12:01 A.M.
on the next day. If before the adoption of this charter the municipality
functioned under a different charter, thereupon the prior charter shall become
effective at the time above mentioned. Territory previously unincorporated
shall revert to that status. Another charter, however, may be adopted and the
question whether or not another charter shall be adopted may be placed on the
ballots used in the election herein mentioned, if the petition filed requests
that, and if all other necessary legal steps to adopt the other charter have
been taken.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
§ 6-1-304 ELECTION OF NEW OFFICERS WHEN CHARTER IS SURRENDERED.
   If there was a previously incorporated municipality or if a new charter is
adopted as provided in §
6-1-303, the county election commission shall call an election not more than
sixty-two (62) days following the election for surrender of this charter, at
which time municipal officials for the newly adopted form of government shall
be chosen who shall take office immediately after the election. The previous
board shall hold over until the newly elected officers take office. The
qualifying deadline for filing nominating petitions shall be as described in §
2-5-101. All registered voters of the municipality may vote in the election.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
§ 6-1-305 SUCCESSION TO ASSETS AND LIABILITIES AFTER SURRENDER OF CHARTER.
   (a)   In case of a reversion to a former charter or adoption of a new one
simultaneously with the surrender of the old, all assets, liabilities and
obligations of the old municipality shall become those of the new municipality.
   (b)   In the event a municipality reverts to unincorporated status, the
board of mayor and aldermen shall become trustees of the property and funds of
the former municipality, and, under such bonds as may be required by the county
legislative body, shall proceed to terminate the affairs of the municipality
and dispose of its property.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
§ 6-1-306 LIQUIDATION OF AFFAIRS.
   If the property and funds are more than sufficient to meet the
municipality’s obligations, the surplus shall be paid into the treasury of the
county to become a part of its general fund. If the property and funds are
insufficient to meet all the municipality’s current obligations, the county
legislative body may levy and collect taxes upon the property within the
boundaries of the former municipality and pay the revenue to the trustees for
the purpose of meeting the current deficit. The trustees shall terminate the
affairs of the municipality as soon as possible, but in no event shall the
trusteeship continue for more than thirty-six (36) months. Any matters,
including obligations maturing after thirty-six (36) months, not disposed of
within the thirty-six-month period shall become the responsibility of the
county legislative body of the county in which the municipality is located.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
PART 4 — OFFICERS
§§ 6-1-401—6-1-406 [REPEALED].
PART 5 — CHANGE OF CORPORATE NAME
§ 6-1-501 RIGHT TO CHANGE CORPORATE NAME.
   A municipality may amend this charter for the sole purpose of changing the
corporate name of the municipality, including the municipality’s designation as
a town or city in the manner provided in Section 2 of this part.
[Acts 2000, ch. 702, § 1]
§ 6-1-502 MANNER OF CHANGING CORPORATE NAME.
   The corporate name of a municipality may be changed only in the following
manner.
   (1)   The proposed name change must be approved by resolution by a vote of
not less than two thirds (2/3) of the board in the manner provided for
ordinances in Section
6-2-102.
   (2)   If approved by the board, the resolution shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the municipality within fourteen (14) days
of final approval by the board or the first available opportunity for
publication, whichever is sooner. Such resolution shall become operative sixty
(60) days after its adoption by the board unless ten percent (10%) of the
qualified electors of the municipality sign a petition and present it to the
board during such sixty (60) day period requesting that the resolution be
referred to the electors, in which case it must receive the approval of a
majority of the electors voting thereon at an election held as provided in
subdivision (3). If such a petition is not received within such sixty-day
period, the resolution shall become operative at the end of such sixty-day
period and the Mayor shall file a copy of the resolution indicating the new
corporate name of the municipality with the Secretary of State.
   (3)   Upon receipt of a petition filed in the manner provided in subdivision
(2), a certified copy of the resolution shall be sent to the county election
commission, which shall place the question whether to approve the resolution on
the ballot of the next scheduled municipal election or General Election at
which members of the General Assembly are chosen, whichever is sooner. The
ballot shall provide options to vote “FOR” or “AGAINST” the resolution. The
qualifications for voting shall be the same as otherwise provided in Section
6-1-204 in the election to adopt the original charter under this chapter.
   (4)   If the majority vote is for the resolution, it shall be deemed to be
operative on the date that the county election commission makes its official
canvas of the election returns. The county election commission shall then
promptly certify the results of the election to the Secretary of State and the
new corporate name of the municipality.
   (5)   If the majority vote is against the election, the question of
approving the resolution shall not be included on any subsequent election
ballot unless a new resolution is first approved by the board in the manner
provided in this section.
[Acts 2000, ch. 702, § 1]
§ 6-1-503 OBLIGATIONS AND LIABILITIES UNAFFECTED BY CHANGE OF NAME.
   Any change in the name of any municipality under this part shall have no
effect whatever on any obligations or liabilities of the municipality, in
contract, tort, or otherwise, all of which shall remain the same as prior to
the name change.
[Acts 2000, ch. 702, § 1]
CHAPTER 2: POWERS OF MUNICIPALITIES WITH MAYOR-ALDERMANIC CHARTER
Section
PART 1 — ORDINANCES
   
6-2-101   Publication of ordinances-Codification
   
6-2-102   Ordinance procedure
   
6-2-103   Annual operating budget—Publication—Budgetary comparison [Effective
January 1, 1993]
   
6-2-104   [Repealed]
   
6-2-105   Ordinances ratified and confirmed
PART 2 — MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY GENERALLY
   
6-2-201   General powers
   6-2-202—6-2-204   [Repealed]
   
6-2-205   Special court cost
PART 3 — EXPENDITURES AND TAXATION
   6-2-301—6-2-308   [Repealed]
PART 4 — OFFICERS
   6-2-401—6-2-404   [Repealed]
PART 5 — ABOLITION OF CHARTER
   6-2-501—6-2-506   [Transferred]
PART 1 — ORDINANCES
§ 6-2-101 PUBLICATION OF ORDINANCES—CODIFICATION.
   Each ordinance, or the caption of each ordinance, shall be published after
its final passage in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. No
ordinance shall take effect until the ordinance or its caption is published.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
§ 6-2-102 ORDINANCE PROCEDURE.
   An ordinance shall be considered and adopted on two (2) separate days; any
other form of board action shall be considered and adopted on one (1) day. Any
form of board action shall be passed by a majority of the members present, if
there is a quorum. A quorum is a majority of the members to which the board is
entitled. All ayes and nays on all votes on all forms of board action shall be
recorded.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1998, ch. 621, § 1]
§ 6-2-103 ANNUAL OPERATING BUDGET—PUBLICATION—BUDGETARY COMPARISON [EFFECTIVE
JANUARY 1, 1993].
   (a)   Notwithstanding the provisions of any other law to the contrary, the
governing body shall publish the annual operating budget and budgetary
comparisons of the proposed budget with the prior year (actual) and the current
year (estimated) which information shall include the following:
      (1)   Revenues and expenditures for the following governmental funds:
general, streets/public works, general purpose school and debt service.
      (2)   Revenues for each fund shall be listed separately by local taxes,
State of Tennessee, federal government and other sources.
      (3)   Expenditures for each fund shall be listed separately by salaries
and other costs.
      (4)   Beginning and ending fund balances shall be shown for each fund.
      (5)   The number of full-time equivalent employee positions shall be
shown for each fund.
   (b)   The publication shall be in a newspaper of general circulation and
shall be published not less than ten (10) days prior to the meeting where the
governing body will consider final passage of the budget.
[Acts 1991, ch. 484, § 8; Acts 1992, ch. 760, § 2]
§ 6-2-104 [REPEALED].
§ 6-2-105 ORDINANCES RATIFIED AND CONFIRMED.
   All ordinances adopted on or prior to June 30, 1991, are hereby ratified and
confirmed.
[Acts 1992, ch. 612, § 2]
PART 2 — MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY GENERALLY
§ 6-2-201 GENERAL POWERS.
   Every municipality incorporated under this charter may:
   (1)   Assess, levy and collect taxes for all general and special purposes on
all subjects or objects of taxation, and privileges taxable by law for state,
county or municipal purposes;
   (2)   Adopt classifications of the subjects and objects of taxation that are
not contrary to law;
   (3)   Make special assessments for local improvements;
   (4)   Contract and be contracted with;
   (5)   Incur debts by borrowing money or otherwise, and give any appropriate
evidence thereof, in the manner hereinafter provided;
   (6)   Issue and give, sell, pledge or in any manner dispose of, negotiable
or nonnegotiable interest-bearing or noninterest-bearing bonds, warrants,
promissory notes or orders of the municipality, upon the credit of the
municipality or solely upon the credit of specific property owned by the
municipality or solely upon the credit of income derived from any property used
in connection with any public utility owned or operated by the municipality, or
solely upon the credit of the proceeds of special assessments for local
improvements, or upon any two (2) or more such credits;
   (7)   Expend the money of the municipality for all lawful purposes;
   (8)   Acquire or receive and hold, maintain, improve, sell, lease, mortgage,
pledge or otherwise dispose of property, real or personal, and any estate or
interest therein, within or without the municipality or state;
   (9)   Condemn property, real or personal, or any easement, interest, or
estate or use therein, either within or without the municipality, for present
or future public use; the condemnation shall be effected in accordance with the
terms and provisions of title 29, chapter 16, or in any other manner provided
by law;
   (10)   Take and hold property within or without the municipality or state
upon trust; and administer trusts for the public benefit;
   (11)   Acquire, construct, own, operate, and maintain, or sell, lease,
mortgage, pledge or otherwise dispose of public utilities or any estate or
interest therein, or any other utility of service to the municipality, its
inhabitants, or any part thereof, and, further, may issue debt for these
purposes under the Local Government Public Obligations Act, title 9, chapter
21;
   (12)   Grant to any person, firm, association or corporation (including the
municipality) franchises for public utilities and public services to be
furnished the municipality and those therein. The power to grant franchises
embraces the power to grant exclusive franchises. Whenever an exclusive
franchise is granted, it shall be exclusive not only as against any other
person, firm, association, or corporation, but also against the municipality
itself. Franchises may be granted for a period of twenty-five (25) years or
less, but not longer. The board may prescribe in each grant of a franchise, the
rate, fares, charges and regulations that may be made by the grantee of the
franchise in accordance with state and federal law. Franchises may by their
terms apply to the territory within the corporate limits of the municipality at
the date of the franchises, and as the corporate limits may be enlarged, and to
the existing streets, alleys and thoroughfares that thereafter may be opened;
   (13)   Make contracts with any person, firm, association or corporation for
public utilities, public services to be furnished the municipality and those
therein. The power to make contracts embraces the power to make exclusive
contracts. When an exclusive contract is entered into, it shall be exclusive
against any other person, firm, association or corporation. These contracts may
be entered into for a period of twenty-five (25) years or less, but not longer.
The board may prescribe in each such contract entered into, the rates, fares,
charges, and regulations that may be made by the person, firm, association or
corporation with whom the contract is made. Such contracts may by their terms
apply to the territory within the corporate limits of the municipality at the
date of the contract, and as the corporate limits may be enlarged, and to the
then existing streets, alleys and thoroughfares and to any other streets,
alleys and other thoroughfares that thereafter may be opened;
   (14)   Prescribe reasonable regulations regarding the construction,
maintenance, equipment, operation and service of public utilities, compel
reasonable extensions of facilities for these services, and assess fees for the
use of or impact upon these services. Nothing herein shall be construed to
permit the alteration or impairment of any of the terms or provisions of any
exclusive franchise granted or of any exclusive contract entered into under
subdivisions (12) and (13);
   (15)   Establish, open, relocate, vacate, alter, widen, extend, grade,
improve, repair, construct, reconstruct, maintain, light, sprinkle and clean
public highways, streets, boulevards, parkways, sidewalks, alleys, parks,
public grounds, public facilities, libraries and squares, wharves, bridges,
viaducts, subways, tunnels, sewers and drains within or without the corporate
limits, regulate their use within the corporate limits, assess fees for the use
of or impact upon such property and facilities, and take and appropriate
property therefor under the provisions of §§ 7-31-107—7-31-111 and 29-16-114,
or any other manner provided by general laws;
   (16)   Construct, improve, reconstruct and reimprove by opening, extending,
widening, grading, curbing, guttering, paving, graveling, macadamizing,
draining or otherwise improving any streets, highways, avenues, alleys or other
public places within the corporate limits, and assess a portion of the cost of
these improvements on the property abutting on or adjacent to these streets,
highways or alleys under, and as provided by, title 7, chapters 32 and 33; This
subsection may not be construed to prohibit a municipality with a population of
not less than seven hundred (700) nor more than seven hundred five (705)
according to the 1990 federal census or any subsequent federal census from
installing and maintaining a traffic control signal within its corporate
limits, and any such municipality is expressly so authorized; provided,
however, no device shall be installed to control traffic on a state highway
without the approval of the Commissioner of Transportation.
   (17)   Assess against abutting property within the corporate limits the cost
of planting shade trees, removing from sidewalks all accumulations of snow,
ice, and earth, cutting and removing obnoxious weeds and rubbish, street
lighting, street sweeping, street sprinkling, street flushing, and street
oiling, the cleaning and rendering sanitary or removal, abolishing, and
prohibiting of closets and privies, in such manner as may be provided by
general law or by ordinance of the board;
   (18)   Acquire, purchase, provide for, construct, regulate and maintain and
do all things relating to all marketplaces, public buildings, bridges, sewers
and other structures, works and improvements;
   (19)   Collect and dispose of drainage, sewage, ashes, garbage, refuse or
other waste, or license and regulate their collection and disposal, and the
cost of collection, regulation, or disposal may be funded by taxation, special
assessment to the property owner, user fees or other charges;
   (20)   License and regulate all persons, firms, corporations, companies and
associations engaged in any business, occupation, calling, profession or trade
not prohibited by law;
   (21)   Impose a license tax upon any animal, thing, business, vocation,
pursuit, privilege or calling not prohibited by law;
   (22)   Define, prohibit, abate, suppress, prevent and regulate all acts,
practices, conduct, business, occupations, callings, trades, use of property
and all other things whatsoever detrimental, or liable to be detrimental, to
the health, morals, comfort, safety, convenience or welfare of the inhabitants
of the municipality, and exercise general police powers;
   (23)   Prescribe limits within which business occupations and practices
liable to be nuisances or detrimental to the health, morals, security or
general welfare of the people may lawfully be established, conducted or
maintained;
   (24)   Inspect, test, measure and weigh any article for consumption or use
within the municipality, and charge reasonable fees therefor, and provide
standards of weights, tests and measures;
   (25)   Regulate the location, bulk, occupancy, area, lot, location, height,
construction and materials of all buildings and structures, and inspect all
buildings, lands and places as to their condition for health, cleanliness and
safety, and when necessary, prevent their use and require any alteration or
changes necessary to make them healthful, clean or safe;
   (26)   Provide and maintain charitable, educational, recreative, curative,
corrective, detentive, or penal institutions, departments, functions,
facilities, instrumentalities, conveniences and services;
   (27)   Purchase or construct, maintain and establish a workhouse for the
confinement and detention of any person convicted in the city court of offenses
against the laws and ordinances of the municipality who fails to secure the
fine imposed upon such person, or contract with the county to keep these
persons in the workhouse of the county and provide by that contract and by
ordinance for the commitment of these persons to the workhouse so provided
until the fines are paid;
   (28)   (A)   Enforce any ordinance, rule or regulation by fines,
forfeitures, and penalties, and by other actions or proceedings in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
      (B)   Provide by ordinance for court costs;
   (29)   Establish schools, determine the necessary boards, officers and
teachers required therefor, and fix their compensation, purchase or otherwise
acquire land for or assess a fee for use of, or impact upon, schoolhouses,
playgrounds and other purposes connected with the schools, purchase or erect
all necessary buildings and do all other acts necessary to establish, maintain
and operate a complete educational system within the municipality;
   (30)   Regulate, tax, license or suppress the keeping or going at large of
animals within the municipality, impound them, and in default of redemption,
sell or kill them;
   (31)   Call elections as herein provided;
   (32)   Create a design review commission which shall have the authority to
develop general guidelines and to develop procedures for the approval of such
guidelines for the exterior appearance of all non-residential property,
multiple family residential property, and any entrance to non-residential
developments within such municipality; provided that such authority is
subordinate to and in no way exceeds the authority delegated to a municipal
planning commission pursuant to title 13, chapter 4. Any property owner
affected by such guidelines may appeal a decision by the design review
commission to such municipality’s planning commission or if there is no
planning commission to the entire municipal legislative body; and
   (33)   Have and exercise all powers that now or hereafter it would be
competent for this charter specifically to enumerate, as fully and completely
as though these powers were specifically enumerated.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1995, ch. 13, § 4; Acts 1998, ch. 621, § 2; Acts
1998, ch. 1126, § 1; Acts 2006, ch. 796, § 1]
§§ 6-2-202—6-2-204 [REPEALED].
§ 6-2-205 SPECIAL COURT COST.
   (a)   It is the intent and purpose of this section to authorize the
collection of a special court cost for each summons, warrant, citation,
presentment, or indictment which:
      (1)   Is filed and heard in a criminal court, general sessions court or
municipal court;
      (2)   Involves behavior occurring within the corporate limits of any
municipality to which this section applies that leads to the filing of charges
for a traffic or criminal offense; and
      (3)   Involves enforcement by a municipal law enforcement officer.
   (b)   The special court cost is ten dollars ($10) and shall be charged and
collected in addition to other authorized court costs by the appropriate court
clerk.
   (c)   The special court cost funds shall be collected by the clerks for each
traffic or criminal offense which:
      (1)   Is enforced by a municipal law enforcement officer; and
      (2)   Involves conduct occurring within the corporate limits of any
municipality to which this section may apply.
   (d)   The funds collected from this special court cost by the clerks shall
be transferred to the city treasurer on an annual basis, and the treasurer
shall establish a special fund for municipal traffic regulation and
enforcement.
   (e)   All funds collected under this section shall be used for the sole
purpose of traffic regulation and enforcement within the municipality.
   (f)   The provisions of this section shall in no manner modify or repeal
other requirements to collect court costs under any other public or private act
applicable to the county where such municipality is located.
   (g)   (1)   The provisions of this section shall be applicable to any
municipality having a population of not less than five thousand three hundred
eighty (5,380) nor more than five thousand three hundred ninety (5,390)
according to the 1990 federal census or any subsequent federal census.
      (2)   This section shall have no effect unless it is approved by a two-
thirds (2/3) vote of any municipal legislative body to which it may apply.
[Acts 1997, ch. 213]
PART 3 — EXPENDITURES AND TAXATION
§§ 6-2-301—6-2-308 [REPEALED].
PART 4 — OFFICERS
§§ 6-2-401—6-2-404 [REPEALED].
PART 5 — ABOLITION OF CHARTER
§§ 6-2-501—6-2-506 [TRANSFERRED].
CHAPTER 3: BOARD AND MAYOR OF ALDERMEN
Section
   
6-3-101   Election of board—Municipalities incorporating under chapters 1-4 of
this title after June 30, 1991
   
6-3-102   Election of board by municipalities incorporated under chapters 1 and
2 of this title, on or prior to June 30, 1991
   
6-3-103   Residence requirements for officers
   
6-3-104   Dates for municipal elections
   
6-3-105   Oaths of office
   
6-3-106   Duties of mayor
   
6-3-107   Vicemayor—Vacancies in office
   
6-3-108   Duties of the board
   
6-3-109   Compensation
§ 6-3-101 ELECTION OF BOARD—MUNICIPALITIES INCORPORATING UNDER CHAPTERS 1-4 OF
THIS TITLE AFTER JUNE 30, 1991.
   (a)   Any municipality incorporating under this charter after June 30, 1991,
shall have at least one (1) ward but not more than eight (8) wards. Any
municipality having a population of less than five thousand (5,000) shall upon
incorporation have one (1) ward, and its board shall consist of a mayor and two
(2) aldermen elected at large. Any municipality having a population of more
than five thousand (5,000) shall upon incorporation have two (2) wards, and its
board shall consist of a mayor to be elected at large and two (2) aldermen
elected from each ward. The mayor and aldermen elected to the first board shall
serve the four (4) and two (2) year terms prescribed by §
6-1-207(b). At each election thereafter the mayor and aldermen shall be elected
to four (4) year terms, except in transitional elections prescribed by
subsection (c). Any municipality that incorporated under this charter after
June 30, 1991, and that has a population of less than five thousand (5,000) and
has only one (1) ward, may by ordinance increase the number of aldermen to a
maximum of four (4) without increasing the number of wards. The ordinance shall
provide for staggered four (4) year terms in accordance with §
6-1-207(b), but may provide for transitional terms of less than four (4) years.
   (b)   (1)   Any municipality incorporated after June 30, 1991 may increase
or reduce the number of wards, except that municipalities having a population
of more than five thousand (5,000) shall not reduce the number of wards below
two (2). The board of any municipality having between one (1) and four (4)
wards shall consist of a mayor elected at large and two (2) aldermen elected
from each ward, except that municipalities having more than one (1) ward may
reduce the number of aldermen from each ward from two (2) to one (1). The board
of any municipality having between five (5) and eight (8) wards shall consist
of a mayor elected at large and one (1) alderman elected from each ward. In
wards having more than one (1) alderman, the aldermen shall serve staggered
terms of office within their wards.
      (2)   Any municipality that has only one (1) ward may provide by
ordinance for numerical designations for aldermanic positions. After numerical
positions have been designated, candidates for alderman shall qualify by
indicating on the qualifying petition the position the candidate is seeking.
Ballots shall indicate the position to be filled by the selection of candidates
listed under “Alderman, position 1,” “Alderman, position 2,” and so on. Any
qualified person residing in the municipality may seek an open aldermanic
position, but may qualify in any election for only one (1) position.
   (c)   All increases and reductions in the number of wards and aldermen under
this section shall be accomplished only by ordinance passed by a two-third (2/
3) vote of the entire membership to which the board is entitled. The ordinance
shall:
      (1)   Take effect at the next municipal election, but shall not affect
the present terms of members of the board of mayor and aldermen;
      (2)   Where appropriate, establish and describe the new ward boundaries;
      (3)   Provide for a transitional election following the adoption of the
ordinance in which the mayor and/or aldermen running for office shall be
elected for terms that will expire at the next municipal election;
      (4)   At the second municipal election following the adoption of the
ordinance provide for a system of staggered terms of office under which the
mayor is elected for a term of four (4) years, in cities with an even number of
wards half the total number of mayor and aldermen running for office are
elected to four (4) year terms, in cities with an uneven number of wards one
(1) more or one (1) less than half the total number of mayor and aldermen
running for office, are elected to four (4) year terms, in both classes of
cities the remaining aldermen are elected to two (2) year terms, and following
which all aldermen shall be elected for four (4) year terms;
      (5)   In the case of a ward that has been abolished provide that any
alderman whose term extends past the life of a ward shall serve as an alderman
at large for the remainder of the term.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1992, ch. 612, §§ 3, 4; Acts 1996, ch. 652, § 1;
Acts 1997, ch. 77; Acts 2003, ch. 261, § 1]
§ 6-3-102 ELECTION OF BOARD BY MUNICIPALITIES INCORPORATED UNDER CHAPTERS 1 AND
2 OF THIS TITLE, ON OR PRIOR TO JUNE 30, 1991.
   (a)   (1)   A municipality incorporated under chapters 1 to 2 of this title,
on or before June 30, 1991, may, by ordinance, establish wards, increase or
decrease the number of wards, increase or decrease the number of aldermen to no
fewer than two (2) and no more than eight (8) in accordance with §
6-3-101.
      (2)   Any municipality that has only one (1) ward may provide by
ordinance for numerical designations for aldermanic positions. After numerical
positions have been designated, candidates for alderman shall qualify by
indicating on the qualifying petition the position the candidate is seeking.
Ballots shall indicate the position to be filled by the selection of candidates
listed under “Alderman, position 1,” “Alderman, position 2,” and so on. Any
qualified person residing in the municipality may seek an open aldermanic
position, but may qualify in any election for only one (1) position.
   (b)   (1)   A municipality whose board has staggered two-year terms may by
ordinance change to staggered four-year terms. The ordinance, which shall take
effect for the next municipal election and shall not affect the present terms
of members of the board of mayor and aldermen, shall provide for the
transitional election of some members of the board of mayor and aldermen for
three (3) year terms. After this initial election, all members of the board of
mayor and aldermen shall be elected for four (4) year terms.
      (2)   A municipality whose board has nonstaggered two-year terms may by
ordinance change to staggered four-year terms. The ordinance, which shall take
effect for the next municipal election and shall not affect the present terms
of members of the board, shall provide for the transitional election of some
members of the board for two-year terms. After this initial election, all
members of the board shall be elected for four-year terms.
      (3)   A municipality whose board has nonstaggered two-year terms may by
ordinance change to nonstaggered four-year terms. The ordinance shall take
effect for the next municipal election and shall not affect the present terms
of members of the board.
      (4)   A municipality whose board has nonstaggered four-year terms may by
ordinance change to staggered four-year terms. The ordinance, which shall take
effect for the next municipal election and shall not affect the present terms
of members of the board, shall provide for the transitional election of some
members of the board for either two (2) or six-year terms. After this initial
election, all members of the board shall be elected for four-year terms.
      (5)   A municipality whose board has staggered two (2) year terms may, by
ordinance, change to non-staggered two (2) year terms. The ordinance, which
shall take effect for the next municipal election and shall not affect the
present terms of members of the board of mayor and aldermen, shall provide that
the members elected at the next election will serve transitional terms of three
(3) years. After such election, all members of the board shall be elected to
serve two (2) year terms.
      (6)   A municipality whose board has non-staggered or staggered four-year
terms may, by ordinance, change to two-year non-staggered or staggered terms.
The ordinance shall not affect the present terms of members of the board
serving four-year terms and shall take effect for the next appropriate
municipal election following the adoption of the ordinance. After such
election, all members of the board shall be elected to serve two-year terms.
   (c)   (1)   Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary,
any municipality incorporated under this charter that is located within two (2)
counties and has a population of not less than one thousand four hundred fifty
(1,450) nor more than one thousand four hundred seventy-five (1,475) according
to the 1990 federal census or any subsequent federal census may by ordinance
provide for the election of its mayor to a four-year term and the election of
its aldermen to staggered four-year terms beginning with municipal elections
that are conducted after January 1, 2001.
      (2)   Nothing in subdivision (c)(1) shall be construed as having the
effect of removing any incumbent from office or abridging the term of any
official prior to the end of the term for which such official was elected.
      (3)   Subsection (c)(1) shall have no effect unless it is approved by a
two-thirds (2/3) vote of any municipality within two (2) counties and has a
population of not less than one thousand four hundred fifty (1,450) nor more
than one thousand four hundred seventy-five (1,475) according to the 1990
federal census or any subsequent federal census. Its approval or nonapproval
shall be proclaimed by the presiding officer of such municipality and certified
to the Secretary of State.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1992, ch. 612, §§ 5, 6, 7; Acts 1994, ch. 574, §
1, § 2; Acts 1998, ch. 691, § 1; Acts 1998, ch. 954, § 1; Acts 2000, ch. 613,
§§ 1, 2; Acts 2003, ch. 261, § 2; Acts 2007, ch. 90, § 1]
§ 6-3-103 RESIDENCE REQUIREMENTS FOR OFFICERS.
   (a)   No person shall be eligible for the office of mayor unless such person
has resided within the municipality for at least one (1) year next preceding
the election.
   (b)   No person shall be eligible for the office of alderman unless such
person has resided within the ward for at least one (1) year next preceding the
election.
   (c)   Residence within any area annexed in a year preceding an election
shall be counted in meeting the residence requirement of this section.
   (d)   Any officer moving from such officer’s ward, in the case of an
alderman, or moving from the municipality, in the case of the mayor, during the
term of office shall be presumed to have vacated the office, and it shall be
declared vacant, and filled as provided in §
6-3-107.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
§ 6-3-104 DATES FOR MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   (a)   The board may by ordinance change the date of municipal elections to
coincide with the August or November general election. The ordinance changing
the election date shall provide for the extension of the terms of members of
the board necessary to meet the election date, but no term may be extended for
more than two (2) years beyond its regular expiration date.
   (b)   Nothing in subsection (a) shall be construed to remove any incumbent
from office or abridge the term of any incumbent prior to the end of the term
for which an elected official was selected.
   (c)   If the board changes the date of municipal elections pursuant to
subsection (a), the board may at a later date change the election date back to
what such date was prior to moving the election date to coincide with the
August or November general election. The board may only make an election date
change under this subsection (c) one (1) time. Terms of incumbent members of
the board shall not be abridged to accomplish an election date change under
this subsection (c); however members elected at a date change pursuant to this
subsection (c) may take office at a later date so as to not abridge terms of
incumbent members. If such members take office at a later date, their term may
be abridged due to such members having to take office at the later date.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; 2010, ch. 1008, § 1]
§ 6-3-105 OATHS OF OFFICE.
   The mayor, after his election, shall take an oath of office to support the
constitution of the state and faithfully discharge the duties of the mayor’s
office, before any officer authorized to administer oaths. This officer or the
mayor shall then induct the aldermen into office by administering to them a
similar oath of office. Oaths of office shall be filed in the archives of the
municipality.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
§ 6-3-106 DUTIES OF MAYOR.
   (a)   The mayor:
      (1)   Shall be the chief executive officer of the municipality and shall
preside at meetings of the board;
      (2)   Shall communicate any information needed, and recommend measures
the mayor deems expedient to the board;
      (3)   (A)   Shall make temporary appointments of any officer or
department head as those terms defined in §
6-1-101, except that of alderman, arising from the absence, sickness or
disability of any such officer or department head, and shall report such
appointment to the board at its next regular meeting.
         (B)   The board may confirm or reject the mayor’s temporary
appointments, or, at its discretion, make its own temporary appointments. The
board shall make appointments to fill vacancies in office.
      (4)   (A)   May call special meetings of the board upon adequate notice
to the board and adequate public notice;
         (B)   Shall state the matters to be considered at the special meeting
and the action of the board shall be limited to those matters submitted;
      (5)   Shall countersign checks and drafts drawn upon the treasury by the
treasurer and sign all contracts to which the municipality is a party;
      (6)   As a member of the board, may make motions and shall have a vote on
all matters coming before the board;
      (7)   Shall make appointments to boards and commissions as authorized by
law.
   (b)   Unless otherwise designated by the board by ordinance, the mayor shall
perform the following duties or may designate a department head or department
heads to perform any of the following duties:
      (1)   Those duties set forth in §
6-4-101, if the board does not appoint a city administrator or if someone else
is not designated by the board to perform those duties.
      (2)   (A)   Employ, promote, discipline, suspend and discharge all
employees and department heads, in accordance with personnel policies and
procedures, if any, adopted by the board;
         (B)   Nothing in this charter shall be construed as granting a
property interest to employees or department heads in their continued
employment;
      (3)   Act as purchasing agent for the municipality in the purchase of all
materials, supplies and equipment for the proper conduct of the municipality’s
business; provided, that all purchases shall be made in accordance with
policies, practices and procedures established by the board;
      (4)   Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the
board for their adoption by ordinance; and
      (5)   Such other duties as may be designated or required by the board.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1992, ch. 612, § 8; Acts 1997, ch. 27, §§ 1, 3]
§ 6-3-107 VICEMAYOR—VACANCIES IN OFFICE.
   (a)   The board shall elect an alderman to the office of vicemayor who shall
serve as mayor when the mayor is absent or unable to discharge the duties of
the mayor’s office, and, in case of a vacancy in the office of mayor, until the
next regular municipal election.
   (b)   (1)   By affirmative vote of a majority of the remaining members, the
board shall fill a vacancy in the office of alderman for the unexpired term,
but any portion of an unexpired four-year term for alderman or mayor that
remains beyond the next municipal election shall be filled by the voters at
that election, if the vacancy occurs at least twenty (20) days before the
latest time for filing nominating petitions for candidates in that election.
      (2)   All such elections by the board shall be made by voice vote, on the
calling of the roll. If a tie vote occurs in filling a vacancy on the board,
the presiding officer shall vote a second time to break the tie.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1992, ch. 612, § 9]
§ 6-3-108 DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
   In the absence of the mayor and vice-mayor, the board may elect an alderman
to act as presiding officer.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1997, ch. 27, § 2]
§ 6-3-109 COMPENSATION.
   (a)   The compensation of all officers shall be established in the ordinance
adopting the annual budget and capital program.
   (b)   The compensation of the mayor may not be diminished during the mayor’s
term of office.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
CHAPTER 4: OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENT HEADS
Section
PART 1 — CITY ADMINISTRATOR
   
6-4-101   Duties of city administrator
PART 2 — CITY RECORDER
   
6-4-201   City recorder—Appointment
   
6-4-202   Recorder’s functions at board meeting
   
6-4-203   Custody of official records
   
6-4-204   Copies of records and ordinances
PART 3 — CITY JUDGE-CITY COURT
   
6-4-301   City judge—Jurisdiction—Appointment—Qualifications and
compensation—Elections
   
6-4-302   Power to enforce ordinances
PART 4 — TREASURER—DEPOSITS OF MUNICIPAL FUNDS
   
6-4-401   Appointment and duties of treasurer
   
6-4-402   Depositories of municipal funds
PART 1 — CITY ADMINISTRATOR
§ 6-4-101 DUTIES OF CITY ADMINISTRATOR.
   (a)   The board may appoint a city administrator who shall be under the
control and direction of the board. The city administrator shall report and be
responsible to the board.
   (b)   The board may, by ordinance, require the city administrator to perform
any or all the following duties:
      (1)   Administer the business of the municipality;
      (2)   Make recommendations to the board for improving the quality and
quantity of public services to be rendered by the officers and employees to the
inhabitants of the municipality;
      (3)   Keep the board fully advised as to the conditions and needs of the
municipality;
      (4)   Report to the board the condition of all property, real and
personal, owned by the municipality and recommend repairs or replacements as
needed;
      (5)   Recommend to the board and suggest the priority of programs or
projects involving public works or public improvements that should be
undertaken by the municipality;
      (6)   Recommend specific personnel positions, as may be required for the
needs and operations of the municipality, and may propose personnel policies
and procedures for approval of the board; and
      (7)   Perform such other duties as may from time to time be designated or
required by the board.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
PART 2 — CITY RECORDER
§ 6-4-201 CITY RECORDER—APPOINTMENT.
   The board shall appoint a city recorder, who also may be appointed to the
positions of finance director or treasurer, or both.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
§ 6-4-202 RECORDER’S FUNCTIONS AT BOARD MEETING.
   The recorder or his designee shall be present at all meetings of the board,
and keep a full and accurate record of all business transacted by the board to
be preserved in permanent form.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
§ 6-4-203 CUSTODY OF OFFICIAL RECORDS.
   (a)   The recorder or the recorder’s designee shall have custody of, and
preserve in the recorder’s office, the city seal, the public records, original
rolls of ordinance, ordinance books, minutes of the board, contracts, bonds,
title deeds, certificates, and papers, all official indemnity or security bonds
(except the recorder’s bond, which shall be in the custody of the mayor), and
all other bonds, oaths and affirmations and all other records, papers, and
documents not required by this charter or by ordinance to be deposited
elsewhere, and register them by numbers, dates and contents, and keep an
accurate and modern index thereof.
   (b)   All such records shall be the property of the municipality.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
§ 6-4-204 COPIES OF RECORDS AND ORDINANCES.
   (a)   The recorder shall provide, copy, and, when required by any officer or
person, certify copies or records, papers and documents in the recorder’s
office.
   (b)   Fees for copying and certification shall be charged as established by
ordinance.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
PART 3 — CITY JUDGE-CITY COURT
§ 6-4-301 CITY JUDGE—JURISDICTION—APPOINTMENT—QUALIFICATIONS AND
COMPENSATION—ELECTIONS.
   (a)   There shall be a city court presided over by a city judge appointed by
the board or elected as provided in subsection (c).
   (b)   (1)   (A)   Where the city judge is appointed, the city judge shall
have the qualifications, term of office, if any, and receive the compensation
the board may provide by ordinance.
         (B)   The board may appoint the general sessions court judge of the
county or counties in which the municipality lies to act as city judge.
      (2)   In the absence or disability of the city judge, the mayor may
designate a qualified person to serve as city judge or may designate the
general sessions court judge of the county or counties in which the
municipality lies to be acting city judge until one can be appointed at the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the board, or as otherwise provided by
ordinance.
   (c)   (1)   The board may require, by ordinance, that the city judge meet
the constitutional qualifications and be elected in the same manner as a judge
of an inferior court. Constitutional provisions applicable to judges of
inferior courts shall apply to the elected city judge.
      (2)   If an elected city judge is unable, temporarily, to preside over
city court for any reason, then the judge shall appoint a general sessions
judge of the county or counties within which the municipality lies to sit in
the judge’s place. If no general sessions judge is available, then the city
judge shall appoint an attorney, meeting the same qualifications as a general
sessions judge, to sit temporarily.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1992, ch. 612, § 10; Acts 1996, ch. 652, §§ 2,
3; Acts 2004, ch. 914, § 6]
§ 6-4-302 POWER TO ENFORCE ORDINANCES.
   (a)   The city judge may impose fines, costs and forfeitures, and punish by
fine for violation of city ordinances.
   (b)   The judge may preserve and enforce order in the court and enforce the
collection of all fines, costs and forfeitures imposed.
   (c)   In default of payment, or good and sufficient security given for the
payment of any fines or forfeitures imposed, the judge shall commit the
offender to the workhouse or other place provided for this purpose, and to any
labor provided by ordinance until the fines or forfeitures are fully paid at
the rate set in § 40-24-104. No such imprisonment shall exceed the period of
time established in § 40-24-104, for any one (1) offense. Fines may be paid in
installments in the manner provided by ordinance. The city judge may remit,
with or without condition, fines and costs imposed for violation of any
ordinance provision.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1995, ch. 13, § 5]
PART 4 — TREASURER—DEPOSITS OF MUNICIPAL FUNDS
§ 6-4-401 APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF TREASURER.
   (a)   The board shall appoint a treasurer.
   (b)   The treasurer shall collect, receive and receipt for the taxes and all
other revenue (and bonds) of the municipality, and the proceeds of its bond
issues, and disburse them.
   (c)   The board may appoint the recorder as treasurer.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1]
§ 6-4-402 DEPOSITORIES OF MUNICIPAL FUNDS.
   Depositories of the municipal funds shall be designated by ordinance. The
board shall require any financial institution that becomes a depository of
municipal funds to secure such funds by collateral in the same manner and under
the same conditions as state deposits under Title 9, Chapter 4, Parts 1 and 4,
or as provided in a collateral pool created under Title 9, Chapter 4, Part 5.
[Acts 1991, ch. 154, § 1; Acts 1994, ch. 752, § 4]
CHAPTERS 5-17: RESERVED
TITLE 1: GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
1.   BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN
         
2.   MAYOR
         
3.   RECORDER
         
4.   CITY ADMINISTRATOR
         
5.   TREASURER
         
6.   CODE OF ETHICS
CHAPTER 1: BOARD OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN
Section
   
1-101   Time and place of regular meetings
   
1-102   Order of business
   
1-103   General rules of order
   
1-104   Election date
   
1-105   Terms of Mayor and Aldermen
   
1-106   Compensation of Aldermen
   
1-107   Non-resident property owners vote by absentee vote only
Charter reference:
   For specific charter provisions related to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen,
see the following sections:
      City Administrator, see §
6-4-101
      Compensation, see §
6-3-109
      Duties of Mayor, see §
6-3-106
      Election of the Board, see §
6-3-101
      Oath, see §
6-3-105
      Ordinance procedure publication, see §
6-2-101
      Readings, see §
6-2-102
      Residence requirements, see §
6-3-103
      Vacancies in office, see §
6-3-107
      Vice-Mayor, see §
6-3-107
Statutory reference:
   Charter provisions related to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, see Tenn.
Code Ann. Title 6, Ch. 3
§ 1-101 TIME AND PLACE OF REGULAR MEETINGS.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall hold regular monthly meetings at 6:00
p.m. on the first and third Monday of each month at City Hall.
(2011 Code, § 1-101) (Ord. 21-01, passed 1-19-2021; Ord. 21-23, passed 10-18-
2021)
§ 1-102 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   At each meeting of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, the following regular
order of business shall be observed unless dispensed with by a majority vote of
the members present:
   (A)   Call to order by the Mayor;
   (B)   Stipulation of members present;
   (C)   Approval of the agenda;
   (D)   Communication from the Mayor;
   (E)   Reports from committees, members of the Board of Mayor and Alderman
and other officers;
   (F)   Comments from Concerned Citizens;
   (G)   Approval of minutes of the previous meeting;
   (H)   Public hearing;
   (I)   Voting agenda;
      (1)   Approval of consent agenda
      (2)   Previous business
      (3)   New business
   (J)   Work session discussion
   (K)   Adjourn.
(2011 Code, § 1-102) (Ord. 07-09, passed 3- -2007; Ord. 21-23, passed 10-18-
2021)
§ 1-103 GENERAL RULES OF ORDER.
   (A)   The rules of order and parliamentary procedure contained in Robert’s
Rules of Order, Newly Revised, shall govern the transaction of business by and
before the Board of Mayor and Aldermen at its meetings in all cases to which
they are applicable and in which they are not inconsistent with provisions of
the charter or this code.
   (B)   The following procedures are hereby adopted as rules of order
governing meetings of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
      (1)   Once any matter is brought before and acted on by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen, no motion, resolution or ordinance pertaining to the same
subject matter may be brought before the Board for its consideration for a
period of six months from the date of such action subject to the following
exceptions.
         (a)   Any such matter may be brought before the Board if a petition
signed by five members of the Board requesting such action is filed with the
Recorder 72 hours prior to a meeting of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
         (b)   If any such matter brought before the Board by petition fails to
get a majority vote of the Board, then the same matter cannot be brought back
for reconsideration for a period of one year.
         (c)   If the Mayor, in his or her discretion, deems that extraordinary
circumstances require a matter to be reconsidered, he or she may move that the
matter be brought before the Board by motion. If such motion is passed by a
majority of the members present, the matter may be considered by the Board.
      (2)   There is further established as a rule of order of the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen that no matter may be placed upon the agenda of any of its
meetings, except by the Mayor, an Aldermen, the Recorder or the City Attorney.
(2011 Code, § 1-103) (Ord. 02-21, passed 9- -2002)
§ 1-104 ELECTION DATE.
   Pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-3-104, the date of the city’s municipal
elections is hereby changed from the second Saturday in May to the second
Thursday in April. This new election date shall not become effective until the
year 1995, as also provided in Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-3-104.
(2011 Code, § 1-104)
§ 1-105 TERMS OF MAYOR AND ALDERMEN.
   (A)   The staggered two-year terms presently in effect for Aldermen shall be
changed to staggered four-year terms, which shall take effect at the next
regular election.
   (B)   At the regular election scheduled for the year 1999, four Aldermen,
one from each ward, shall be elected for four-year terms. Thereafter, municipal
elections shall be conducted every two years at which time four Aldermen, one
from each ward, shall be elected for a four-year term.
   (C)   The term of the Mayor of the city shall be for a period of four years
commencing at the next regular election in the year 2001. In 2001 and
thereafter, a Mayor will be elected every four years.
   (D)   The terms of Mayor and Aldermen shall commence and terminate on the
third Monday of April following the elections commencing in 1999.
(2011 Code, § 1-105) (Ord. 01-48, passed 12- -2001; Ord. 04-13, passed 6- -
2004)
§ 1-106 COMPENSATION OF ALDERMEN.
   (A)   Compensation to be paid Aldermen.
      (1)   All members of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, with the exception
of the Mayor, shall be paid at the rate of $225 per meeting, not to exceed $450
per month.
      (2)   Aldermen serving on the Planning Commission, on other bodies,
commissions, committees or boards shall not be compensated for that service
unless other members of the same type appointment shall also be compensated in
which case the Aldermen shall be compensated at the same rate as fellow
appointees serving in the same capacity.
      (3)   Compensation shall be paid commencing with the next fiscal year
following the aldermanic public election in 1997, and shall hereafter remain in
effect until changed by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
   (B)   Rules and administration for compensation.
      (1)   For compensation to be paid, attendance shall be for a substantial
portion of the meeting and/or discussion of the most important policy issues
before the governing board.
      (2)   The time and place of each regular meeting, special called meeting
and work session for which compensation is to be paid shall have first been
published in a newspaper of general circulation.
      (3)   The City Administrator shall be the administrative judge of all
issues relating to specific performance of the attendance requirements for
compensation. Such decision made by the City Administrator may be altered by a
majority of all the members of the governing board.
(2011 Code, § 1-106) (Ord. 07-28, passed 7- -2007)
§ 1-107 NON-RESIDENT PROPERTY OWNERS VOTE BY ABSENTEE VOTE ONLY.
   In according with Tenn. Code Ann. § 2-6-205, in the city, non-resident
property owners shall cast their municipal ballots for municipal elections or
municipal referenda as absentee mail ballots.
(Ord. 14-21, passed 8-18-2014)
CHAPTER 2: MAYOR
Section
   
1-201   Generally supervises city’s affairs
   
1-202   Mayoral voting privilege
Charter reference:
   Specific charter provisions related to the Mayor, see the following
sections:
      Vacancies in office, see §
6-3-107
      Vice-Mayor, see §
6-3-107
Statutory reference:
   Charter provisions related to the Mayor, see Tenn. Code Ann. Title 6, Ch. 3
§ 1-201 GENERALLY SUPERVISES CITY’S AFFAIRS.
   The Mayor shall have general supervision of all municipal affairs and may
require such reports from the officers and employees as he or she may
reasonably deem necessary to carry out his or her executive responsibilities.
(2011 Code, § 1-201)
Charter reference:
   Duties of Mayor, see §
6-3-106
§ 1-202 MAYORAL VOTING PRIVILEGE.
   (A)   The Mayor is empowered to grant the mayoral voting privilege, as a
proxy vote, to the Vice Mayor or other elected official as designated by the
Mayor or Vice Mayor while such officials are in attendance at any meetings with
other agencies, committees, commissions or other groups, any of which are not
exclusively a city group.
   (B)   The Mayor is authorized to exercise this right to grant a proxy vote
entirely at the discretion of the Mayor and under conditions of instruction and
direction as may be given by the Mayor.
(2011 Code, § 1-202)
CHAPTER 3: RECORDER
Section
   
1-301   To perform general administrative duties and the like
Charter reference:
   City recorder, see §§
6-4-201 et seq.
   Recorder as Judge, see §
6-4-301(b)(1)(C)
   Recorder as Treasurer, see §
6-4-401(c)
§ 1-301 TO PERFORM GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE DUTIES AND THE LIKE.
   The Recorder shall perform all administrative duties for the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen and for the city which are not expressly assigned by the charter
or this code to another corporate officer. The Recorder shall also have custody
of, and be responsible for maintaining all corporate bonds, records and papers
in such fire-proof vault or safe as the city provides.
(2011 Code, § 1-301)
CHAPTER 4: CITY ADMINISTRATOR
Section
   
1-401   Office established
   
1-402   Duties
   
1-403   Compensation
§ 1-401 OFFICE ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby created, pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-4-101, the position
of City Administrator. The City Administrator shall be appointed by the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen and he or she shall serve at the pleasure of this Board.
(2011 Code, § 1-401)
§ 1-402 DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Administrator shall be under the control and direction of the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen, to whom he or she shall report and be responsible.
   (B)   The City Administrator is authorized to perform all of the duties
prescribed by Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-4-101, as the same may from time to time be
amended, including specifically the following.
      (1)   The City Administrator shall be required to perform the following
duties:
         (a)   Administer the business of the municipality;
         (b)   Make recommendations to the Board for improving the quality and
quantity of public services to be rendered by the officers and employees to the
inhabitants of the municipality;
         (c)   Keep the Board fully advised as to the conditions and needs of
the municipality;
         (d)   Report to the Board the condition of all property, real and
personal, owned by the municipality and recommend repairs or replacements as
needed;
         (e)   Recommend to the board and suggest the priority of programs or
projects involving public works or public improvements that should be
undertaken by the municipality;
         (f)   Recommend specific personnel positions, as may be required for
the needs and operations of the municipality and may propose personnel policies
and procedures for approval of the Board; and
         (g)   Perform such other duties as may from time to time be designated
or required by the Board.
      (2)   The City Administrator shall oversee, manage and supervise the
duties of all employees of the city, including department heads, the Chief of
Police, the City Recorder, the Building Inspector, the Superintendent of Public
Works and the Superintendent of the sewer disposal system. All of these
individuals shall perform any lawful orders of or directions from the City
Administrator. All employees shall be under the control and supervision of the
City Administrator who may prescribe their duties and responsibilities and the
hours in which they discharge their duties. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may
modify or revoke any such orders or directives.
      (3)   Pursuant to the City Charter § 63-106(b)(2) and by this subsection
(B)(3), the Board of Mayor and Aldermen has designated the City Administrator
as having responsibility to employ, promote, discipline, suspend and discharge
all employees and department heads. Nothing in the city’s Personnel Policy,
Charter or city code shall be construed as granting a property interest to
employees or department heads in their continued employment.
      (4)   (a)   The City Administrator may suspend any employee of the city,
including department heads, for dereliction of duty or failure to perform
duties prescribed by him or her, the Mayor or the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
         (b)   Any such suspension shall be reported to the next meeting of the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen, which shall act on this suspension.
         (c)   Any suspension can be with or without pay in the discretion of
the City Administrator, which decision may be reversed or modified by
subsequent action of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
      (5)   The City Administrator may act as purchasing agent for the
municipality in the purchase of all materials, supplies and equipment for the
proper conduct of the municipality’s business; provided that, all purchases
shall be made in accordance with the laws of the state and the policies,
practices and procedures established by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
      (6)   The City Administrator shall prepare and submit the initial
proposed annual budget and capital programs to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
(2011 Code, § 1-402) (Ord. 11-22, passed 1-17-2012)
§ 1-403 COMPENSATION.
   Compensation of the City Administrator shall be fixed by the Board. Until
such time as changed by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, the City Administrator
shall be paid the sum of $2,500 per month.
(2011 Code, § 1-403)
CHAPTER 5: TREASURER
Section
   
1-501   Duties and appointment
§ 1-501 DUTIES AND APPOINTMENT.
   The Recorder of the city shall perform all of the duties required of the
Treasurer as set forth in Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-4-401(b).
(2011 Code, § 1-501)
CHAPTER 6: CODE OF ETHICS
Section
   
1-601   Applicability
   
1-602   Definitions
   
1-603   Disclosure of personal interest by official with vote
   
1-604   Disclosure of personal interest in non-voting matters
   
1-605   Acceptance of gratuities and the like
   
1-606   Use of information
   
1-607   Use of municipal time, facilities and the like
   
1-608   Use of position or authority
   
1-609   Outside employment
   
1-610   Ethics complaints
   
1-611   Violations
Statutory reference:
   Campaign finance, see Tenn. Code Ann. Title 2, Ch. 10
   Conflict of interests, see Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 6-54-107, 6-54-108, 12-4-101,
12-4-102
   Conflict of interests disclosure statements, see Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 8-50-501
et seq.
   Consulting fee prohibition for elected municipal officials, see Tenn. Code
Ann. §§ 2-10-122, 2-10-124
   Crimes involving public officials (bribery, soliciting unlawful
compensation, buying and selling in regard to office), see Tenn. Code Ann. §§
39-16-101 et seq.
   Crimes of official misconduct, official oppression, misuse of official
information, see Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 39-16-401 et seq.
   Ouster law, see Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 8-47-101 et seq.
§ 1-601 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This chapter is the code of ethics for personnel of the municipality.
It applies to all full-time and part-time elected or appointed officials and
employees, whether compensated or not, including those of any separate board,
commission, committee, authority, corporation or other instrumentality
appointed or created by the municipality.
   (B)   The words “municipal” and “municipality” include these separate
entities.
(2011 Code, § 1-601) (Ord. 07-03, passed 3- -2007)
§ 1-602 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For purposes of §§
1-603 and
1-604 of this chapter, PERSONAL INTEREST means:
      (1)   Any financial, ownership or employment interest in the subject of a
vote by a municipal board not otherwise regulated by state statutes on
conflicts of interests;
      (2)   Any financial, ownership or employment interest in a matter to be
regulated or supervised; or
      (3)   Any such financial, ownership or employment interest of the
official’s or employee’s spouse, parent(s), step parent(s), grandparent(s),
sibling(s), child(ren) or step child(ren).
   (B)   The words EMPLOYMENT INTEREST include a situation in which an official
or employee or a designated family member is negotiating possible employment
with a person or organization that is the subject of the vote or that is to be
regulated or supervised.
   (C)   In any situation in which a personal interest is also a conflict of
interest under state law, the provisions of the state law take precedence over
the provisions of this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 1-602) (Ord. 07-03, passed 3- -2007)
§ 1-603 DISCLOSURE OF PERSONAL INTEREST BY OFFICIAL WITH VOTE.
   (A)   An official with the responsibility to vote on a measure shall
disclose, during the meeting at which the vote takes place, before the vote and
so it appears in the minutes, any personal interest that affects or that would
lead a reasonable person to infer that it affects the official’s vote on the
measure.
   (B)   In addition, the official may recuse himself or herself from voting on
the measure.
(2011 Code, § 1-603) (Ord. 07-03, passed 3- -2007)
§ 1-604 DISCLOSURE OF PERSONAL INTEREST IN NON-VOTING MATTERS.
   (A)   An official or employee who must exercise discretion relative to any
matter, other than casting a vote, and who has a personal interest in the
matter that affects or that would lead a reasonable person to infer that it
affects the exercise of the discretion shall disclose, before the exercise of
the discretion when possible, the interest on a form provided by and filed with
the Recorder.
   (B)   In addition, the official or employee may, to the extent allowed by
law, charter, ordinance or policy, recuse himself or herself from the exercise
of discretion in the matter.
(2011 Code, § 1-604) (Ord. 07-03, passed 3- -2007)
§ 1-605 ACCEPTANCE OF GRATUITIES AND THE LIKE.
   An official or employee may not accept, directly or indirectly, any money,
gift, gratuity or other consideration or favor of any kind from anyone other
than the municipality:
   (A)   For the performance of an act, or refraining from performance of an
act, that he or she would be expected to perform, or refrain from performing,
in the regular course of his or her duties; or
   (B)   That might reasonably be interpreted as an attempt to influence his or
her action, or reward him or her for past action, in executing municipal
business.
(2011 Code, § 1-605) (Ord. 07-03, passed 3- -2007)
§ 1-606 USE OF INFORMATION.
   (A)   An official or employee may not disclose any information obtained in
his or her official capacity or position of employment that is made
confidential under state or federal law, except as authorized by law.
   (B)   An official or employee may not use or disclose information obtained
in his or her official capacity or position of employment with the intent to
result in financial gain for himself or herself or any other person or entity.
(2011 Code, § 1-606) (Ord. 07-03, passed 3- -2007)
§ 1-607 USE OF MUNICIPAL TIME, FACILITIES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   An official or employee may not use or authorize the use of municipal
time, facilities, equipment or supplies for private gain or advantage to
himself or herself.
   (B)   An official or employee may not use or authorize the use of municipal
time, facilities, equipment or supplies for private gain or advantage to any
private person or entity, except as authorized by legitimate contract or lease
that is determined by the governing body to be in the best interests of the
municipality.
(2011 Code, § 1-607) (Ord. 07-03, passed 3- -2007)
§ 1-608 USE OF POSITION OR AUTHORITY.
   (A)   An official or employee may not make or attempt to make private
purchases, for cash or otherwise, in the name of the municipality.
   (B)   An official or employee may not use or attempt to use his or her
position to secure any privilege or exemption for himself, herself or others
that is not authorized by the charter, general law or ordinance or policy of
the municipality.
(2011 Code, § 1-608) (Ord. 07-03, passed 3- -2007)
§ 1-609 OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.
   An official or employee may not accept or continue any outside employment if
the work unreasonably inhibits the performance of any affirmative duty of the
municipal position or conflicts with any provision of the municipality’s
charter or any ordinance or policy.
(2011 Code, § 1-609) (Ord. 07-03, passed 3- -2007)
§ 1-610 ETHICS COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   The City Attorney is designated as the Ethics Officer of the
municipality. Upon the written request of an official or employee potentially
affected by a provision of this chapter, the City Attorney may render an oral
or written advisory ethics opinion based upon this chapter and other applicable
law.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the City Attorney
shall investigate any credible complaint against an appointed official or
employee charging any violation of this chapter, or may undertake an
investigation on his or her own initiative when he acquires information
indicating a possible violation, and make recommendations for action to end or
seek retribution for any activity that, in the Attorney’s judgment, constitutes
a violation of this code of ethics.
      (2)   The City Attorney may request the governing body to hire another
attorney, individual or entity to act as Ethics Officer when he or she has or
will have a conflict of interests in a particular matter.
      (3)   When a complaint of a violation of any provision of this chapter is
lodged against a member of the municipality’s governing body, the governing
body shall either determine that the complaint has merit, determine that the
complaint does not have merit or determine that the complaint has sufficient
merit to warrant further investigation. If the governing body determines that a
complaint warrants further investigation, it shall authorize an investigation
by the City Attorney or another individual or entity chosen by the governing
body.
   (C)   The interpretation that a reasonable person in the circumstances would
apply shall be used in interpreting and enforcing this code of ethics.
   (D)   When a violation of this code of ethics also constitutes a violation
of a personnel policy, rule or regulation or a civil service policy, rule or
regulation, the violation shall be dealt with as a violation of the personnel
or civil service provisions rather than as a violation of this code of ethics.
(2011 Code, § 1-610) (Ord. 07-03, passed 3- -2007)
§ 1-611 VIOLATIONS.
   An elected official or appointed member of a separate municipal board,
commission, committee, authority, corporation or other instrumentality who
violates any provision of this chapter is subject to punishment as provided by
the municipality’s charter or other applicable law and, in addition, is subject
to censure by the governing body. An appointed official or an employee who
violates any provision of this chapter is subject to disciplinary action.
(2011 Code, § 1-611) (Ord. 07-03, passed 3- -2007)
TITLE 2: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND THE LIKE
      Chapter
         
1.   SOLID WASTE PLANNING REGION BOARD
         
2.   PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
         
3.   BOARD OF CODE APPEALS
         
4.   HISTORIC COMMISSION
CHAPTER 1: SOLID WASTE PLANNING REGION BOARD
Section
   
2-101   City to participate in creating board
§ 2-101 CITY TO PARTICIPATE IN CREATING BOARD.
   The city does hereby elect to join in creating and participating in the
Marshall-Maury Municipal Solid Waste Planning Region Board, pursuant to Tenn.
Code Ann. § 68-211-903.
(2011 Code, § 2-101)
CHAPTER 2: PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
Section
   
2-201   Organization and appointment of members
   
2-202   Terms of office
   
2-203   Removal of members
   
2-204   Duties and powers of Commission
   
2-205   General administration
§ 2-201 ORGANIZATION AND APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   There shall be a Parks and Recreation Commission of the city
(hereinafter referred to as “the Commission”), which shall serve as an advisory
board regarding parks and recreation plans, policies, and projects, and to
serve as liaison between citizens and the Board of Mayor and Aldermen on parks
and recreation related matters.
   (B)   The Commission shall be constituted as a body of seven members. Six
members shall be appointed at-large from within the city limits. The members
shall be appointed by majority vote of the membership of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen. The Mayor shall appoint a seventh member, who shall be an Alderman.
The Chairperson will be appointed by majority vote of the membership of the
Parks and Recreation Commission.
   (C)   Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, but may be
reimbursed for reasonable and necessary expenses.
(2011 Code, § 2-201) (Ord. 13-05, passed 2-19-2013; Ord. 17-20, passed 12-18-
2017)
§ 2-202 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The initial members of the Commission appointed from wards shall serve terms
as follows: first ward, until 12-31-1996; second ward, until 12-31-1997; third
ward, until 12-31-1998; fourth ward, until 12-31-1999. Upon the expiration of
each initial term, a member shall be appointed to a four-year term. Members
shall be eligible for reappointment. Vacancies shall be filled by vote of a
majority of the membership of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen to serve out the
remainder of the vacating member’s term. The Alderman appointed by the Mayor to
serve on the Commission shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and only
during the appointing Mayor’s term of office as Mayor.
(2011 Code, § 2-202) (Ord. 13-05, passed 2-19-2013)
§ 2-203 REMOVAL OF MEMBERS.
   The Mayor is authorized to dismiss and remove a member of the Commission
appointed from a ward, for cause, with a written explanation given to all
Aldermen. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may dismiss and remove a member
appointed from a ward by vote of two-thirds of the membership of the Board.
(2011 Code, § 2-203)
§ 2-204 DUTIES AND POWERS OF COMMISSION.
   The duties and powers of the Commission shall be to:
   (A)   Act as the advisory board regarding parks and recreation plans,
policies, and projects of the city, including the use of city property or funds
by civic organizations for recreation purposes, subject to the general
governance of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen;
   (B)   Study, plan, determine, and recommend parks and recreation needs in
property, facilities, maintenance, and programs based on public input and
surveys, and present the same to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen on a periodic
basis as requested by the Board;
   (C)   Report at each monthly meeting of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen on
the activities and plans of the Commission;
   (D)   The Commission is authorized to spend an amount less than $10,000 for
a single project, event, or series of expenditures devoted to one end result;
and
   (E)   Work with personnel as selected and supervised by the city.
(2011 Code, § 2-204) (Ord. 13-05, passed 2-19-2013; Ord. 17-20, passed 12-18-
2017)
§ 2-205 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Commission shall conduct meetings and study sessions as public
meetings, upon adequate public notice, and shall keep and maintain minutes of
all meetings.
   (B)   All parks and recreation personnel matters shall be handled by the
city rather than by the Commission.
   (C)   Fund accounting, disbursement and receipting shall be done by the
Finance and Administration Department of the city.
   (D)   City government staff support shall be provided to the Commission as
appropriate and available.
   (E)   The Parks and Recreation Director or his or her designated
representative shall be in attendance at all Commission meetings.
(2011 Code, § 2-205) (Ord. 17-20, passed 12-18-2017)
CHAPTER 3: BOARD OF CODE APPEALS
Section
   
2-301   Established
   
2-302   Authority
   
2-303   Membership
   
2-304   Qualifications
   
2-305   Term
   
2-306   Duties
§ 2-301 ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a Construction Board of Adjustments and Appeals,
referred to in this chapter as the “Board”, to hear appeals from a decision,
notice, or order of the building official or his/her designee, enforcing
provisions of the International Building Code, the International Plumbing Code,
the International Mechanical Code, the International Gas Code, the
International Residential Code, the International Energy Conservation Code,
International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, the International Existing Building
Code, and the International Property Maintenance Code, or as such codes and
standards have been adopted and amended by ordinance.
(Ord. 22-16, passed 7-5-2022)
§ 2-302 AUTHORITY.
   The authority of the Board is derived from and set forth in the currently
adopted edition of the International Building Code.
(Ord. 22-16, passed 7-5-2022)
§ 2-303 MEMBERSHIP.
   The membership of the Board shall consist of five members appointed by the
Mayor. The Board of Mayor and Alderman may object and overturn an appointment
by a two thirds vote.
(Ord. 22-16, passed 7-5-2022)
§ 2-304 QUALIFICATIONS.
   The qualifications shall be as stipulated in the currently adopted edition
of the International Building Code.
(Ord. 22-16, passed 7-5-2022)
§ 2-305 TERM.
   The members of the Board shall be appointed to five-year terms.
(Ord. 22-16, passed 7-5-2022)
§ 2-306 DUTIES.
   (A)   The Board shall meet as needed.
   (B)   The Board shall be empowered to adopt procedures to govern the order
of proceedings as well as the method of electing officers.
   (C)   At all meetings, three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum
for the transaction of business and all questions before the Board at a meeting
shall be determined by a majority vote of those present.
   (D)   The Board shall hear appeals from a decision, notice, or order of the
building official or his/her designee, enforcing provisions of the
International Building Code, the International Plumbing Code, the International
Mechanical Code, the International Gas Code, the International Residential
Code, the International Energy Conservation Code, International Swimming Pool
and Spa Code, the International Existing Building Code, and the International
Property Maintenance Code, or as such codes and standards have been adopted and
amended by ordinance.
(Ord. 22-16, passed 7-5-2022)
CHAPTER 4: HISTORIC COMMISSION
Section
   
2-401   Purposes
   
2-402   Creation; membership
   
2-403   Organization
   
2-404   Conflict of interest
   
2-405   Powers and duties
   
2-406   Designation and protection of historically significant sites
   
2-407   Criteria for designation of historically significant sites
   
2-408   Mapping of historically significant sites
   
2-409   Removal of classification
§ 2-401 PURPOSES.
   The general intent of this Commission includes, among others, the following
purposes:
   (A)   To promote the preservation and protection of the physical character
and quality of life in the city;
   (B)   To promote the educational, cultural civic awareness and general
welfare of the city while providing a sense of commitment and continuity
between the past and present through the encouragement of preservation and
protection of historically significant sites and structures; and
   (C)   To foster civic pride and historic recognition through the
preservation of the city’s heritage.
(2011 Code, § 2-401) (Ord. 07-01, passed 4- -2007)
§ 2-402 CREATION; MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   In order to encourage the intent of this division, there is hereby
established an advisory board to be known as the Spring Hill Historic
Commission. Such Commission shall consist of no less than five and not more
than seven members.
   (B)   The members of such Commission shall be selected on the following
basis:
      (1)   One member of such Commission shall be a member of the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen appointed by the Mayor to serve a term consistent with their
elected term of office.
      (2)   One member of such Commission shall be a member of the Planning
Commission appointed by the Mayor to serve a term consistent with their term as
a member of the Planning Commission.
      (3)   Five at-large members of the Spring Hill Historic Commission shall
be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to the following provisions:
         (a)   Each of the appointees shall own property in the City or be a
resident of the City. Terms of the members, after expiration of the initial
members' terms, shall be three years.
         (b)   Appointees should have a background and experience indicative of
a desire to be involved in the recognition and preservation of the city’s
history.
         (c)   Two of these five positions may remain open and shall not affect
the quorum of the Commission if not filled.
         (d)   One member of such Commission may be a member, employee, or
agent of an organization, corporation, or other legal entity involved in the
ownership, management or operations of a property formally recognized as a
Historically-Significant Site by the City of Spring Hill and otherwise
ineligible to serve. This seat shall rotate between historical sites.
         (e)   Members already serving on the Commission may continue to serve
at their original term. New members shall be appointed to serve for one year
and two year terms respectfully.
   (C)   If any member of the Commission does not attend 75% of scheduled
meetings, the Commission may, by majority vote, require that Commission member
to resign.
(2011 Code, § 2-402) (Ord. 07-01, passed 4- -2007; Ord. 10-25, passed 10-18-
2010; Ord. 22-09, passed 4-18-2022)
§ 2-403 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The city’s Historic Commission shall select from its members its own
Chairperson and such other officers deemed appropriate.
   (B)   It shall:
      (1)   Establish procedures, rules of order and regular meeting dates;
      (2)   Keep a record of all proceedings;
      (3)   Meet no less often than quarterly; and
      (4)   Comply with all appropriate regulations of Tennessee Code Annotated
that apply to municipalities.
   (C)   At least three members shall constitute a quorum and the concurring
vote of at least three members shall constitute a decision of the Commission on
any matter before it.
(2011 Code, § 2-403) (Ord. 07-01, passed 4- -2007)
§ 2-404 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   Any member of the Historic Commission who shall have a direct or indirect
interest in any property or issue which is the subject matter of, or affected
by, a decision of the Commission shall be disqualified from participating in
the discussion, decision or proceedings of the Commission, as a voting member
of the Commission, in connection therewith.
(2011 Code, § 2-404) (Ord. 07-01, passed 4- -2007)
§ 2-405 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The city’s Historic Commission shall have the authority and powers
granted herein or as provided in the future by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen,
to include:
      (1)   Recommendation to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen that specific
geographic sites and/or structures be designated as historically significant
and encourage the consideration of specific measures to ensure the preservation
of historically significant sites;
      (2)   Prior to submitting such recommendations to the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen, the city’s Historic Commission shall:
         (a)   Provide formal notification of its recommendations to the owners
of record of the affected properties;
         (b)   Publicize such notice in an appropriate manner;
         (c)   Conduct such public hearings as would meet the requirements of
local, state or federal law; and
         (d)   Receive formal notification of acceptance that specific
geographic sites and/or structures be designated as historically significant
from the owners of record of the affected properties.
      (3)   Regarding properties designated as historically significant by the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen, the city’s Historic Commission shall, upon the
request of the property owner, assist such owner by reviewing proposed
preservation plans, changes in exterior designs or modifications to structures
or geographical locations and offering suggestions to retain or enhance the
historic importance of the site.
   (B)   The city’s Historic Commission shall not consider interior structure
modifications.
(2011 Code, § 2-405) (Ord. 07-01, passed 4- -2007)
§ 2-406 DESIGNATION AND PROTECTION OF HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT SITES.
   (A)   Designation of a historically significant site will be done by
resolution of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, upon recommendation by the
city’s Historic Commission. A proclamation (a formal copy to be provided the
owner), along with a metal plaque to be prominently displayed at the site, will
be provided by the city.
   (B)   Once a site or structure is designated as historically significant,
the Planning Commission shall thereafter, as part of its normal site review
process, be responsible for ensuring that appropriate measures are taken to
protect the structure and the immediate grounds when development or
redevelopment occurs on adjacent property.
(2011 Code, § 2-406) (Ord. 07-01, passed 4- -2007)
§ 2-407 CRITERIA FOR DESIGNATION OF HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT SITES.
   The following criteria are to be used in determining eligibility and
appropriateness of selection as a historically significant site:
   (A)   The quality of significance in the city’s history, architecture,
archaeology and culture is present in districts, sites, buildings, structures
and objects that possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials,
workmanship, feeling and association, and that:
      (1)   Are associated with events that have made a significant
contribution to the broad patterns of the city’s history;
      (2)   Are associated with the lives of persons significant in the city’s
past;
      (3)   Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period or method
of construction or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high
artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity
whose components lack individual distinction; or
      (4)   Have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
prehistory or history.
   (B)   Ordinarily cemeteries, birthplaces or graves of historical figures,
properties owned by religious institutions or used for religious purposes,
structures that have been moved from their original locations, reconstructed
historic buildings, properties primarily commemorative in nature and properties
that have achieved significance within the past 75 years shall not be
considered eligible for the city’s historic register. However, such properties
will qualify if they are integral parts of districts that do meet the criteria
or if they fall within the following categories:
      (1)   A religious property deriving primary significance from
architectural or artistic distinction or historical importance;
      (2)   A building or structure removed from its original location but
which is significant primarily for architectural value, or which is the
surviving structure most importantly associated with a historic person or
event;
      (3)   A birthplace or grave of a historical figure of outstanding
importance if there is no appropriate site or building directly associated with
his or her productive life;
      (4)   A cemetery which derives its primary significance from graves of
persons of transcendent importance, from age, from distinctive design features
or from association with historic events;
      (5)   A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a suitable
environment and presented in a dignified manner as part of a restoration master
plan, and when no other building or structure with the same association has
survived; and
      (6)   A property achieving significance within the past 50 years if it is
of exceptional importance.
(2011 Code, § 2-407) (Ord. 07-01, passed 4- -2007)
§ 2-408 MAPPING OF HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT SITES.
   (A)   All official city maps shall be modified to allow for the inclusion of
designated historically significant sites in an appropriate and consistent
manner.
   (B)   An application for a subdivision of property, site development plan
and/or zoning district amendment shall identify all significant historic and
archeological features and structures (as designated by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen) that are located on the affected property or within 300 feet of the
boundary of the affected property. Any proposed development plan for the
affected tract shall be guided by city zoning and subdivision regulations and
the principles and standards contained within the publication, Saving the
Farmstead (a publication of the Heritage Foundation of Franklin and Williamson
County, dated December 1996). The development plan shall be configured in a
manner that protects the historic and archeological features on the property to
the greatest extent feasible and practical. The plan shall be subject to review
and comments by a qualified historic preservation consultant retained by the
city and the recommendations of the city’s Historic Commission. Upon approval
of a development plan by the Planning Commission, no grading or building
permits shall be issued by the City Manager or his or her designee until
stabilization measures are in place to permanently protect the feature from the
impact of nearby construction.
(2011 Code, § 2-408) (Ord. 07-01, passed 4- -2007)
§ 2-409 REMOVAL OF CLASSIFICATION.
   Any property owner of a historically significant site may petition the
Historic Commission to have the designation removed. The Historic Commission
upon such petition or request from the owner of the property shall, by vote of
the Commission, recommend or not recommend to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
the removal of such designation. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall vote on
the petition or request, in the form of a resolution, to remove or allow the
property to remain on the city’s list of historically significant properties.
The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall not be bound by any decision of the
Historic Commission as such is only advisory in nature.
(2011 Code, § 2-409) (Ord. 07-01, passed 4- -2007)
TITLE 3: MUNICIPAL COURT
      Chapter
         
1.   CITY JUDGE
         
2.   COURT ADMINISTRATION
         
3.   WARRANTS, SUMMONSES AND SUBPOENAS
         
4.   BONDS AND APPEALS
CHAPTER 1: CITY JUDGE
Section
   
3-101   City Judge
   
3-102   Procedure for appointment of City Judge
§ 3-101 CITY JUDGE.
   The officer designated by the Charter to handle judicial matters within the
city shall preside over the City Court and shall be known as the “City Judge”.
(2011 Code, § 3-101)
Charter reference:
   City Judge—City Court, see §
6-4-301
§ 3-102 PROCEDURE FOR APPOINTMENT OF CITY JUDGE.
   (A)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen (BOMA) will appoint the City Judge
with assistance from the City Attorney, City Administrator (or designee) and
the Human Resource Director.
   (B)   Position announcement will be distributed through such organizations
and publications as Williamson County Bar Association, Maury County Bar
Association, Tennessee Municipal Attorneys Association, Tennessee Municipal
Judges Conference, and Tennessee Town and City.
   (C)   Deadline for applications will be established and applications will be
forwarded to Board of Mayor and Aldermen. Names of applicants will be posted on
the city's website.
   (D)   BOMA will meet to review applications and determine candidates to
interview.
   (E)   BOMA will interview selected applicants; interviews will be
videotaped.
   (F)   The new city judge will be appointed by the BOMA by Resolution which
will set start date, compensation, and term.
(Ord. 22-17, passed 6-20-2022)
CHAPTER 2: COURT ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
3-201   Maintenance of docket
   
3-202   Imposition of fines and costs
   
3-203   Disposition and report of fines and costs
   
3-204   Disturbance of proceedings
   
3-205   Trial and disposition of cases
   
3-206   Court costs
   
3-207   Maximum penalty for municipal violations
   
3-208   Separate offense; failure to appear as contempt of court
   
3-209   Offense; contempt
   
3-210   Use of collection agency to collect unpaid fees and fines
§ 3-201 MAINTENANCE OF DOCKET.
   (A)   The City Judge shall keep a complete docket of all matters coming
before him or her in his or her judicial capacity.
   (B)   The docket shall include for each defendant such information as his or
her name; warrant and/or summons numbers; alleged offense; disposition; fines,
penalties and costs imposed and whether collected; whether committed to
workhouse; and all other information that may be relevant.
(2011 Code, § 3-201)
§ 3-202 IMPOSITION OF FINES AND COSTS.
   (A)   All fines and costs shall be imposed and recorded by the City Judge on
the City Court docket in open court.
   (B)   In all cases heard or determined by him or her, the City Judge shall
tax in the bill of costs the same amounts and for the same items allowed in
courts of general sessions for similar work in state cases.
(2011 Code, § 3-202)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 8-21-401
§ 3-203 DISPOSITION AND REPORT OF FINES AND COSTS.
   All funds coming into the hands of the City Judge in the form of fines,
costs and forfeitures shall be recorded by him or her and paid over daily to
the city. At the end of each month, he or she shall submit to the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen a report accounting for the collection or non-collection of
all fines and costs imposed by his or her Court during the current month and to
date for the current fiscal year.
(2011 Code, § 3-203)
§ 3-204 DISTURBANCE OF PROCEEDINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to create any disturbance of any trial
before the City Court by making loud or unusual noises, by using indecorous,
profane or blasphemous language or by any distracting conduct whatsoever.
(2011 Code, § 3-204)
§ 3-205 TRIAL AND DISPOSITION OF CASES.
   Every person charged with violating a municipal ordinance shall be entitled
to an immediate trial and disposition of his or her case; provided, the City
Court is in session or the City Judge is reasonably available. However, the
provisions of this section shall not apply when the alleged offender, by reason
of drunkenness or other incapacity, is not in a proper condition or is not able
to appear before the Court.
(2011 Code, § 3-205)
§ 3-206 COURT COSTS.
   The Court costs on all cases in the City Court shall be increased from the
present rate of $59.25 to the sum of $75, these being Municipal Court costs
exclusive of the state litigation tax currently in the amount of $13.75.
(2011 Code, § 3-206)
§ 3-207 MAXIMUM PENALTY FOR MUNICIPAL VIOLATIONS.
   The maximum penalty which may be imposed by the City Court for municipal
violations will be $500, but $50 shall be the maximum penalty for municipal
violations as listed:
   (A)   All traffic offenses;
   (B)   Property and Health Code offenses judged by the city’s Codes
Inspectors to be in compliance prior to commencement of Court proceedings;
   (C)   A community service sentence, defined in hours, may be imposed in lieu
of the $50 fine.
(2011 Code, § 3-207)
§ 3-208 SEPARATE OFFENSE; FAILURE TO APPEAR AS CONTEMPT OF COURT.
   (A)   It shall constitute a separate offense for any person notified to
appear in City Court to fail to appear on the date and at the time that they
have been notified to appear:
      (1)   When an offender has signed an agreement and waiver in lieu of
arrest contained in the citation(s);
      (2)   As commanded in a notice of violation, summons, subpoena or other
lawful order of the Court, ordering a person to appear; and/or
      (3)   As commanded by a verbal order of the court to a person at a
previous appearance by that person in Court.
   (B)   Upon a person’s failure to appear in Court as set forth in subsections
(A)(1) through (A)(3) above, the Court shall provide the offender with notice
of a separate show cause hearing date and time at which the offender may appear
and show persuasive cause for why he or she failed to appear in City Court on
the hearing date set for the original offense, or as otherwise commanded to
appear in City Court, and why he or she should not be found guilty of failure
to appear and contempt of City Court. However, the failure to appear at the
show cause hearing shall not be treated as an additional failure to appear
offense, but as a default and admission of guilt on the failure to appear
charge.
   (C)   A violation of the separate offense of failure to appear shall result
in a fine of $50, plus Court costs and litigation taxes, as well as a $35 fee
for the administrative costs associated with the scheduling, notice and
adjudication of the separate contempt charge for failure to appear.
   (D)   The power to punish under this section may not be used against any
person who fails to appear for parking violations.
(Ord. 14-18, passed 5-19-2014)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 29-9-108(a)(3)
§ 3-209 OFFENSE; CONTEMPT.
   Any violation of Tenn. Code Ann. Title 29, Ch. 9, shall constitute the
offense of contempt of the City Court. Such contempt shall be punishable by
fine in the amount of $50, or such lesser amount as may be imposed at the
Judge’s discretion, plus Court costs and litigation taxes. Offenders shall be
given an opportunity to purge the contempt in a subsequent hearing after being
served by certified mail, return receipt requested or other form of personal
service, a notice and order to show cause. The Clerk of the Court shall be
authorized to charge a separate $35 fee for the administrative costs associated
with the scheduling, notice and adjudication of the contempt case, in addition
to any other applicable costs. The power to punish under this section may not
be used against any person who fails to appear for parking violations.
(Ord. 14-17, passed 5-19-2014)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 29-9-108(a)(3)
§ 3-210 USE OF COLLECTION AGENCY TO COLLECT UNPAID FEES AND FINES.
   (A)   The city is hereby authorized to solicit and use the services of a
collection agency to collect unpaid fees and fines of the municipal court
including, but not limited to, traffic citations;
   (B)   The contract with such collection agency shall be in writing and
conform to all provisions set forth in Tenn. Code Ann. § 40-24-105(e); and
   (C)   The city shall be entitled to recover collection fees and attorney's
fees incurred in collecting delinquent court accounts.
(Ord. 19-35, passed 11-18-2019)
CHAPTER 3: WARRANTS, SUMMONSES AND SUBPOENAS
Section
   
3-301   Issuance of arrest warrants
   
3-302   Issuance of summonses
   
3-303   Issuance of subpoenas
§ 3-301 ISSUANCE OF ARREST WARRANTS.
   The City Judge shall have the power to issue warrants for the arrest of
persons charged with violating municipal ordinances.
(2011 Code, § 3-301)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to issue warrants, see Tenn. Code Ann. Title 40, Ch. 6
§ 3-302 ISSUANCE OF SUMMONSES.
   When a complaint of an alleged ordinance violation is made to the City
Judge, the Judge may, in his or her discretion, in lieu of issuing an arrest
warrant, issue a summons ordering the alleged offender to personally appear
before the City Court at a time specified therein to answer to the charges
against him or her. The summons shall contain a brief description of the
offense charged, but need not set out verbatim the provisions of the ordinance
alleged to have been violated. Upon failure of any person to appear before the
City Court as commanded in a summons lawfully served on him or her, the cause
may be proceeded with ex parte and the judgment of the Court shall be valid and
binding subject to the defendant’s right of appeal.
(2011 Code, § 3-302)
§ 3-303 ISSUANCE OF SUBPOENAS.
   The City Judge may subpoena as witnesses all persons whose testimony he or
she believes will be relevant and material to matters coming before his or her
Court, and it shall be unlawful for any person lawfully served with such a
subpoena to fail or neglect to comply therewith.
(2011 Code, § 3-303)
CHAPTER 4: BONDS AND APPEALS
Section
   
3-401   Appearance bonds authorized
   
3-402   Appeals
   
3-403   Bond amounts, conditions and forms
§ 3-401 APPEARANCE BONDS AUTHORIZED.
   When the City Judge is not available or when an alleged offender requests
and has reasonable grounds for a delay in the trial of his or her case, he or
she may, in lieu of remaining in jail pending disposition of his or her case,
be allowed to post an appearance bond with the City Judge or, in the absence of
the Judge, with the ranking police officer on duty at the time; provided, such
alleged offender is not drunk or otherwise in need of protective custody.
(2011 Code, § 3-401)
§ 3-402 APPEALS.
   Any defendant who is dissatisfied with any judgment of the City Court
against him or her may, within ten days next after such judgment is rendered,
Sundays exclusive, appeal to the next term of the Circuit Court upon posting a
proper appeal bond.
(2011 Code, § 3-402)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 16-18-307
§ 3-403 BOND AMOUNTS, CONDITIONS AND FORMS.
   (A)   An appearance bond in any case before the City Court shall be in such
amount as the City Judge shall prescribe and shall be conditioned that the
defendant shall appear for trial before the City Court at the stated time and
place.
   (B)   An appeal bond in any case shall be in the sum of $250 and shall be
conditioned that if the Circuit Court finds against the appellant the fine and
all costs of the trial and appeal shall be promptly paid by the defendant and/
or his or her sureties.
   (C)   An appearance or appeal bond in any case may be made in the form of a
cash deposit or by any corporate surety company authorized to do business in
the state or by two private persons who individually own real property located
within the county.
   (D)   No other type of bond shall be acceptable.
(2011 Code, § 3-403)
TITLE 4: MUNICIPAL PERSONNEL
      Chapter
         
1.   SOCIAL SECURITY
         
2.   OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM
         
3.   TRAVEL REIMBURSEMENT REGULATIONS
         
4.   HUMAN RESOURCES SYSTEM
CHAPTER 1: SOCIAL SECURITY
Section
   
4-101   Policy and purpose as to coverage
   
4-102   Necessary agreements to be executed
   
4-103   Withholdings from salaries or wages
   
4-104   Appropriations for employer’s contributions
   
4-105   Records and reports to be made
   
4-106   Exclusions
§ 4-101 POLICY AND PURPOSE AS TO COVERAGE.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to provide
for all eligible employees and officials of the city, whether employed in
connection with a governmental or proprietary function, the benefits of the
system of Federal Old Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance. In pursuance of
said policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be
required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations.
(2011 Code, § 4-101)
§ 4-102 NECESSARY AGREEMENTS TO BE EXECUTED.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to execute all the necessary
agreements and amendments thereto with the state’s Executive Director of Old
Age Insurance, as agent or agency, to secure coverage of employees and
officials as provided in §
4-101 of this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 4-102)
§ 4-103 WITHHOLDINGS FROM SALARIES OR WAGES.
   Withholdings from the salaries or wages of employees and officials for the
purpose provided in the first section of this chapter are hereby authorized to
be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state
or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state or federal
agency designated by said laws or regulations.
(2011 Code, § 4-103)
§ 4-104 APPROPRIATIONS FOR EMPLOYER’S CONTRIBUTIONS.
   There shall be appropriated from available funds such amounts at such times
as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations for
employer’s contributions, and the same shall be paid over to the state or
federal agency designated by said laws or regulations.
(2011 Code, § 4-104)
§ 4-105 RECORDS AND REPORTS TO BE MADE.
   The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by
applicable state and federal laws or regulations.
(2011 Code, § 4-105)
§ 4-106 EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   There is hereby excluded from this chapter any authority to make any
agreement with respect to emergency, part-time and fee-basis employees and
elective legislative and executive officials, or any employee or official not
authorized to be covered by applicable federal or state laws and regulations.
   (B)   Acting under §
4-102 of this chapter, the Mayor is hereby directed to amend the Social
Security agreement executed with the state agency on 12-13-1951, so as to
extend the benefits of the Federal System of Old Age, Survivors and Disability
Insurance to include the services of employees and officials in part-time
positions and elective legislative and executive positions as of 1-1-1977.
   (C)   It is understood and agreed that this does not apply to services
performed after 7-1-1991 that are covered under § 210(a)(7)(F) of the Social
Security Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 410.
   (D)   The city hereby elects to exclude its coverage under the Federal
System of Old Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance, the services of election
workers and election officials if the renumeration paid to any individual for
such services in a calendar year is less than $1,000 on or after 1-1-1995, and
ending on or before 12-31-1999, and the adjusted amount thereafter determined
under § 218(c)(8)(B) of the Social Security Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 418, for any
calendar year commencing on or after 1-1-2000.
   (E)   The Mayor and the Recorder are hereby authorized and directed to sign
an amendment to the existing agreement between the city and the State Old Age,
Survivors and Disability Insurance Agency to effectuate this exclusion.
(2011 Code, § 4-106)
CHAPTER 2: OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM
Section
   
4-201   Occupational Safety and Health Program adopted by reference
§ 4-201 OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH PROGRAM ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city’s Occupational Safety and Health Program regulations, and any and
all amendments, are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if
set out in full.
(Ord. 13-06, passed 3-18-2013; Ord. 20-17, passed 10-19-2020; Ord. 22-02,
passed 2-7-2022)
CHAPTER 3: TRAVEL REIMBURSEMENT REGULATIONS
Section
   
4-301   Enforcement
   
4-302   Travel policy
   
4-303   Travel reimbursement rate schedule
   
4-304   Administrative procedures
§ 4-301 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) of the city or his or her designee
shall be responsible for the enforcement of these travel regulations.
(2011 Code, § 4-301)
§ 4-302 TRAVEL POLICY.
   (A)   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, the term
TRAVELER or AUTHORIZED TRAVEL means any elected or appointed municipal officer
or employee, including members of municipal boards and committees appointed by
the Mayor or the municipal governing body, and the employees of such boards and
committees who are traveling on official municipal business and whose travel
was authorized in accordance with this chapter. AUTHORIZED TRAVELER shall not
include the spouse, children, other relatives, friends or companions
accompanying the authorized traveler on city business, unless the person(s)
otherwise qualifies as an authorized traveler under this chapter.
   (B)   Authorized travelers are entitled to reimbursement of certain
expenditures incurred while traveling on official business for the city.
Reimbursable expenses shall include expenses for transportation; lodging;
meals; registration fees for conferences, conventions and seminars; and other
actual and necessary expenses related to official business as determined by the
CAO. Under certain conditions, entertainment expenses may be eligible for
reimbursement.
   (C)   (1)   Authorized travelers can request either a travel advance for the
projected cost of authorized travel or advance billing directly to the city for
registration fees, air fares, meals, lodging, conferences and similar expenses.
      (2)   Travel advance requests are not considered documentation of travel
expenses. If travel advances exceed documented expenses, the traveler must
immediately reimburse the city. It will be the responsibility of the CAO to
initiate action to recover any undocumented travel advances.
   (D)   Travel advances are available only for special travel and only after
completion and approval of the travel authorization form.
   (E)   The travel expense reimbursement form will be used to document all
expense claims.
   (F)   To qualify for reimbursement, travel expenses must be:
      (1)   Directly related to the conduct of the city business for which
travel was authorized; and
      (2)   Actual, reasonable and necessary under the circumstances. The CAO
may make exceptions for unusual circumstances. Expenses considered excessive
won’t be allowed.
   (G)   Claims of $5 or more for travel expense reimbursement must be
supported by the original paid receipt for lodging, vehicle rental, phone call,
public carrier travel, conference fee and other reimbursable costs.
   (H)   Any person attempting to defraud the city or misuse city travel funds
is subject to legal action for recovery of fraudulent travel claims and/or
advances.
   (I)   Mileage and motel expenses incurred within the city aren’t ordinarily
considered eligible expenses for reimbursement.
(2011 Code, § 4-302)
§ 4-303 TRAVEL REIMBURSEMENT RATE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Authorized travelers shall be reimbursed according to the federal
travel regulation rates. The city’s travel reimbursement rates will
automatically change when the federal rates are adjusted.
   (B)   The municipality may pay directly to the provider for expenses such as
meals, lodging and registration fees for conferences, conventions, seminars and
other education programs.
(2011 Code, § 4-303)
§ 4-304 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The city adopts and incorporates by reference, as if fully set out
herein, the administrative procedures submitted by MTAS to, and approved by
letter by, the state’s Comptroller of the Treasury in June 1993. A copy of the
administrative procedures is on file in the office of the City Recorder.
   (B)   This chapter shall take effect upon its final reading by the municipal
governing body. It shall cover all travel and expenses occurring on or after 1-
1-1993.
(2011 Code, § 4-304)
CHAPTER 4: HUMAN RESOURCES SYSTEM
Section
   
4-401   Purpose
   
4-402   Coverage
   
4-403   Administration
   
4-404   Personnel rules and regulations
   
4-405   Records
   
4-406   Right to contract for special services
   
4-407   Discrimination
   
4-408   Amendments
   
4-409   Severability
§ 4-401 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a system of human resource
administration in the City of Spring Hill that is based on merit and fitness.
The system shall provide a means to select, develop, and maintain an effective
municipal work force through impartially applying human resources policies and
procedures free of personal and political considerations and regardless of
race, color, gender, age, creed, national origin, or disability.
(Ord. 23-15, passed 10-2-2023)
§ 4-402 COVERAGE.
   (A)   All offices and positions of the municipal government are divided into
classified service and exempt service. The classified service shall include all
regular full-time and regular part-time positions in the city's service, unless
specifically placed in the exempt service. All offices and positions of the
municipal government placed in the exempt service are as follows:
      (1)   All elected officials;
      (2)   The City Administrator;
      (3)   Members of appointed boards and commissions;
      (4)   Consultants, advisers, and legal counsel rendering temporary
professional service;
      (5)   City Attorney;
      (6)   Independent contractors;
      (7)   Officers/employees of school system;
      (8)   Part-time employees paid by the hour of the day, and not considered
regular;
      (9)   City Judge.
   (B)   All employment positions of the municipal government not expressly
exempt from coverage by this section shall be subject to the provisions of the
city charter.
(Ord. 23-15, passed 10-2-2023)
§ 4-403 ADMINISTRATION.
   The human resources system shall be administered by a Human Resources
Director, under the direction of the City Administrator.
(Ord. 23-15, passed 10-2-2023)
§ 4-404 PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Human Resources Director, under the direction of the City
Administrator, shall develop rules and regulations necessary for effectively
administering the human resources system. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall
consider the rules as presented to them. Amendments to the rules and
regulations shall be made in accordance with the procedure below.
   (B)   Nothing in the human resources rules and regulations document shall be
deemed to give employees any more property rights in their job than may already
be given by the city charter. The city reserves the right to alter or change
any or all of these rules without prior notice to employees.
(Ord. 23-15, passed 10-2-2023)
§ 4-405 RECORDS.
   The Human Resources Director shall maintain adequate records of the
employment record of every employee as specified herein.
(Ord. 23-15, passed 10-2-2023)
§ 4-406 RIGHT TO CONTRACT FOR SPECIAL SERVICES.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may direct the City Administrator to
contract with any competent agency for performing such technical services in
connection with the establishment of the human resources system or with its
operation as may be deemed necessary.
(Ord. 23-15, passed 10-2-2023)
§ 4-407 DISCRIMINATION.
   No person in the classified service or seeking admission thereto shall be
employed, promoted, demoted, discharged, or in any way favored or discriminated
against because of political opinions or affiliations, race, color, creed,
national origin, gender, age, religious belief, military status or disability.
(Ord. 23-15, passed 10-2-2023)
§ 4-408 AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments or revisions of the human resources rules shall be recommended
for adoption to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen by Resolution. Such amendments
or revisions of these rules shall become effective after approval by the
governing body.
(Ord. 23-15, passed 10-2-2023)
§ 4-409 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this chapter, or if any policy or order thereunder, or
the application of any provision to any person or circumstances is held
invalid, the remainder of this chapter, and the application of the provision of
this chapter, or of the policy or order to people or circumstances other than
those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby.
(Ord. 23-15, passed 10-2-2023)
TITLE 5: MUNICIPAL FINANCE AND TAXATION
      Chapter
         
1.   MISCELLANEOUS
         
2.   REAL PROPERTY TAXES
         
3.   PRIVILEGE TAXES
         
4.   WHOLESALE BEER TAX
         
5.   IMPACT FEE
         
6.   ADEQUATE FACILITIES TAX
CHAPTER 1: MISCELLANEOUS
Section
   
5-101   Official depository for city funds
   
5-102   Expenditures
   
5-103   Credit and debit card payments made to the city
   
5-104   Establishment of fees, fines, charges, and rates
§ 5-101 OFFICIAL DEPOSITORY FOR CITY FUNDS.
   Any bank or banks within the boundaries of Maury or Williamson Counties can
be designated as a depository of municipal funds, in any sum or sums deemed
appropriate for any banking need of the municipality.
(2011 Code, § 5-101)
Statutory reference:
   Specific charter provisions on depositories of municipal funds, see Tenn.
Code Ann. § 6-4-402
§ 5-102 EXPENDITURES.
   All expenditures for any purpose shall be made ACH, bank draft, electronic
funds transfer, wire transfer or by check. Checks must contain two signatures
by two of the following: City Finance Director, City Recorder, City
Administrator, Assistant City Administrator, Vice Mayor and/or Mayor.
Expenditures for goods or services other than employees' wages or salaries
shall be made only after receipt of a proper invoice and acknowledgment by the
party receiving the goods or services and after approval by the Department
Head, Finance Director and/or City Administrator.
(Ord. 22-04, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 5-103 CREDIT AND DEBIT CARD PAYMENTS MADE TO THE CITY.
   (A)   The city shall accept credit or debit card payments for any tax,
license, fine, utility bill, fee, or other money due the city.
   (B)   Added to each credit or debit card payment is a processing fee equal
to the amount paid to the city’s third-party processor.
   (C)   A service charge of $25 shall be imposed on any transaction that is
not honored by the credit or debit card company issuing the card or entity upon
which the funds are drawn, unless the c
   (D)   Any notice to the person or customer owing the tax, fine, utility
bill, fee, or other money due the city shall state the percentage or amount of
the processing fee for use of a credit or debit card.
(Ord. 17-15, passed 9-18-2017)
§ 5-104 ESTABLISHMENT OF FEES, FINES, CHARGES, AND RATES.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The purpose of this section is to provide a
unified and transparent process for the establishment, modification, and
reference of fees, fines, charges, and rates within the City of Spring Hill.
   (B)   Procedure for establishment and modification. All fees, fines,
charges, and rates associated with city services, permits, licenses,
activities, and other applicable matters shall be set and modified by
resolution of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen (BOMA). The BOMA may modify such
fees, fines, charges, and rates at any time throughout the year through a duly
adopted resolution.
   (C)   Publication and accessibility. The established fees, fines, charges,
and rates shall be published on the official city website and made available
for public inspection at the City Clerk's office during regular business hours.
   (D)   Applicability. All other sections of the SHMC Spring Hill Municipal
Code that refer to specific fees, fines, charges and rates shall be henceforth
subject to this section. Sections of the Spring Hill Municipal Code that refer
to specific fees, fines, charges and rates not referenced in the most recent
fee resolution shall remain as denoted in the Code of Ordinances.
   (E)   Severability. If any provision of this section or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the section or the
application of the provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be
affected.
(Ord. 23-21, passed 12-4-2023)
CHAPTER 2: REAL PROPERTY TAXES
Section
   
5-201   When due and payable
   
5-202   When delinquent; penalty and interest
§ 5-201 WHEN DUE AND PAYABLE.
   Taxes levied by the city against real property shall become due and payable
annually on October of the year for which levied.
(2011 Code, § 5-201)
Statutory reference:
   Read together, these statutes permit a municipality to collect its own
property taxes if its charter authorizes it to do so, or to turn over the
collection of its property taxes to the County Trustee; apparently, under those
same provisions, if a municipality collects its own property taxes, tax due and
delinquency dates are as prescribed by the charter; if the County Trustee
collects them, the tax due date is the first Monday in October, and the
delinquency date is the following March 1, see Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 67-1-701, 67-
1-702 and 67-1-801
§ 5-202 WHEN DELINQUENT; PENALTY AND INTEREST.
   All real property taxes shall become delinquent on and after the first day
of March next after they become due and payable and shall thereupon be subject
to such penalty and interest as is authorized and prescribed by the state law
for delinquent county real property taxes.
(2011 Code, § 5-202)
Statutory reference:
   If the County Trustee collects the municipality’s property taxes, a penalty
of 0.5% and interest of 1% shall be added on March 1, following the tax due
date and on the first day of each succeeding month, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 67-5-
2010(b)
   A municipality has the option of collecting delinquent property taxes any
one of three ways:
      (1)   Under the provisions of its charter for the collection of
delinquent property taxes;
      (2)   Under Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 6-55-201 through 6-55-206; and
      (3)   By the County Trustee under Tenn. Code Ann. § 67-5-2005
CHAPTER 3: PRIVILEGE TAXES
Section
   
5-301   Tax levied
   
5-302   License required
§ 5-301 TAX LEVIED.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided in this code, there is hereby
levied on all vocations, occupations and businesses declared by the general
laws of the state to be privileges taxable by municipalities an annual
privilege tax in the maximum amount allowed by said state laws. The taxes
provided for in the state’s Business Tax Act (Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 67-4-701 et
seq. of this chapter) are hereby expressly enacted, ordained and levied on the
businesses, business activities, vocations and occupations carried on within
the city at the rates and in the manner prescribed by the said Act.
(2011 Code, § 5-301)
§ 5-302 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall exercise any such privilege within the city without a
currently effective privilege license, which shall be issued by the Recorder to
each applicant therefor upon the applicant’s payment of the appropriate
privilege tax.
(2011 Code, § 5-302)
CHAPTER 4: WHOLESALE BEER TAX
Section
   
5-401   To be collected
§ 5-401 TO BE COLLECTED.
   The Recorder is hereby directed to take appropriate action to assure payment
to the city of the wholesale beer tax levied by the Wholesale Beer Tax Act, as
set out in Tenn. Code Ann. Title 57, Ch. 6.
(2011 Code, § 5-401)
Statutory reference:
   Provides for a tax of 17% on the sale of beer at wholesale; every wholesaler
is required to remit to each municipality the amount of the net tax on beer
wholesale sales to retailers and other persons within the corporate limits of
the municipality, see Tenn. Code Ann. Title 57, Ch. 6
CHAPTER 5: IMPACT FEE
Section
   
5-501   Short title
   
5-502   Findings
   
5-503   Intent
   
5-504   Authority
   
5-505   Definitions
   
5-506   Applicability of impact fee
   
5-507   Imposition of impact fee
   
5-508   Capital improvements program
   
5-509   Administration of impact fee
   
5-510   Bonding of excess facility projects
   
5-511   Refunds
   
5-512   Appeals
   
5-513   Effect of impact fee on zoning and subdivision regulations
   
5-514   Impact fee as additional and supplemental requirement
   
5-515   Variances and exceptions
   
5-516   Credits
   
5-517   Roadway impact fee
   
5-518   [Reserved]
   
5-519   [Reserved]
   
5-520   Severability
§ 5-501 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Spring Hill Impact Fee
Ordinance”.
(2011 Code, § 5-501) (Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-
2019)
§ 5-502 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen (“Board”) hereby finds and declares
that:
      (1)   The city is committed to the provision of public facilities and
services at levels attainable within its resources to cure any existing public
service deficiencies in already developed areas;
      (2)   Such facilities and services levels will be provided by the city
utilizing available funds allocated via the capital budget and capital
improvements programming processes and relying upon the funding sources
indicated therein;
      (3)   However, new residential and non-residential development imposes
increased and excessive demands on city public facilities and services
including, without limitation, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, water lines,
water tanks, a fire hall, fire trucks and police cars, safety and rescue
equipment, public works machinery, roads and parks that would not otherwise be
necessary;
      (4)   Planning and zoning projections indicate that such development will
continue and will place ever increasing demands on the city to provide
necessary public facilities;
      (5)   To the extent that such developments place demands on the public
facility infrastructure, those demands should be satisfied by shifting the
responsibility for financing the provision of such facilities from the public
at large to the developments actually creating the demands; and
      (6)   The amount of the impact fee to be imposed shall be determined by
the cost of the additional public facilities needed to support such
development.
   (B)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen, after careful consideration of the
matter, hereby finds and declares that an impact fee imposed upon residential
and non-residential development in order to finance specified major public
facilities, the demand for which is created by such development is in the best
interest of the general welfare of the city and its residents, is equitable,
does not impose an unfair burden on such development by forcing developers and
builders to pay more than their fair or proportionate share of the cost, and
deems it advisable to adopt this chapter, as hereinafter set forth.
(2011 Code, § 5-502) (Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-
2019)
§ 5-503 INTENT.
   This chapter is intended to impose an impact fee at the time of building
permit or certificate of occupancy issuance, in an amount based upon the gross
square footage of non-residential development and number of residential
dwelling units in order to finance public facilities, the demand for which is
generated by new development. The city will meet, to the extent finances permit
through the use of general city revenues, all capital improvement needs
associated with existing development. Only needs created by new development
will be met by impact fees. Impact fees shall not exceed the cost of providing
capital improvements for which the need is substantially attributable to those
developments that pay the fees. The fees shall be spent on new or enlarged
capital facilities improvements that substantially benefit those developments
that pay the fees.
(2011 Code, § 5-503) (Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-
2019)
§ 5-504 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is passed pursuant to the general laws of the state, the
charter of the city, including Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-2-201(14) and (15), and
Priv. Acts 1988, Ch. 173 (HB 2436) of the state’s General Assembly. The
provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to limit the power of the
city to adopt such chapter pursuant to any other source of local authority or
to utilize any other methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing
the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with
this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 5-504) (Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-
2019)
§ 5-505 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING PERMIT. The permit required for new construction and additions
pursuant to the International Building Code heretofore adopted. The term
BUILDING PERMIT, as used herein, shall not be deemed to include permits
required for remodeling, rehabilitation or other improvements to an existing
structure or rebuilding a damaged or destroyed structure; provided, there is no
increase in gross floor area or number of dwelling units resulting therefrom.
   CAPITAL BUDGET. A separate budget dedicated to financing capital
improvements.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN. Part of the Comprehensive Plan adopted by Res. 94-
1.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS.
      (1)   Public facilities that are treated as capitalized expenses
according to generally accepted accounting principles and does not include
costs associated with the operation, administration, maintenance or replacement
of capital improvements, nor does it include administrative facilities.
      (2)   Any and/or all of the following, and including acquisition of land,
construction, improvements, equipping and installing of same and which
facilities are identified in the capital improvements plan to be financed by
the imposition of an impact fee:
         (a)   Parks and recreational facilities;
         (b)   Road systems;
         (c)   Sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities;
         (d)   Water treatment and distribution facilities;
         (e)   Storm and flood control facilities;
         (f)   Police and fire facilities;
         (g)   Solid waste facilities; and
         (h)   Other facilities the costs of which may be substantially
attributed to new development.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM. The official adopted schedule of capital
improvements to be undertaken.
   CITY. The City of Spring Hill, a duly constituted political subdivision of
the state.
   BOARD. The duly constituted governing body of the city.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real property,
the use of any principal structure or land or any other activity that requires
issuance of a building permit.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA. The total of the gross horizontal area of all floors that
will be heated or cooled, including usable basements, cellars and attics, below
the roof and within the outer surface of the main walls of principal or
accessory buildings or the centerlines of a party wall separating such
buildings or portions thereof, or within lines drawn parallel to and two feet
within the roof line of any building or portions thereof without walls, but
excluding enclosed parking areas, farm buildings, and arcades, porticoes and
similar open areas that are accessible to the general public and are not
designed or used as sales, display, storage, service or production areas.
   IMPACT FEE. Any fee or assessment levied as a condition of issuance of a
building permit or development approval for the purpose of funding the costs of
capital improvements or public facilities attributable to accommodating the
additional demands created by new development.
   RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT. Any development approved by the local government
for residential use.
   SITE. The land on which development takes place.
   ZONING DISTRICTS. Those areas designated in the Zoning Ordinance as being
reserved for specific land uses, subject to development and use regulations
specified in the ordinance.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. The official adopted zoning map and text regulating all
development and land use in the city.
(2011 Code, § 5-505) (Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-
2019)
§ 5-506 APPLICABILITY OF IMPACT FEE.
   This chapter shall be uniformly applicable to development that occurs within
the city limits and the urban growth boundary.
(2011 Code, § 5-506) (Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-
2019)
§ 5-507 IMPOSITION OF IMPACT FEE.
   (A)   No building permit shall be issued for a development in unless the
impact fee is imposed and calculated pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Impact fees shall not exceed the cost of providing capital
improvements for which the need is reasonably attributable to those
developments that pay the fees. The fees shall be spent on new or enlarged
capital improvements that reasonably benefit those developments that pay the
fees.
   (C)   The portion of impact fee revenues reasonably attributable to the
equitable assessment described in subsection (B) above may be spent on new or
enlarged capital improvements that will reasonably benefit anticipated future
development rather than those developments that have paid the fee.
   (D)   Impact fees that are assessed against new development shall be
assessed in such a manner that any new development having the same impacts on
capital facilities shall be assessed the same impact fee. This provision
notwithstanding, the Board may contribute from the General Fund any part or all
of the impact fee assessed against certain new development that achieves other
policies, including, but not limited to, the provision of affordable housing
and the retention of existing employment or the generation of new employment.
(2011 Code, § 5-507) (Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-
2019)
§ 5-508 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM.
   To service the projected development, capital improvements will be required
to be provided and financed via impact fees.
(2011 Code, § 5-508) (Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-
2019)
§ 5-509 ADMINISTRATION OF IMPACT FEE.
   (A)   Transfer of funds to Finance Department. Upon receipt of impact fees,
the city’s Finance Department shall be responsible for placement of such funds
into separate accounts, as hereinafter specified. All such funds shall be
deposited in interest-bearing accounts in a bank authorized to receive deposits
of city funds. Interest earned by each account shall be credited to that
account and shall be used solely for the purposes specified for funds of such
account. The City Engineer, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for
oversight of the program and ensuring that impact fees are properly expended
towards eligible projects.
   (B)   Establishment and maintenance of accounts. The city’s Finance
Department shall establish separate accounts and maintain records for each such
account whereby impact fees collected can be segregated.
   (C)   Maintenance of records. The city’s Finance Department shall maintain
and keep accurate financial records for each such account that shall show the
source and disbursement of all revenues; that shall account for all monies
received; that shall ensure that the disbursement of funds from each account
shall be used solely and exclusively for the provision of projects specified in
the capital improvements program; and that shall provide an annual accounting
for each impact fee account showing the source and amount of all funds
collected and the projects that were funded.
   (D)   Review and modification. The city shall review, in conjunction with
the capital budget and capital improvements plan adoption processes, the
development potential of the city and the capital improvements plan and make
such modifications to impact fee schedules as are deemed necessary every three
years as a result of:
      (1)   Development occurring in the prior years;
      (2)   Capital development potential of the city and the capital
improvements actually constructed;
      (3)   Changing facility needs;
      (4)   Inflation;
      (5)   Revised cost estimates for capital improvements;
      (6)   Changes in the availability of other funding sources applicable to
public facility projects; and
      (7)   Such other factors as may be relevant.
(2011 Code, § 5-509) (Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-
2019)
§ 5-510 BONDING OF EXCESS FACILITY PROJECTS.
   The city may issue bonds, revenue certificates and other obligations of
indebtedness in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided
by law in furtherance of the provision of capital improvement projects. Funds
pledged toward retirement of bonds, revenue certificates or other obligations
of indebtedness for such projects may include the fees and taxes herein imposed
and impact fees and other city revenues as may be allocated by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen. Impact fees paid pursuant to this chapter, however, shall
be restricted to use solely and exclusively for financing directly, or as a
pledge against bonds, revenue certificates and other obligations of
indebtedness for the cost of capital improvements, as specified herein.
(2011 Code, § 5-510) (Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-
2019)
§ 5-511 REFUNDS.
   (A)   The current owner or contract purchaser of property on which an impact
fee has been paid may apply for a refund of such fee if:
      (1)   The city has failed to expend the funds within six years of the
date of payment of the impact fee, to be determined according to first-in/
first-out accounting; or
      (2)   The project for which a building permit has been issued has been
altered resulting in a decrease in the amount of the impact fee due.
   (B)   A petition for refund must be filed within one year of the event
giving rise to the right to claim a refund.
   (C)   The petition for refund must be submitted to the City Engineer, or his
or her designee, on a form provided by the city for such purpose.
   (D)   Within one month of the date of receipt of a petition for refund, the
City Engineer, or his or her duly designated agent, must provide the
petitioners in writing, with a decision on the refund request including the
reasons for the decision. If a refund is due petitioner, the City Engineer, or
his or her duly designated agent, shall notify the Finance Department and
request that a refund payment be made to petitioner. The City Engineer, or his
or her designee, shall publicly disclose all refunds made on behalf of the city
to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen in a public meeting.
   (E)   The petitioner may appeal the determination of the City Engineer to
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
(2011 Code, § 5-511) (Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-
2019)
§ 5-512 APPEALS.
   After determination of the applicability of the impact fee, an applicant for
a building permit or a property owner may appeal the amount of the impact fee
or refund due to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. The applicant must file a
notice of appeal with the Board of Mayor and Aldermen within 30 days following
the determination of the applicability of the impact fee ordinance, the impact
fee or refund due. If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a bond or other
sufficient surety satisfactory to the municipal counsel in an amount equal to
the impact fee due, as calculated by the City Engineer, or his or her designee,
the chief Building Official shall issue the building permit. The filing of an
appeal shall not stay the collection of the impact fee due unless a bond or
other sufficient surety has been filed.
(2011 Code, § 5-512) (Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-
2019)
§ 5-513 EFFECT OF IMPACT FEE ON ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
   This chapter shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of
property, density of development, design and improvement standards and
requirements, or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of
capital improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or other
regulations of the city, which shall be operative and remain in full force and
effect without limitation with respect to all such development.
(2011 Code, § 5-513) (Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-
2019)
§ 5-514 IMPACT FEE AS ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENT.
   The impact fee is additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution
of, any other requirements imposed by the city on the development of land or
the issuance of building permits. It is intended to be consistent with and to
further the objectives and policies of the capital improvements plan, and other
city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the
provision of public facilities in conjunction with the development of land. In
no event shall a property owner be obligated to pay for capital improvements in
an amount in excess of the amount calculated pursuant to this and any other
impact fee or similar ordinance; but, provided that, a property owner may be
required to pay, pursuant to city ordinances, regulations or policies, for
other capital improvements in addition to the impact fee for capital
improvements as specified herein.
(2011 Code, § 5-514) (Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-
2019)
§ 5-515 VARIANCES AND EXCEPTIONS.
   Petitions for variances and exceptions to the application of this chapter
shall be made to the Mayor in accordance with procedures to be established by
resolution of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
(2011 Code, § 5-515) (Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-
2019)
§ 5-516 CREDITS.
   (A)   A property owner may elect, with written permission of the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen, to construct an eligible capital improvement listed in the
capital improvements plan. If the property owner elects to make such
improvement, the property owner must enter into an agreement with the city
prior to issuance of any building permit. The agreement must establish the
estimated cost of the improvement, the schedule for initiation and completion
of the improvement, a requirement that the improvement be completed to city
standards, and such other terms and conditions as deemed necessary by the city.
The city must review the improvement plan, verify costs and time schedules,
determine if the improvement is an eligible improvement, and determine the
amount of the applicable credit for such improvement to be applied to the
otherwise applicable impact fee prior to issuance of any building permit. In no
event may the city provide a refund for a credit that is greater than the
applicable impact fee. If, however, the amount of the credit is calculated to
be greater than the amount of the impact fee due, the property owner may
utilize such excess credit toward the impact fees imposed on other building
permits for development on the same site and in the same ownership.
   (B)   No credits shall be given for the construction of local on-site
facilities required by zoning, subdivision or other city regulations.
(2011 Code, § 5-516) (Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-
2019)
§ 5-517 ROADWAY IMPACT FEE.
   This section contains additional provisions pertaining to roadway impact
fees.
   (A)   (1)   The fees are based on the analysis contained in the Roadway
Impact Fee Study prepared for the city in 2019, or on a subsequent similar
study. That analysis ensures that the fees charge only for the cost of major
roadway system improvements attributable to new development.
      (2)   Fee schedule. The following schedule of roadway impact fees shall
be assessed on all new development in the city.
Land Use Type          Unit     Fee per Unit (33% -     Fee per Unit (100% -
                                Effective July 1, 2019) Effective July 1, 2020)
Single-Family Detached Dwelling $1,006                  $3,048
Multi Family           Dwelling $780                    $2,364
Mobile Home Park       Pad      $533                    $1,614
Senior Adult Housing,  Dwelling $453                    $1,374
Detached
Senior Adult Housing,  Dwelling $394                    $1,194
Attached
Golf Course            Hole     $289                    $875
Hotel/Motel            Room     $624                    $1,891
Retail/Commercial/     1,000 sf $1,568                  $4,753
Shopping Center
Restaurant, Standard   1,000 sf $3,009                  $9,118
Restaurant, Drive-     1,000 sf $6,676                  $20,229
Through                                                  
Gas Station w/         1,000 sf $2,590                  $7,848
Convenience Mkt.
Office/Institutional   1,000 sf $1,188                  $3,599
Elementary/Secondary   1,000 sf $369                    $1,117
School
Community College      1,000 sf $831                    $2,517
Day Care Center        1,000 sf $979                    $2,966
Hospital               1,000 sf $919                    $2,784
Nursing Home           1,000 sf $560                    $1,698
Place of Worship       1,000 sf $594                    $1,800
Industrial             1,000 sf $446                    $1,350
Warehouse              1,000 sf $230                    $697
Mini-warehouse         1,000 sf $199                    $602
 
      (3)   Periodic review and update. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall
review the roadway impact fee schedule at least every three years or on a
sooner basis as deemed necessary by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
      (4)   Automatic indexing for inflation. The fees shown in subsection (A)
(2) above shall be adjusted to account for construction cost inflation on
January 1 following each year in which the fees were not comprehensively
updated based on a new impact fee study. The existing fees will be multiplied
by the ratio of the Engineering News-Record Construction Cost Index for the
most recent month for which the index is available to the index for the same
month of the previous year. The adjusted fee schedule will be posted on the
city’s web site and made publicly available by December 1 and will become
effective on January 1.
      (5)   Repeal or reduction. In the event that a proposal is presented to
eliminate roadway impact
fees or reduce the roadway impact fee schedule below an amount based on capital
improvement needs as determined by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen, an
amendment to this chapter shall have to pass by a two-thirds vote to repeal or
significantly reduce roadway impact fees.
   (B)   Interpretation of fee schedule.
      (1)   Residential development shall be assessed based on the number and
type of dwelling units. Non-residential development shall be assessed based on
the gross floor area and type of land use.
      (2)   The following definitions shall be used to classify proposed land
uses into the categories included in the roadway impact fee schedule. For
proposed land uses that cannot be classified into one of the fee schedule
categories, the fee shall be assessed using the most similar category based on
trip generation or other relevant information.
         DAY CARE CENTER. A facility or establishment that provides care,
protection and supervision for six or more children unrelated to the operator
and which receives a payment, fee or grant for any of the children receiving
care, whether or not operated for profit. The term does not include public or
nonpublic schools.
         ELEMENTARY/SECONDARY SCHOOL. A school offering an elementary through
high school curriculum.
         GAS STATION WITH CONVENIENCE MARKET. An establishment offering the
sale of motor fuels and convenience items to motorists.
         GOLF COURSE. A golf course that is not restricted primarily for use by
residents of a residential development of which it is a part, including
commercial uses such as pro shop or bar that are designed primarily to serve
golfers on the site.
         HOSPITAL. An establishment primarily engaged in providing medical,
surgical, or skilled nursing care to persons, including overnight or longer
stays by patients.
         HOTEL/MOTEL. A building or group of buildings on the same premises and
under single control, consisting of sleeping rooms kept, used, maintained or
advertised as, or held out to the public to be, a place where sleeping
accommodations are supplied for pay to transient guests or tenants. This land
use category includes rooming houses, boardinghouses, and bed and breakfast
establishments.
         INDUSTRIAL. An establishment primarily engaged in the fabrication,
assembly or processing of goods. Typical uses include manufacturing plants,
industrial parks, research and development laboratories, welding shops,
wholesale bakeries, dry cleaning plants, and bottling works.
         MINI-WAREHOUSE. An enclosed storage facility containing independent,
fully enclosed bays that are leased to persons for storage of their household
goods or personal property.
         MOBILE HOME/RV PARK. A parcel (or portion thereof) or abutting parcels
of land designed, used or intended to be used to accommodate two or more
occupied mobile homes or recreational vehicles, with necessary utilities,
vehicular pathways, and concrete pads or vehicle stands.
         MULTI-FAMILY. A building containing two or more dwelling units. It
includes duplexes, apartments, residential condominiums, townhouses, and
timeshares.
         NURSING HOME. An establishment primarily engaged in providing limited
health care, nursing and health-related personal care but not continuous
nursing services.
         OFFICE/INSTITUTIONAL. A general office, medical office or public/
institutional use, as hereby defined.
            1.   GENERAL OFFICE. A building exclusively containing
establishments providing executive, management, administrative, financial, or
non-medical professional services, and which may include ancillary services for
office workers, such as a restaurant, coffee shop, newspaper or candy stand, or
child care facilities. It may be the upper floors of a multi-story office
building with ground floor retail uses. Typical uses include banks without
drive-in facilities, real estate, insurance, property
management, investment, employment, travel, advertising, secretarial, data
processing, telephone answering, telephone marketing, music, radio and
television recording and broadcasting studios, professional or consulting
services in the fields of law, architecture, design, engineering, accounting
and similar professions, interior decorating consulting services, and business
offices of private companies, utility companies, trade associations, unions and
nonprofit organizations. This category does not include an administrative
office that is ancillary to a principal commercial or industrial use.
            2.   MEDICAL OFFICE. A building primarily used for the examination
and/or treatment of patients on an outpatient basis (with no overnight stays by
patients) by health professionals, and which may include ancillary services for
medical office workers or a medical laboratory to the extent necessary to carry
out diagnostic services for the medical office’s patients. It includes the use
of a site primarily for the provision of medical care and treatment of animals,
which may include ancillary boarding facilities.
            3.   PUBLIC/INSTITUTIONAL. A governmental, quasi-public or
institutional use, or a non-profit recreational use, not located in a shopping
center or separately listed in the impact fee schedule. Typical uses include
higher education institutions, city halls, courthouses, post offices, jails,
libraries, museums, military bases, airports, bus stations, fraternal lodges,
parks and playgrounds. It also includes bus terminals, fraternal clubs, adult
day care centers, college dormitories, and prisons.
         PLACE OF WORSHIP. A structure designed primarily for accommodating an
assembly of people for the purpose of religious worship, including related
religious instruction for 100 or fewer children during the week and other
related functions.
         RESTAURANT, DRIVE-THROUGH. A stand-alone establishment, not located in
a shopping center but may be located on an out-parcel, that sells meals
prepared on site, and provides drive-through or drive-in service.
         RESTAURANT, STANDARD. A stand-alone establishment, not located in a
shopping center but may be located on an out-parcel, that sells meals prepared
on site, and does not provide drive-through or drive-in service.
         RETAIL/COMMERCIAL/SHOPPING CENTER. An integrated group of commercial
establishments planned, developed, owned or managed as a unit, or a free-
standing retail or commercial use not otherwise listed in the impact fee
schedule. Uses located on a shopping center out- parcel are considered free-
standing for the purposes of this definition. A retail or commercial use shall
mean the use of a building or structure primarily for the sale to the public of
nonprofessional services, or goods or foods that have not been made, assembled
or otherwise changed in ways generally associated with manufacturing or basic
food processing in the same building or structure. This category includes but
is not limited to all uses located in shopping centers and the following free-
standing uses:
            1.   Amusement park;
            2.   Auto parts store;
            3.   Auto wrecking yard;
            4.   Automobile repair;
            5.   Bank without drive-through facilities;
            6.   Bar and cocktail lounge;
            7.   Camera shop;
            8.   Car wash;
            9.   Convenience food and beverage store without gas pumps;
            10.   Department store;
            11.   Florist shop;
            12.   Food store;
            13.   Grocery;
            14.   Hardware store;
            15.   Health or fitness club;
            16.   Hobby, toy and game shop;
            17.   Junkyard;
            18.   Laundromat;
            19.   Laundry or dry cleaning;
            20.   Lawn and garden supply store;
            21.   Massage establishment;
            22.   Music store;
            23.   Newsstand;
            24.   Nightclub;
            25.   Racetrack;
            26.   Recreation facility, commercial;
            27.   Rental establishment;
            28.   Repair shop, including auto repair;
            29.   School, commercial;
            30.   Specialty retail shop;
            31.   Supermarket;
            32.   Theater, indoor (including movie theater);
            33.   Used merchandise store;
            34.   Variety store; and
            35.   Vehicle and equipment dealer.
         SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED. A building containing only one dwelling unit,
including a mobile home not located in a mobile home park.
         WAREHOUSE. An establishment primarily engaged in the display, storage
and sale of goods to other firms for resale, as well as activities involving
significant movement and storage of products or equipment. Typical uses include
wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, trucking terminals, moving and
storage firms, recycling facilities, trucking and shipping operations and major
mail processing centers.
   (C)   Expenditure of impact fees. Roadway impact fees collected pursuant to
this chapter shall be limited to capacity improvements on the major roadway
system. The major roadway system is defined as roads classified as arterials in
the city’s Major Thoroughfare Plan. Capacity improvements include but are not
limited to new roads, road widening projects, intersection improvements, and
signalization, as well as improvements such as installation of sidewalks, curb
and gutter, drainage, bridges, landscaping and other elements needed to
complete the roadway cross-section. Such expenditures shall not include costs
of rights-of-way or land acquisition, but may include costs for design,
preliminary engineering, construction engineering and inspection, and similar
elements required for the project. Impact fee revenue may also be used to
retire debt attributable to eligible cost components.
(Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-2019)
§ 5-518 RESERVED.
§ 5-519 RESERVED.
§ 5-520 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, phrase, sentence or portion of this chapter is held invalid
or unconstitutional, same shall not affect the validity of the remaining
portions hereof.
(Ord. 15-04, passed 12-21-2015; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-2019)
CHAPTER 6: ADEQUATE FACILITIES TAX
Section
   
5-601   Short title
   
5-602   Purpose
   
5-603   Findings
   
5-604   Authority
   
5-605   Definitions
   
5-606   Capital improvements plan
   
5-607   Tax levy
   
5-608   Probation of issuance of building permit or certificate of occupancy
   
5-609   Collection of tax
   
5-610   Use and segregation of tax funds
   
5-611   New tax levy
   
5-612   Exemptions from tax
   
5-613   Protest of tax
   
5-614   Additional authority
   
5-615   Non-repealer
§ 5-601 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the “Spring Hill Adequate
Facilities Tax”.
(2011 Code, § 5-601)
§ 5-602 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is intended to assure the provision of adequate park, road,
police, fire, safety, sanitation, sewer and water facilities to serve new
development in the city by requiring each new development to pay a tax
proportionate to the need for new facilities created by such development, the
proceeds of which shall be used exclusively to fund capital improvements made
necessary by new growth.
(2011 Code, § 5-602)
§ 5-603 FINDINGS.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen (hereinafter “Board”) hereby finds and
declares that:
   (A)   The city is experiencing rapid pollution and employment growth, as a
result of the location of the General Motors Corporation’s Saturn Plant;
   (B)   The city will experience an increase of 600 or more residential
dwelling units by the year 1999;
   (C)   The anticipated population growth in the city creates the demand for
additional road, park, police, fire, safety, sanitation and water facilities;
   (D)   The city, insofar as its revenues allow, is committed to the provision
of such public facilities and services at levels of service necessary to
support anticipated residential growth;
   (E)   The city has prepared a ten-year capital improvements plan which, to
the extent possible, identifies such facilities and services levels and
designates the sources of funding the same;
   (F)   The estimated capital improvements costs of these facilities to serve
new growth for the next ten years will be approximately $10,000,000;
   (G)   The city’s capital improvements plan apportions the costs of providing
additional public facilities and services among existing and future users of
such facilities in proportion to the demands for these facilities generated by
such users, the Board realizing that the city’s facilities before Saturn were
adequate for its population at that time and its pre-Saturn rate of growth for
the next 20 years;
   (H)   The demand for additional public facilities to serve new growth in the
city is generated by residential development and, to some extent, by non-
residential development, such as the Ryder Transportation facilities, and
anticipated future non-residential development; taking into consideration
factors such as usage of public facilities by employees residing outside of the
city and demand for specialized services necessitated by non-residential
development. The ratio of the impact on public facilities and services
attributable to new residential development and new non-residential development
as to the pre-Saturn demands of the city is approximately 100 to one (100:1);
   (I)   The legislature of the state has authorized the city to impose an
adequate facilities tax on the privilege of engaging in the business of
development; and
   (J)   The tax herein imposed is within the statutory limits established by
the legislature and is otherwise reasonable and equitable.
(2011 Code, § 5-603)
§ 5-604 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is imposed under the charter powers of the city, and under the
authority conferred on the city to levy an adequate facilities tax on the
privilege of engaging in development by the state’s Priv. Acts 1988, Ch. 173
(HB 2436).
(2011 Code, § 5-604)
§ 5-605 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, chattels or movable property of any kind, including a mobile home, but
excluding buildings used for agricultural purposes.
   BUILDING PERMIT. A permit issued by the Building Official authorizing
performance of a specified activity in or on a structure or building.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT. A park or recreational facility; police facility; fire
or safety facility; or water facility, with a life expectancy of three or more
years, owned and operated by or on behalf of the city.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS COSTS. The cost of land acquisition, planning, design
or construction for a capital improvement.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN. The proposed schedule of future capital
improvements, listed in order of construction priority over a five-year period,
the associated capital improvements costs and the anticipated funding sources
for each project together with the list of projected long-range capital
improvements and capital improvements costs for the next 20 years.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. A license for occupancy of a building or structure
after the building or structure has been inspected to determine that
construction has been undertaken in compliance with the building permit
application and in conformity with the Zoning Ordinance and other pertinent
ordinances or codes.
   CITY. The City of Spring Hill, Tennessee.
   DEVELOPMENT. New construction, building, reconstruction, erection,
extension, betterment or improvement of land providing a building or structure
or the addition to any building or structure, or any part thereof, which
provides, adds to or increases the floor area of a residential or non-
residential use.
   DWELLING UNIT. A room, or rooms connected together constituting a separate,
independent housekeeping establishment for owner occupancy, rental or lease on
a daily, weekly, monthly or longer basis; physically separated from any other
room(s) or dwelling units which may be in the same structure; and containing
independent cooking and sleeping facilities.
   FLOOR AREA. The total of the gross horizontal area of all floors which will
be heated or cooled, including such usable basements and cellars, below the
roof and within the outer surface of the main walls of principal or accessory
buildings or the centerlines of a party wall separating such buildings or
portions thereof, or within lines drawn parallel to and two feet within the
roof line of any building or portions thereof without walls, but excluding farm
buildings and sheds and, in the case of non-residential facilities: arcades,
porticoes and similar open areas which are accessible to the general public,
and which are not designed or used as sales, display, storage, service or
production areas.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL. The development of any property for any use other than
residential use, except as may be exempted by this chapter.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate or other group
or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular number.
   PLACE OF WORSHIP. The portion of a building owned by a religious institution
which has tax-exempt status, which is used for worship services and related
functions, but does not include buildings or portions of buildings which are
used for purposes other than for worship and related functions or which are or
are intended to be leased, rented or used by persons who do not have tax-
exempt status.
   PUBLIC BUILDINGS. A building owned by the state or any agency thereof, a
political subdivision of the state, including, but not necessarily limited to,
counties, cities, school districts and special districts or the federal
government or any agency thereof.
   RESIDENTIAL. The development of any property for a dwelling unit or units.
   STRUCTURE. Anything which is constructed or erected, and the use of which
requires more or less permanent location on ground or attachment to something
having permanent location on ground, not, however, including wheels; an edifice
of any kind; any production or piece of work, artificially built up or composed
of parts of and joined together in some definite manner.
(2011 Code, § 5-605)
§ 5-606 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted the capital improvements plan for the city for
the years 1994-1999 set forth in Res. 93-12, a copy of which is set out in App.
B of this code of ordinances and incorporated by reference herein or as it may
by amended by resolution or ordinance from time to time.
   (B)   The fact that the capital improvements plan also identifies the
capital costs of public facilities and services other than capital improvements
as defined in this chapter has no effect on the computation or assessment of
taxes herein established.
(2011 Code, § 5-606)
§ 5-607 TAX LEVY.
   (A)   There is hereby levied a tax on each person engaging in the business
of development in the city, which tax is to be paid at the time the building
permit is issued as provided in § 5-609 of this chapter, as follows:
      (1)   One dollar per gross square foot of new residential development;
and
      (2)   Two dollars per gross square foot of new non-residential
development.
   (B)   The tax shown in subsection (A) above shall be increased by 2.5%
annually to account for inflation on January 1.
   (C)   Provided, however, that, the total fees herein imposed shall in no
event exceed $1 per gross square foot for residential development and $2 per
gross square foot of new non-residential development.
(2011 Code, § 5-607) (Ord. 06-35, passed 5- -2006; Ord. 19-11A, passed 4-15-
2019; Ord. 22-03B, passed 2-22-2022)
§ 5-608 PROBATION OF ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT OR CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No building permit, nor certificate of occupancy, for new development in the
city shall be issued unless and until the tax herein imposed has been paid in
full by the person engaging in such new development, as provided in §
5-609 of this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 5-608)
§ 5-609 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   (A)   Each applicant for a building permit for new development shall state,
on a form provided by the city, the amount of gross square footage contained in
the development for which the permit is sought.
   (B)   The city’s Building Official shall calculate the tax due on the
development and collect such tax in cash prior to acceptance of the application
for the permit.
   (C)   In the event that a building permit is not required (or was issued
prior to 4-1-1994) for the new development, the applicant for a certificate of
occupancy shall state the amount of gross square footage contained in the
development for which the certificate is sought, and the city’s Building
Official shall calculate the tax due on the development and collect such tax in
cash prior to acceptance of the application for the certificate.
   (D)   In its sole discretion, the city may permit a person engaging in the
business of developments, upon application for a building permit for a
development, to defer payment of the tax until the time for issuance of the
certificate of occupancy for such development; provided that, such person
provides security for the full amount of the tax due in a form acceptable to
the city.
(2011 Code, § 5-609)
§ 5-610 USE AND SEGREGATION OF TAX FUNDS.
   All taxes on new development collected pursuant to this chapter shall be
deposited in a separate account. Funds of the account shall be expended solely
for those capital improvements identified in the city’s capital improvements
plan.
(2011 Code, § 5-610)
§ 5-611 NEW TAX LEVY.
   (A)   The Board may, from time to time, amend the tax herein imposed on new
development, based upon adoption of a revised capital improvements plan, which
identifies new capital improvements costs reasonably attributable to the new
development.
   (B)   Such tax shall be collected prospectively only.
(2011 Code, § 5-611)
§ 5-612 EXEMPTIONS FROM TAX.
   No tax shall be assessed or collected for the development of:
   (A)   Public buildings; or
   (B)   Places of worship.
(2011 Code, § 5-612)
§ 5-613 PROTEST OF TAX.
   Any person aggrieved by the assessment of the tax herein authorized may
protest such assessment in the manner provided by the laws of the state.
(2011 Code, § 5-613)
§ 5-614 ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY.
   The city’s adequate facilities tax on new development is in addition to all
other authority the city may exercise to impose taxes, fees, assessments or
other revenue raising or land development regulatory measures granted either by
private or public acts of the state and the imposition of such tax, in addition
to any other authorized tax, fee, assessment or charge, shall not be deemed to
constitute double taxation.
(2011 Code, § 5-614)
§ 5-615 NON-REPEALER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall in no manner repeal, modify or
interfere with the authority granted by any other public or private law
applicable to the city.
(2011 Code, § 5-615)
TITLE 6: LAW ENFORCEMENT
      Chapter
         
1.   POLICE AND ARREST
         
2.   WORKHOUSE
CHAPTER 1: POLICE AND ARREST
Section
   
6-101   Police officers subject to Chief’s orders
   
6-102   Police officers to preserve law and order and the like
   
6-103   Police officers to wear uniforms and be armed
   
6-104   When police officers to make arrests
   
6-105   Police officers may require assistance
   
6-106   Disposition of persons arrested
   
6-107   Police Department records
   
6-108   Additional holiday compensation for police officers
   
6-109   Electronic citations
§ 6-101 POLICE OFFICERS SUBJECT TO CHIEF’S ORDERS.
   All police officers shall obey and comply with such orders and
administrative rules and regulations as the Police Chief may officially issue.
(2011 Code, § 6-101)
§ 6-102 POLICE OFFICERS TO PRESERVE LAW AND ORDER AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Police officers shall preserve law and order within the city.
   (B)   They shall patrol the city and shall assist the City Court during the
trial of cases.
   (C)   Police officers shall also promptly serve any legal process issued by
the City Court.
(2011 Code, § 6-102)
§ 6-103 POLICE OFFICERS TO WEAR UNIFORMS AND BE ARMED.
   All police officers shall wear such uniform and badge as the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen shall authorize and shall carry a service pistol and billy club at
all times while on duty unless otherwise expressly directed by the Chief for a
special assignment.
(2011 Code, § 6-103)
§ 6-104 WHEN POLICE OFFICERS TO MAKE ARRESTS.
   Unless otherwise authorized or directed in this code or other applicable
law, an arrest of the person shall be made by a police officer in the following
cases:
   (A)   Whenever he or she is in possession of a warrant for the arrest of the
person;
   (B)   Whenever an offense is committed or a breach of the peace is
threatened in the officer’s presence by the person; and/or
   (C)   Whenever a felony has in fact been committed and the officer has
reasonable cause to believe the person has committed it.
(2011 Code, § 6-104)
§ 6-105 POLICE OFFICERS MAY REQUIRE ASSISTANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to refuse to aid a police
officer in making a lawful arrest when such a person’s assistance is requested
by the police officer and is reasonably necessary.
(2011 Code, § 6-105)
§ 6-106 DISPOSITION OF PERSONS ARRESTED.
   Unless otherwise authorized by law, when a person is arrested for any
offense, other than one involving drunkenness, he or she shall be brought
before the City Court for immediate trial or allowed to post bond. When the
arrested person is drunk, or when the City Judge is not immediately available,
and the alleged offender is not able to post the require bond, he or she shall
be confined.
(2011 Code, § 6-106)
§ 6-107 POLICE DEPARTMENT RECORDS.
   The Police Department shall keep a comprehensive and detailed daily record
in permanent form, showing:
   (A)   All known or reported offenses and/or crimes committed within the
corporate limits;
   (B)   All arrests made by police officers; and
   (C)   All police investigations made, funerals convoyed, fire calls answered
and other miscellaneous activities of the Police Department.
(2011 Code, § 6-107)
§ 6-108 ADDITIONAL HOLIDAY COMPENSATION FOR POLICE OFFICERS.
   Each member of the police force of the city shall be compensated for an
additional day for each holiday as follows: for each such holiday, each police
officer shall be paid 1/260th of his or her annual compensation. Each member of
the police force shall receive this additional compensation for each such
holiday whether or not work is performed on such holiday.
(2011 Code, § 6-108)
§ 6-109 ELECTRONIC CITATIONS.
   The city authorizes the collection of $5 for each e-citation resulting in a
conviction, with $1 of said fee collected shall go to the city court and $4 of
said fee collected shall go to the Police Department for authorized purchases.
(Ord. 16-15, passed 8-15-2016)
CHAPTER 2: WORKHOUSE
Section
   
6-201   County workhouse to be used
   
6-202   Inmates to be worked
   
6-203   Compensation of inmates
§ 6-201 COUNTY WORKHOUSE TO BE USED.
   The county workhouse is hereby designated as the municipal workhouse,
subject to such contractual arrangement as may be worked out with the county.
(2011 Code, § 6-201)
§ 6-202 INMATES TO BE WORKED.
   All persons committed to the workhouse, to the extent that their physical
conditions permit, shall be required to perform such public work or labor as
may be lawfully prescribed for the county prisoners.
(2011 Code, § 6-202)
§ 6-203 COMPENSATION OF INMATES.
   Each workhouse inmate shall be allowed $5 per day as credit toward payment
of the fines and costs assessed against him or her.
(2011 Code, § 6-203)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 40-24-104
TITLE 7: FIRE PROTECTION FIREWORKS, HAZARDOUS MATERIALS, LITHIUM BATTERIES
AND FIRE WATCH
      Chapter
         
1.   FIRE DISTRICT
         
2.   FIRE CODE
         
3.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
         
4.   FIRE SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS
         
5.   CONSTRUCTION FIRES
         
6.   OPEN BURNING
         
7.   EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS
         
8.   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
         
9.   LITHIUM-ION (Li-ion) BATTERY DISPOSAL, CLASSIFICATION, SALE, SECOND USE,
STORAGE AND COMMERCIAL CHARGING
         
10.   FIRE WATCH
CHAPTER 1: FIRE DISTRICT
Section
   
7-101   Fire District
§ 7-101 FIRE DISTRICT.
   The City of Spring Hill Fire Department provides for an all-hazards
emergency response encompassing fire, rescue, and emergency medical services
within the City of Spring Hill, Tennessee; and provides mutual aid and
automatic aid to surrounding cities and counties through both pre-established
and state-wide mutual aid agreements.
(2011 Code, § 7-101) (Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-
2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
CHAPTER 2: FIRE CODE
Section
   
7-201   Definitions
   
7-202   Codes adopted
   
7-203   Enforcement
   
7-204   Penalties
   
7-205   Modifications
   
7-206   Application
   
7-207   Equal applicability
   
7-208   Fire sprinkler systems/FDCs, fire alarms and monitoring
   
7-209   Storage of explosives, flammable liquids and the like
   
7-210   Petroleum delivery vehicles
   
7-211   Variances
   
7-212   Violations
   
7-213   Fire inspection reporting online
§ 7-201 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR CURTAIN DESTRUCTOR. A unit consisting of a combustion chamber pit and
air blower designed to establish a curtain of high velocity air above the fire
burning in the pit so that the products of combustion must be forced up through
the curtain before they reach the outside air.
   DEPARTMENT OF FIRE PREVENTION. In the International Fire Code, it refers to
the Spring Hill Fire Department Fire Prevention Division.
   FIRE CODE OFFICIAL. In the International Fire Code adopted by the provisions
of this code, it shall be held to mean the Fire Chief, or duly authorized
representative being Fire Marshal or Fire Inspector.
   JURISDICTION. In the International Fire Code adopted by the provisions of
this code, it shall be held to mean the City of Spring Hill, Tennessee.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter under such conditions that products
of combustion are emitted directly into the open atmosphere without passing
directly through a stack.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation,
association, joint stock company, trust, estate, political subdivision, an
agency, authority, commission, or department of the United States, or of the
State of Tennessee; or any other legal entity, or their legal representative,
agent, or assigns.
   RUBBISH. Any material thrown away as worthless trash.
   WOOD WASTE. As any product which has not lost its basic character as wood,
such as bark, sawdust, limbs, tree trunks, chips and chemically untreated
lumber whose “disposition” by open burning is to solely get rid of or destroy.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-202 CODES ADOPTED.
   (A)   (1)   Pursuant to authority granted by Tenn. Code Ann.,§§ 6-54-501 et
seq., and for the purpose of regulating and governing the safe-guarding of life
and property from fire or explosion, hazards arising from the storage, handling
and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices, and from conditions
hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises, and
providing for the issuance of permits in the City of Spring Hill, the 2018
edition of the International Fire Code, including Appendix D, as prepared by
the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted by reference and
included herein as part of this code.
      (2)   (a)   The International Fire Code is adopted and incorporated as
fully as if set out at length herein and shall be controlling within the
corporate limits.
         (b)   Pursuant to authority granted by Tenn. Code Ann., § 6-54-502(c),
the Fire Chief or his designee shall adopt administrative regulations to
incorporate subsequent amendments to the International Fire Code, 2018 edition,
as published by the International Code Council, including its referenced
standards in Chapter 80, incorporating National Fire Protection Association
amendments. These amendments shall be identified by the Fire Chief as to date
and source and shall take effect as provided in Tenn. Code Ann., § 6-54-502,
unless disapproved by resolution of the Board of Mayor and Alderman.
Administrative regulations adopting amendments to the International Fire Code,
2018 edition will be placed on file at the City Recorder's office when they are
published by the Fire Chief, and at least 15 days before their effective date.
   (B)   Pursuant to the requirement of Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-54-502, one copy of
these codes (and any amendments thereto) has been filed with the City Recorder
and is available for public use and inspection.
(2011 Code, § 7-201) (Ord. 09-14, passed 4- -2009; Ord. 09-25, passed 8- -2009;
Ord. 13-19, passed 10-21-2013; Ord. 20-16, passed 9-21-2020; Ord. 23-02, passed
3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
Editor’s note:
   Copies of the International Fire Code are available from the International
Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213-1206.
§ 7-203 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The International Fire Code herein adopted by reference shall be
enforced by the Fire Chief of the city, or his duly authorized representative
known as Fire Marshal. Any other persons so authorized by the Fire Chief or
Fire Marshal to make inspections shall be designated as a "Fire Inspector." The
Fire Chief, Fire Marshal, or Fire Inspector shall be authorized to inspect all
property within the city and any future area that shall be annexed to the city.
If in the opinion of the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal or their designees, after
appropriate inspection, any work inspected under the terms of this section
fails to comply with the law, and notice is given, and any reinspection of the
same work is required, then a fee as specified in
Appendix A, comprehensive fees and penalties, per reinspection may be assessed
against and collected. No portion of the work shall continue without first
paying the reinspection fee. Authority to enforce traffic and parking rules and
regulations relating to fire safety shall be shared equally by the Fire Chief,
Fire Marshal or their designees and the Police Chief.
   (B)   The Fire Chief and the Fire Marshal shall be authorized to issue
summons, citations, written notices and take any action required to remove or
abate any situation that poses an immediate threat to life and/or property. The
Fire Inspector shall be authorized to issue written notices for code
violations.
   (C)   The Fire Official shall be authorized to grant an extension of up to
30 days' time limit to correct violations upon proof and receipt of written
request not less than three days prior to expiration of notice
(2011 Code, § 7-202) (Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-
2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-204 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, the
International Fire Code or the conditions of any permit issued hereunder, shall
be served by the Fire Official with a summons, citation or written notice
stating the nature of the violation, and providing up to 30 working days' time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
   (B)   The offender shall, within the time period stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations as prescribed by the Fire Official. Any permit
issued hereunder shall be void until such time as the violation is corrected.
   (C)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time provided
for in §
7-209(A)(1), shall be served by the Fire Code Official with a summons stating
the nature of the violation. Such violation shall be punishable by a civil
penalty as specified in
Appendix A, comprehensive fees and penalties.
   (D)   As to any violation deemed by the Fire Code Official to be emergency
in nature, or which poses an immediate danger to life or property, involves
fire, or necessitates removal or abatement by the Fire Department, the Fire
Code Official may issue a summons stating the nature of the violation and
requiring the appearance of the violator in city court. In such cases, the Fire
Code Official shall not be required to give any prior notice of violation or
opportunity to correct the condition. Any such violation shall be punishable by
a civil penalty as specified in
Appendix A, comprehensive fees, and penalties.
   (E)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the city for expense, loss or damage occasioned by the city
personnel or equipment by reason of such violation.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-205 MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   When reference is made to the duties of certain officials named
therein, including the Building Official, that the Building Inspector of the
city shall be deemed the responsible official insofar as enforcing the
provisions of said codes are concerned.
   (B)   (1)   Wherever the fire prevention codes refer to the “Chief
Appointing Authority” or the “Chief Administrator”, it shall be deemed to be a
reference to the “Board of Mayor and Aldermen” or the “City Administrator”.
      (2)   When the terms “Building Official” or “Director of Public Works”
are named, they shall, for the purposes of the Fire Prevention Code, mean the
“Building Inspector” of the city or such person as the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen has appointed and designated to administer and enforce the provisions
of the Fire Prevention Code.
(2011 Code, § 7-203) (Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-
2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-206 APPLICATION.
   The provisions of the codes adopted by reference in §
7-202 shall govern the manner in which:
   (A)   The codes are applied to new construction and existing buildings;
   (B)   Occupancies and types of construction are classified for the purpose
of determining minimum code requirements;
   (C)   The specific requirements of the codes may be modified to permit the
use of alternate materials or methods of construction.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-207 EQUAL APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of the Fire Code shall apply equally to both public and
private property, and it shall apply to all structures and their occupancies,
except as otherwise specified.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-208 FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS/FDCs, FIRE ALARMS AND MONITORING.
   (A)   An automatic fire sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all
new or remodeled buildings under the following conditions:
      (1)   All multi-family residential structures (duplex and greater) and
all residential structures having a zero-foot building setback line; and
      (2)   All commercial buildings of 10,000 gross square feet or larger.
   (B)   Automatic fire sprinkler systems required by this code shall be
designed, installed, tested, inspected, alarmed, and monitored in accordance
with the scope and purpose of the latest edition of the following standards, as
published by the National Fire Protection Association;
      (1)   NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems;
      (2)   NFPA 13D, Standard for the Installation of sprinkler Systems in
One- and Two- Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes; and
      (3)   NFPA 13R, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in
Residential Occupancies up to and including four stories in height.
   (C)   In existing buildings which are substantially remodeled or
rehabilitated, an automatic fire sprinkler system shall be required if the
subsequent building meets any of the conditions for new buildings in subsection
(B)(1) above of this structure. SUBSTANTIALLY REMODELED OR REHABILITATED means
any structural alteration or restoration of a building for which cost, or value
exceeds 50% of the current replacement cost of the particular building, or
where more than 50% of the gross square footage has been structurally altered,
such building shall conform to the requirements for new buildings.
   (D)   Any addition to an existing commercial building, which brings the area
to 10,000 gross square feet, or more, shall cause the entire building to
conform to the requirements for new buildings or, otherwise, the addition shall
be separated from the existing building by a four-hour fire wall with opening
protectives in accordance with the International Building Code.
   (E)   Where automatic fire sprinkler systems are determined to increase the
hazard to the property or occupants to be protected, other automatic fire
extinguishing systems appropriate for the hazard shall be designed, installed,
tested, inspected, alarmed, monitored, and maintained in accordance with the
national fire protections standards.
   (F)   An automatic fire sprinkler system or automatic fire extinguishing
system provided as a requirement of this code, or otherwise installed shall be
supervised in accordance with the Fire Code, Building Code and NFPA 101 Life
Safety Code. Automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be equipped with an audible
alarm located on the address side of the building exterior as approved by the
Fire Chief.
   (G)   Every new Fire Department connection for an automatic sprinkler system
shall be located on the address side of the building not more than 100 feet
from the fire hydrant riser connected to an approved water supply. Fire
Department connections shall be provided with a locking cap or caps of type
approved by the Fire Chief.
   (H)   Occupancies shall be classified in accordance with provisions of the
International Building Code, 2018 edition.
   (I)   Where these requirements conflict with the Building Code, Fire Code,
Life Safety Code or any state, or federal requirement, the more stringent
requirement shall apply.
   (J)   For all fire sprinkler line taps that are used solely for the fire
sprinkler and installed by the owner or developer with no cost to the city,
there shall be a meter fee charge equivalent to the tap size and a
corresponding system development charge based upon tap size as provided in §
18-108(A).
   (K)   For any fire sprinkler tap size that is installed by the city, the
owner shall pay a meter and tap fee equivalent to the tap size and a
corresponding system development charge based upon the tap size as provided in
§
18-108(A).
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-209 STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES, FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Any limits referred to in the Fire Code, in which storage of explosive
materials is prohibited, are hereby declared to be the fire limits as set out
in §
7-101 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Any limits referred to in the Fire Code, in which storage of flammable
or combustible liquids in outside above ground tanks is prohibited, are hereby
declared to be the fire limits as set out in §
7-101 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Any limits referred to in the Fire Code, in which new bulk plants for
flammable or combustible liquids are prohibited, are hereby declared to be the
fire limits as set out in §
7-101 of this code of ordinances.
   (D)   Any limits referred to in the Fire Code, in which bulk storage of
liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, is hereby declared to be the fire limits
as set out in §
7-101 of this code of ordinances.
(2011 Code, § 7-205) (Ord. 03-03, passed 2- -2003; Ord. 03-40, passed 1- -2004;
Ord. 11-11, passed 10-17-2011; Ord. 19-32, passed 10-21-2019; Ord. 20-16,
passed 9-21-2020; Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023;
Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-210 PETROLEUM DELIVERY VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall operate or park any petroleum delivery vehicle within
any residential area at any time, except for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in the expeditious delivery of gasoline.
   (B)   A petroleum delivery vehicle is defined as any vehicle that carries
over 200 gallons of gasoline, diesel fuel, kerosene, or any other combustible
liquid fuels that can be offloaded for the purpose of retail sale.
(2011 Code, § 7-206) (Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-
2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-211 VARIANCES.
   The Fire Chief and/or Fire Marshal may recommend to the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen variances from the provisions of the Fire Code upon application in
writing by any property owner or lessee, or the duly authorized agent of
either, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the
strict letter of the code; provided that, the spirit of the code shall be
observed, public safety secured and substantial justice done. The particulars
of such variances when granted or allowed shall be contained in a resolution of
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
(2011 Code, § 7-207) (Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-
2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-212 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter or the latest adopted version of the
International Building Code, International Fire Code or NFPA Life Safety Code
herein adopted by reference and modified.
(2011 Code, § 7-208) (Ord. 04-05, passed 5- -2004; Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023;
Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-213 FIRE INSPECTION REPORTING ONLINE.
   Fire protection system inspections and maintenance shall be submitted
electronically and made accessible to the City of Spring Hill Fire Department
Fire Marshal's Office via an online format.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
CHAPTER 3: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
7-301   Establishment
   
7-302   Objectives
   
7-303   Organization, rules and regulations
   
7-304   Records and reports
   
7-305   Fire Department training
   
7-306   Chief to be assistant to state officer
   
7-307   Office of the Fire Marshal
§ 7-301 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Fire Department to be supported and
equipped from appropriations by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen and from other
contributions. All apparatus, equipment, and supplies of the Fire Department
shall be purchased with the approval of the Fire Chief in accordance with
municipal purchasing requirements and shall be and remain the property of the
city. The Fire Department shall be composed of a Chief appointed by the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen, and such number of subordinate officers and firefighters
as may be recommended by the Fire Chief and funded in the annual budget
ordinance.
   (B)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall provide for the operations of
the Fire Department in its annual budget. Any funds raised by any individual or
group may be accepted by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen and may be used for
purposes designated by the respective contributors. All equipment, materials,
supplies, etc. purchased with contributed funds shall become the property of
the City of Spring Hill. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may reject any gift or
contribution it deems not to be in the best interest of the City of Spring
Hill.
(2011 Code, § 7-301) (Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-
2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-302 OBJECTIVES.
   The Fire Department shall have as its objectives:
   (A)   To prevent uncontrolled fires from starting;
   (B)   To prevent the loss of life and property because of fires;
   (C)   To confine fires to their places of origin;
   (D)   To extinguish uncontrolled fire;
   (E)   To prevent loss of life from asphyxiation or drowning;
   (F)   To perform such rescue work as its equipment and/or the training of
its personnel makes practicable;
   (G)   To provide emergency medical care at the highest level that the
equipment and training of the personnel makes practicable;
   (H)   To provide code enforcement and building inspections as directed by
the city within adopted codes and ordinances;
   (I)   To protect the health and safety of the citizens from the
transportation, storage, or manufacture of hazardous materials to the extent
possible;
   (J)   To work with the water department to insure that adequate water
supplies for fire protection as available; and
   (K)   To provide public fire education materials and information to the
citizens in order that they may protect themselves from harm.
(2011 Code, § 7-302) (Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-
2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-303 ORGANIZATION, RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall set up the organizational structure
of the Department, make personnel assignments and promotions, and shall
formulate and enforce such standard operating guidelines, policies and/or
procedures as shall be necessary for the orderly and efficient operation of the
Fire Department.
(2011 Code, § 7-303) (Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-
2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-304 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall keep adequate records of all fires,
inspections, apparatus, equipment, personnel, and work of the Department. He or
she shall submit a written report on such matters to the Mayor and Board of
Alderman once each month and, at the end of the year, a detailed annual report
shall be made.
(2011 Code, § 7-304) (Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-
2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-305 FIRE DEPARTMENT TRAINING.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall be fully responsible for the training
of the firefighters and for maintenance of all property and equipment of the
Fire Department, under the direction and subject to the requirements of the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen. Each firefighter and/or officer shall receive no
less than 40 hours of in-service firefighter training annually. Career
firefighters shall be trained in accordance with the standards of the Tennessee
Commission on Firefighter Standards and Education.
(2011 Code, § 7-306) (Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-
2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-306 CHIEF TO BE ASSISTANT TO STATE OFFICER.
Pursuant to requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-102-108, the Chief of the Fire
Department is designated as an assistant to the state's Commissioner of
Commerce and Insurance and is subject to all the duties and obligations imposed
by Tenn. Code Ann. Title 68, Ch. 102, and shall be subject to the directions of
the Commissioner in the execution of the provisions thereof.
(2011 Code, § 7-307) (Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-
2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-307 OFFICE OF THE FIRE MARSHAL.
   (A)   There is hereby established the office of Fire Marshal. The Fire
Marshal shall be a classified employee within the personnel system of the city.
The Fire Marshal shall be a member of the Fire Department and shall be
supervised by the Fire Chief. The Fire Marshal shall be a full-time salaried
position.
   (B)   General qualifications of the Fire Marshal shall include experience as
a firefighter, building inspector, or Fire Official, and shall have such other
experience and qualifications as may be established by the Department.
   (C)   The Fire Marshal shall have duties and responsibilities to include the
following:
      (1)   To conduct technical inspections throughout the city to discover
and eliminate potential fire and safety hazards in schools, businesses,
hospitals, manufacturing plans and facilities and other institutions.
      (2)   To notify the safety director of all hazardous materials
violations.
      (3)   To conduct and oversee construction plan review for Fire Code
compliance.
      (4)   To conduct or initiate all necessary inspections related to the
issuance of certificates of use and occupancy.
      (5)   To recommend codes improvements and ordinances relevant to the
protection of life and property.
      (6)   To review fire sprinkler plans and conduct sprinkler inspections.
      (7)   To perform spot inspections of assembly occupancies such as
stadiums, churches, theaters, bars, taverns, and restaurants.
      (8)   To enforce violations of the Fire Code.
      (9)   To make recommendation to the Fire Chief of the size of the
subordinate workforce required to meet the needs of the Office of Fire Marshal.
      (10)   To have such other duties, not inconsistent herewith, as may be
necessary to carrying out of the above duties and as may be assigned by the
Board, the City Administrator, or the Fire Chief.
(2011 Code, § 7-308) (Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-
2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
CHAPTER 4: FIRE SERVICE OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS
Section
   
7-401   Jurisdictional fire apparatus use
§ 7-401 JURISDICTIONAL FIRE APPARATUS USE.
   Personnel and/or equipment of the City of Spring Hill Fire Department may be
used for fighting any fire outside the town limits if:
   (A)   In the opinion of the Fire Chief, the fire is in such hazardous
proximity to property owned or located within the town as to endanger the town
property;
   (B)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen has developed policies for providing
emergency services outside of the town limits or entered into a contract or
mutual aid agreement pursuant to the authority of The Local Government
Emergency Assistance Act of 1987, as amended, codified in Tenn. Code Ann., §§
58-2-601 et seq., Tenn. Code Ann., §§ 12-9-101 et seq., or Tenn. Code Ann., §
6-54-601.
(2011 Code, § 7-401) (Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-
2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
CHAPTER 5: CONSTRUCTION FIRES
Section
   
7-501   Construction waste fires
   
7-502   Prohibition of pollutants
   
7-503   Actions by the city
   
7-504   Land clearing fires
§ 7-501 CONSTRUCTION WASTE FIRES.
   (A)   No construction materials will be disposed of by burning within the
City of Spring Hill.
   (B)   The prime contractor, also known as the general contractor, for the
site of the building construction shall be responsible for the acts of all his
or her employees, sub-contractors, vendors or others using his or her site to
start fires.
(2011 Code, § 7-502) (Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-
2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-502 PROHIBITION OF POLLUTANTS.
   No roofing, waste oil/fuel, plastics, oil-based products, paints,
insulation, or any other construction material emitting airborne pollutants
shall be burned within the city limits of Spring Hill.
(2011 Code, § 7-503) (Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-
2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-503 ACTIONS BY THE CITY.
   (A)   Any fire on a construction site resulting in a fire response by the
city's Fire Department, shall result in a service fee charged to the prime
contractor upon whose site the fire is found. The service fee shall be added to
the Fire Department's budget.
   (B)   The Fire Chief shall keep a record of time, place and facts related to
any construction site fire response and shall notify the city's Building
Inspector and the appropriate contractors by regular mail of his or her
findings.
   (C)   A certificate of occupancy for the built construction shall be
withheld by the city's Building Inspector until the service fee is paid, and
there will be no further building permits issued to the named contractor until
the service fee is paid to the city.
(2011 Code, § 7-504) (Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-
2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-504 LAND CLEARING FIRES.
   The use of an air curtain destructor (also referred to as air curtain
burner) to incinerate timber, stumps, and forest floor materials i.e., duff, is
permitted once a burn permit is obtained from the Fire Department.
   (A)   Air curtain destructor is a unit consisting of a combustion chamber
pit and air blower designed to establish a curtain of high velocity air above
the fire burning in the pit so that the products of combustion must be forced
up through the curtain before they reach the outside air.
   (B)   Priming materials used to facilitate such burning as wood waste and
vegetation are limited to #1 or #2 grade fuel oil.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
CHAPTER 6: OPEN BURNING
Section
   
7-601   General
   
7-602   Homeowners
   
7-603   Special circumstances
§ 7-601 GENERAL.
   (A)   No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit open burning within
the entire city limits of the City of Spring Hill, TN except as set in
following sections:
      (1)   Commercial barbeque fireplace.
      (2)   Fires set by or at the direction of responsible fire control
persons for training purposes or directed at the prevention, elimination, or
reduction of fire hazards.
      (3)   Fires set at the direction of law enforcement agencies or courts
for the purpose of destruction of controlled substances and legend drugs seized
as contraband. This does not include antineoplastic agents.
   (B)   Routine demolition of structures via supervised open burning by
responsible fire control persons will not be considered fire training or
elimination of fire hazard. Demolition of structures may be conducted by open
burning provided that there is unilaterally issued state of local building
codes order to demolish the structure by open burning because of its structural
failure. Such orders shall be recognized only where there is no other safe way
to demolish the structure.
   (C)   Warming barrels shall be allowed at building construction sites during
cold weather. Barrel must be at least 25 feet from a structure or combustible
material.
(Ord. 20-02, passed 5-18-2020; Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed
11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-602 HOMEOWNERS.
   (A)   Homeowners are not allowed to burn combustible materials or
residential waste or construction debris. Homeowners are permitted to have
fire/BBQ pits as long as the fire/BBQ pit is 25 feet from a structure or other
combustible material, this includes non-commercial fires used for cooking of
food including BBQ and outdoor fireplaces.
   (B)   The burning of yard debris i.e., grass clippings and leaves is
prohibited.
(2011 Code, § 7-602) (Ord. 20-02, passed 5-18-2020; Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-
2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-603 SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES.
   (A)   Following a natural disaster, the Fire Marshal and/or Fire Chief may
authorize open burning of class A wood materials, brush and yard debris in an
effort to mitigate materials in order to speed up recovery efforts.
   (B)   Property owners that own more than five acres of land that is zoned
other than residential, may conduct property maintenance burns twice annually
by permit; between October 1 and May 30 and during daylight hours of sunrise to
sunset. Property owners will adhere to the following items;
      (1)   The property owner will acknowledge in the burn permit application
that the property owner assumes full responsibility and liability for any
damages incurred by their open burning;:
      (2)   Brush pile is a minimum of 500 feet from a residential
neighborhood, unless approval is granted by the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief for
a reduced distance;
      (3)   Brush pile is a minimum of 500 feet from a residential
neighborhood, unless approval is granted by the Fire Marshal or Fire Chief for
a reduced distance;
      (4)   The brush pile contains only brush, limbs, or wood items that were
collected on the identified property and not trucked in or transferred from
another location.
      (5)   There will be no property maintenance burns when winds exceed ten
miles per hour.
      (6)   Property owners will abide by any and all published State of
Tennessee, county- wide or city declared burn bans.
      (7)   Property owners (or designated person) must remain on site with
adequate fire extinguishing equipment until the fire is extinguished and no
longer smoldering.
      (8)   Property owners may request fire department stand-by assistance
during a property maintenance burns at the designated rate as listed in the
City of Spring Hill fee schedule.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
CHAPTER 7: EXPLOSIVES AND FIREWORKS
Section
   
7-701   Definitions
   
7-702   Use restrictions and permits
   
7-703   Permit revocation
   
7-704   Permissible fireworks
   
7-705   Storing and structures
   
7-706   Limitations on structures
   
7-707   Location of fireworks retail sales site
   
7-708   Parking requirement for retail fireworks sales site
   
7-709   Unlawful sale to certain children and other persons; unlawful use of
fireworks
   
7-710   Exclusions
   
7-711   Authorization to seize
   
7-712   Violation and penalty
§ 7-701 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      DISTRIBUTOR. Any person engaged in the business of selling of fireworks
to any other person engaged in the business of reselling fireworks either as a
wholesaler or retailer, or any person who receives, brings, or imports any
fireworks of any kind, in any manner into the City of Spring Hill.
      FIREWORKS. Any composition or device for the purpose of producing a
visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or detonation, and
which meets the definition of:
         (a)   All articles of fireworks classified as 1.4G or referred to as
"Consumer Fireworks", or as "Class C Common Fireworks".
         (b)   Theatrical or novelty, classified as 1.4S; or
         (c)   Display fireworks, classified as 1.3G, as set forth in the U.S.
Department of Transportation's (DOT) Hazardous Materials Regulation, 49 CFR,
Parts 171-180.
         (d)   Exceptions:
            1.   Toy caps for use in toy pistols, toy canes, or toy guns, and
novelties and trick noisemakers manufactured in accordance with DOT
regulations, 49 CFR 173.100(p), and packed and shipped according to those
regulations;
            2.   Model rockets and model rocket motors designed, sold, and used
for the purpose of propelling recoverable aero models; and
            3.   Propelling or expelling charges consisting of a mixture of
sulfur, charcoal, saltpeter are not considered as designed to produce audible
effects.
      MOBILE RETAILER. A vendor operating from motor vehicle, trailer, bicycle
or motorcycle.
      PERMIT. The written authority of the City of Spring Hill issued under the
authority of this section.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership or corporation.
      RETAILER. Any person engaged in the business of making retail sales of
fireworks to the general public.
      SALE. An exchange of articles of fireworks for money and also includes
barter, exchange, gift, or offer and each such transaction made by any person,
whether as principal, proprietor, salesperson, agent, association, co-
partnership, or one or more individuals.
      STATE FIRE MARSHAL PERMIT. The appropriate fireworks permit issued by the
Tennessee Fire Marshal under the authority of Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 68-104-101 et
seq.
   (B)   Singular works and plural words used in the singular include the
plural and the plural as singular.
(Ord. 18-28A, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18,
passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-702 USE RESTRICTIONS AND PERMITS.
   (A)   (1)   The Fire Marshal of the city may adopt reasonable rules and
regulations for the granting of permits for supervised displays of fireworks by
fair associations, amusement parks and other organizations or groups of
individuals. Such permits may be granted upon application to the Fire Marshal
and the filing of a bond in the amount of $1,000 by the applicant. Every such
display shall be handled by a competent operator licensed or certified as to
competency by the Fire Marshal and shall be of such composition and character,
and so located, discharged or fired as, in the opinion of the Fire Marshal,
shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person or persons.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to sell or to offer for sale in the
City of Spring Hill any item of fireworks without first having secured a State
Fire Marshal permit and a permit issued by the City of Spring Hill.
      (3)   A person applying for a retail fireworks sales site permit with the
City of Spring Hill must disclose the location where the applicant will conduct
the business of selling fireworks and the dates for which the right to do
business is desired.
      (4)   A permit (to sell fireworks to the general public) is valid only
from June 25 through July 5 or December 23 through January 1.
      (5)   The permit fee for fireworks retail permit is listed in the City of
Spring Hill fee schedule. In addition to the permit fee, the applicant must pay
cleanup deposit per location, which shall be refunded after the fireworks
permit has expired or used by the city to clean up the retail fireworks site if
needed.
      (6)   A permit to sell fireworks in the City of Spring Hill must be
obtained at least two weeks prior to the date on which the applicant begins
making sales. Each application shall contain the following:
         (a)   The application must include the name, address and telephone
number of applicant.
         (b)   The applicant must be the natural person who will operate or be
responsible for sales.
         (c)   The applicant's name must be the same as the name on the State
Fire Marshal permit.
         (d)   The applicant is liable for all violations of this chapter by
persons under his/her supervision.
         (e)   The applicant must submit a letter or contract signed by the
property owner (or authorized agent of the property owner) that provides
written permission by the property owner to the applicant to conduct retail
fireworks sales on the property.
      (7)   A copy of the State Fire Marshal permit. (For a state permit to be
obtained by a retailer, the Mayor must sign on behalf of the retailer an
application for fireworks permit that the state requires before a state permit
is issued to a retailer for a specific location).
      (8)   A person that applies for a retail fireworks permit must show proof
that a state sales tax number has been obtained for sales tax purposes.
      (9)   A permit to sell fireworks in the City of Spring Hill will require
the issuance of a temporary use permit in accordance with § 8.4 of the City of
Spring Hill Unified Development Code. The applicant must provide a site plan
that includes the dimension of the lot, size and location of the temporary
structure, setback of the structure from the right-of-way, location of other
structures in the area that are occupied, location and number of parking
spaces, location of any nearby residences, and location of the nearest fuel
outlets.
      (10)   Mobile vendors are not permitted.
      (11)   Distributors are not permitted.
      (12)   Signage for a retail fireworks location must comply with the City
of Spring Hill Unified Development Code. Flashing signs are not permitted.
      (13)   The application for a retail fireworks location must contain
evidence that general liability insurance has been obtained by applicant naming
the City of Spring Hill as additional insured for at least $2,000,000 for each
occurrence, whether in respect to bodily injury liability or property damage
liability or bodily injury liability and property damage liability combined.
      (14)   After the application has been submitted and approved, a City
Codes Inspector and/or Fire Inspector shall inspect the site for compliance
with applicable codes and ordinances.
      (15)   After such privilege shall have been granted, sales, possession,
use and distribution of fireworks for such display is lawful for that purpose
only.
      (16)   No person shall manufacture any fireworks within the corporate
limits of the City of Spring Hill.
      (17)   No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.
      (18)   Religious ceremonial events must be requested in writing to the
Fire Marshal at least seven days prior to the event. The Fire Marshal and/or
Fire Chief will review the location of the requested display, the fireworks to
be used, and duration of the event. A written acknowledgement will be provided
to the requesting entity along with any changes, modifications, or
recommendations for public safety.
   (B)   The discharge of fireworks within the city limits shall be limited to
the following days and times:
      (1)   July 4, beginning at 12:00 noon and ending at 11:00 p.m.;
      (2)   Christmas Eve, beginning at 12:00 noon and ending at 11:00 p.m.;
      (3)   New Year's Eve, beginning at 12:00 noon and ending at 12:30 a.m.;
      (4)   Religious ceremonial events ending at 11:00 p.m.; following review
and approval of location from the Fire Chief or Fire Marshal.
(2011 Code, § 7-701) (Ord. 02-25, passed 10- -2002; Ord. 18-28A, passed 12-17-
2018; Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16,
passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-703 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   (A)   The City Codes Director and/or Fire Marshal may revoke any permit upon
failure of retailer to correct any of the following conditions within 24 hours
after written notice is issued to the retailer.
      (1)   When the permit or the permittee's operator violates any lawful
rule, regulation, or order of the City Codes Director and/or Fire Marshal.
      (2)   When the permittee's application contains any false or untrue
statements.
      (3)   When the permittee fails to timely file any report or pay any tax,
fee, fine or charge.
      (4)   When the permittee or the permittee's operator violates any
fireworks ordinance or statute.
   (B)   When any activities of the permittee constitute a distinct hazard to
life or property, the City Codes Director or Fire Marshal, or both, may revoke
the permit immediately.
(Ord. 18-28A, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18,
passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-704 PERMISSIBLE FIREWORKS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any individual, firm, partnership or corporation to
sell or use within the City of Spring Hill, except as provided in this chapter,
any "fireworks" as defined in §
7-701 (A)(1), other than the following:
      (1)   Those items classified by the U.S. Department of Transportation as
1.4G Consumer Fireworks; or
      (2)   Those items that comply with the construction, chemical
composition, and labeling regulations promulgated by the United States Consumer
Product Safety Commission and permitted for use by the general public under its
regulations.
   (B)   Any display using 1.3G display fireworks must be under the control of
a licensed pyrotechnics technician.
(Ord. 18-28A, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18,
passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-705 STORING AND STRUCTURES.
   No person may smoke within a structure where fireworks are sold. No person
selling fireworks may permit the presence of lighted cigars, cigarettes, or
pipes within a structure where fireworks are offered for sale. At all places
where fireworks are stored or sold, there must be posted signs with the words
"Fireworks - No Smoking" in letters not less than four inches high. An
inspected and currently tagged fire extinguisher with a minimum 2A rating and
one pressurized water type fire extinguisher must be present at each retail
fireworks site. Fireworks sold at retail may be sold only from a freestanding
structure. Fireworks must be stored at least ten feet away from windows and
other areas where the sun may shine through. Fireworks are not permitted to be
stored in residential districts, except for personal use.
(Ord. 18-28A, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18,
passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-706 LIMITATIONS ON STRUCTURES.
   Tents meeting the current adopted International Building Code and the Life
Safety Code (NFPA 101) may be used for the retail sale of fireworks. Ground
fault interrupter protection must be used for power cords that supply power to
tents and other outdoor structures. Electrical wiring inside tents and other
outdoor locations shall be securely installed, without splices, and lamps shall
be protected from accidental breakage by a suitable fixture or guard. No
structure from which fireworks are sold may exceed 3,200 square feet. Fireworks
may not be stored in a permanent building unless the building has a sprinkler
system and is constructed of non-flammable materials such as metal or concrete
block.
(Ord. 18-28A, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18,
passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-707 LOCATION OF FIREWORKS RETAIL SALES SITE.
   (A)   Fireworks retail sales site are not permitted in any residential
district as defined in the City of Spring Hill Unified Development Code.
   (B)   Retail fireworks sales site are only permitted in C-4, General
Commercial District and C-5, Regional Commercial District as defined in the
City of Spring Hill Unified Development Code and illustrated on the Official
Zoning Map of the City of Spring Hill; provided, however fireworks retail sales
structures must not be located closer than 500 linear feet to any occupied
residence or Residential District, public or private educational facility,
public building, or hospital, and must not be located closer than 1,000 linear
feet to a fuel (gasoline, diesel, kerosene, or propane) outlet or storage
facility.
   (C)   Any site for a fireworks retailer must be located so that all parts of
the structure and fireworks inventory on the site are no closer than 50 feet to
a property line or right-of-way.
   (D)   Fireworks sales are not allowed on any property where there is an
existing retail business use in which a single business operates from a
building in excess of 10,000 square feet.
   (E)   The parcel in which a fireworks retail use is proposed shall be a
minimum of 2,500 feet from other similar uses. This distance shall be measured
in a straight line from structure to structure. If two retailers are applying
for permits for the first time at locations within 2,500 feet of each other for
the same fireworks season, priority shall be given to the retailer who obtained
a city permit at the earliest day and time prior to the permit period. In
addition, priority shall be given to the retailer who obtained a permit the
previous summer fireworks season at the same location.
   (F)   The location of the fireworks retail sales site and structure must be
verified by the Planning Department prior to the issuance of a permit by the
City of Spring Hill.
   (G)   There shall be no more than a total of four retail fireworks sales
permits issued by the City of Spring Hill for retail sales of fireworks during
each period as described in §
7-702(A)(4). Priority will be first come, first serve provided, however, after
the first year (2019), priority shall be given to the retailer that obtains a
retail sales permit for the previous summer season at the same location.
(Ord. 18-28A, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18,
passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)18; Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023;
Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023)
§ 7-708 PARKING REQUIREMENT FOR RETAIL FIREWORKS SALES SITE.
   The site for a fireworks retailer shall be improved to provide at least 12
graveled or paved parking places for off street and right-of-way customer
parking compliant with ADA requirements. In addition, the retail fireworks site
must provide for an on-site turnaround area so that backing of vehicles onto
the street will not be necessary.
(Ord. 18-28A, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18,
passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-709 UNLAWFUL SALE TO CERTAIN CHILDREN AND OTHER PERSONS; UNLAWFUL USE OF
FIREWORKS.
   It is unlawful to offer for sale or to sell any fireworks to children under
the age of 16 years of age or to any intoxicated person. It is unlawful to
explode or ignite fireworks within 600 feet of any church, assisted living
facility, nursing home, hospital, funeral home, public or private school
academic structure, or within 200 feet of where fireworks are stored, sold, or
offered for sale. It is unlawful to ignite or discharge any permissible
articles of fireworks within or throw them from a motor vehicle. It is unlawful
to place or throw any ignited article of fireworks into or at a motor vehicle,
or at or near any person or group of persons. It is unlawful to ignite
fireworks on another person's private property unless permission is obtained
from the owner or occupant of the property. It is unlawful to launch fireworks
onto property of persons who have not given permission. It is unlawful to use
fireworks at times, places, or in any manner that endangers other persons. It
is unlawful to ignite fireworks during a burning ban declared by either the
State of Tennessee or the City of Spring Hill Fire Department, except for
public (and/or group) displays for which permits have been granted.
(Ord. 18-28A, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18,
passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-710 EXCLUSIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter prohibits:
   (A)   The transport of any kind of fireworks through the corporate limits of
the city in accordance with the regulations of the United States Department of
Transportation covering the transportation or explosives and other dangerous
articles by motor, rail and water.
   (B)   The sale, transportation, handling, or use of industrial pyrotechnic
devices or fireworks, such as railroad torpedoes, fuses, automotive,
aeronautical, and marine flares and smoke signals.
   (C)   The sale or use of blank cartridges for theater, for signal or
ceremonial purposes in athletics or sporting events, or legal power tools.
   (D)   The transportation, handling, or use of any pyrotechnic device by the
armed forces of the United States.
   (E)   The use of pyrotechnics in training by the fire service, law
enforcement or similar governmental agencies.
   (F)   The use of fireworks for agricultural purposes under conditions
approved by the City Fire Marshal.
   (G)   Displays of fireworks as provided for in this chapter.
(Ord. 18-28A, passed 12-17-2018; Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18,
passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-711 AUTHORIZATION TO SEIZE.
   The Fire Marshal, Fire Chief or their designee shall seize, take, remove or
cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks or
combustibles offered or exposed for sale, stored or held in violation of this
chapter. The Fire Marshal shall store and maintain seized fireworks and dispose
of them as ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. Seized fireworks shall
in no event be returned to the person from whom seized until all appellate
remedies are exhausted. The confiscation and forfeiture of fireworks being an
action "in rem", the city shall have the right to appeal an order restoring the
seized fireworks to the person from whom seized.
(2011 Code, § 7-702) (Ord. 02-25, passed 10- -2002; Ord. 18-28A, passed 12-17-
2018; Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16,
passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-712 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating the provisions of
this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $150.
(2011 Code, § 7-703) (Ord. 02-25, passed 10- -2002; Ord. 18-28A, passed 12-17-
2018; Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16,
passed 9-3-2024)
CHAPTER 8: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Section
   
7-801   Area in which storage of flammable and combustible liquids in outside
above ground tanks is permitted
   
7-802   Bulk storage of petroleum products restricted; building, businesses
restricted
   
7-803   Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases restricted; building,
businesses restricted
   
7-804   Bulk storage of liquefied natural gas restricted; building, businesses
restricted
   
7-805   Compression, storage and dispensing of compressed natural gas
restricted; building, businesses restricted
   
7-806   Transportation of explosives and blasting agents
   
7-807   Manufacture and storage of explosives and blasting agents
   
7-808   Routes for vehicles transporting hazardous materials
   
7-809   Transportation of hazardous materials
   
7-810   Hazardous substance; recovery costs
   
7-811   Storage, dispensing, use and handling of hazardous materials,
restricted
§ 7-801 AREA IN WHICH STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS IN OUTSIDE
ABOVE GROUND TANKS IS PERMITTED.
   (A)   Storage of flammable and combustible liquids above ground in
commercial and industrial areas is limited to one tank of 1,000 gallons or less
capacity per five acres or portion thereof. Usage is limited to onsite non-
retail needs. In addition, each processor in the area may have one tank not to
exceed 500 gallons for storage of fuel for equipment used to mow grass push
snow, etc., or one tank per product per five acres.
   (B)   Storage of flammable and combustible liquids in outside above ground
tanks allowed under above provisions, shall meet requirements of the Fire Code
and NFPA 30-1993.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-802 BULK STORAGE OF PETROLEUM PRODUCTS RESTRICTED; BUILDING, BUSINESSES
RESTRICTED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to establish, erect, construct, or
enlarge a plant or place of business where petroleum products are to be
manufactured or physically distributed or handled, except in the commercial and
industrial areas of the city.
   (B)   Bulk storage of petroleum products allowed under above provisions,
shall meet requirements of the Fire Code and NFPA 30-1993.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-803 BULK STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES RESTRICTED; BUILDING,
BUSINESSES RESTRICTED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to establish, erect, construct, or
enlarge a plant or place of business where liquefied petroleum gas or gases are
to be manufactured or physically distributed or handled, except in the
commercial and industrial areas of the city.
   (B)   Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases allowed under above
provisions, shall meet requirements of the Fire Code and NFPA 58 and 59-1992.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-804 BULK STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED NATURAL GAS RESTRICTED; BUILDING, BUSINESSES
RESTRICTED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to establish, erect, construct or
enlarge a plant or place of business where liquefied petroleum gas or gases are
to be manufactured or physically distributed or handled, except in the
commercial and industrial areas of the city.
   (B)   Bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases allowed under above
provisions, shall meet requirements of the Fire Code and NFPA 59A-1990.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-805 COMPRESSION, STORAGE AND DISPENSING OF COMPRESSED NATURAL GAS
RESTRICTED; BUILDING, BUSINESSES RESTRICTED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to establish, erect, construct or
enlarge a plant or place of business where compression, storage and dispensing
of compressed natural gas or gases are to be manufactured or physically
distributed or handled, except in the commercial and industrial areas of the
city.
   (B)   Compression, storage and dispensing of compressed natural gases
allowed under above provisions, shall meet requirements of the Fire Code, NFPA
52-1992 and regulations of the Public Service Commission.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-806 TRANSPORTATION OF EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS.
   No person shall operate or park any vehicle carrying explosives and blasting
agents within the corporate limits of Spring Hill at any time except while
traveling on an established hazardous material route and for the purpose of and
while engaged in the expeditious delivery of explosives and blasting agents.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-807 MANUFACTURE AND STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as applying to:
      (1)   The armed forces of the United States or the State militia;
      (2)   Explosives in forms prescribed by the official United States
Pharmacopoeia;
      (3)   The sale, possession or use of fireworks;
      (4)   The possession, transportation and use of small arms ammunition;
      (5)   The possession, storage, transportation and use of not more than
one pound of black sporting powder, 20 pounds of smokeless powder, and 2,000
small arms primers for hand loading of small arms ammunition for personal use;
      (6)   The possession, storage, transportation, and use of explosives or
blasting agents by the United States Bureau of Mines, the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, the United States Secret Service, or Police and Fire Departments
acting in their official capacities.
   (B)   Definitions.
      BLASTING AGENT. A material or mixture consisting of a fuel and oxidizer
intended for blasting, not otherwise classified as an explosive, in which none
of the ingredients is classified as explosives, provided that the finished
product as mixed and packaged for use or shipment cannot be detonated by means
of a No. 8 test blasting cap when unconfined. Materials or mixtures classified
as nitrocarbonitrates by the Department of Transportation regulations shall be
included in this definition.
      EXPLOSIVE. A chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly
used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion, that contains any
oxidizing and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities, or packing, than an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion,
by percussion, or by detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause
such a sudden generation of highly heated gases that the resultant gaseous
pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects or
of destroying life and limb.
   (C)   The manufacture of explosives or blasting agents shall be prohibited
within the City of Spring Hill.
   (D)   The storage of explosives or blasting agents is prohibited within the
City of Spring Hill except for temporary storage for use in connection with
approved blasting operations; however, at the end of the day's operations, as
established by the Fire Chief, any remaining explosives or blasting agents
shall be safely removed from the corporate limits of the City of Spring Hill.
Any onsite magazine shall be locked in the open position. This prohibition
shall not apply to wholesale and retail stocks of small arms ammunition,
explosive bolts, explosive rivets or cartridges for explosive-actuated power
tools in quantities involving less than 500 pounds of explosive material.
      (1)   Businesses located within the City of Spring Hill may store
explosives and blasting agents at sites designated subject to review and
approval by the Fire Marshal.
      (2)   No person shall possess, offer for sale, sell, display, or utilize
any explosives or blasting agents at any location within the City of Spring
Hill not authorized by a permit issued by the Fire Marshal.
      (3)   The manufacture and storage of explosives and blasting agents under
the above provisions shall meet requirements of the Fire Code and NFPA 495-
1992.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-808 ROUTES FOR VEHICLES TRANSPORTING HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   Routes for vehicles transporting hazardous materials shall be as established
by the fire chief, police chief and the public works director. Hazardous
materials routes will be the state roads or city arterial roads as outlined on
city GIS mapping.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-809 TRANSPORTATION OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS.
   No person shall operate or park any vehicle carrying hazardous materials
within the corporate limits of the city at any time except while traveling on
an established route and for the purpose of and while actual engaged in the
expeditious delivery of hazardous materials. Vehicles transporting hazardous
materials shall be prohibited within the limits of the Fire District, except to
make expeditious deliveries within the Fire District. The date, time of day,
quantity of materials, and method of delivery shall be subject to regulation
and permitted by the Fire Marshal. Businesses located within the city may have
vehicle parking sites designated, subject to review and approval by the Fire
Marshal. This article shall apply to materials not otherwise covered in this
code which are highly flammable, or which may react to cause fires or
explosives, or by their presence create or augment a fire or explosion hazard,
or which because of toxicity, flammability or liability to explosion render
fire-fighting abnormally dangerous or difficult; also the flammable or
combustible liquids which are chemically unstable and which may spontaneously
form explosive compounds or undergo spontaneous reactions of explosive violence
or with sufficient evolution of heat to be a fire hazard. Hazardous materials
shall include flammable solids, corrosive liquids, poisonous gases or highly
toxic, radioactive, oxidizing, unstable or reactive, hyperbolic or pyrophoric
materials. Also, any substance or mixture of substance which is an irritant, a
strong sensitizer, or which generates pressure through exposure to heat,
decomposition or other means.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-810 HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE; RECOVERY COSTS.
   (A)   As used in this section, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
      COSTS. Costs means those necessary and reasonable costs incurred by the
city in connection with investigating, mitigating, minimizing, removing or
abating discharges of hazardous substances including, but not limited to the
following: actual labor cost of city personnel or its authorized agents; costs
of equipment operation and rental; and cost of expendable items including, but
not limited to, firefighting foam, chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent
material, sand, recovery drums, acid suits, acid gloves, goggles and protective
clothing.
      DISCHARGE. Any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting
in the releasing, spilling, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of
a hazardous substance upon public or private property located within the city
limits of the City of Spring Hill.
      HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES. Any substances or materials in a quantity or form,
which in the determination of the Fire Chief or his authorized designee poses
an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health, safety or welfare of
persons or property within the City of Spring Hill, and shall include, but not
be limited to, those hazardous substances listed in the "N.F.P.A. Guide on
Hazardous Materials", or the E.P.A.'s list of extremely hazardous substances.
      (4)   One or more individuals, partnerships, corporations, joint
ventures, associations or any other entities or any combination thereof.
   (B)   (1)   The Fire Department is hereby authorized to take such steps as
necessary to clean up, remove or abate the effects of any hazardous substances
discharged upon or into public or private property or facilities located within
the limits of the city.
      (2)   Any person or persons responsible for causing or allowing an
unauthorized discharge of hazardous substances that requires emergency action
of the Fire Department of the City of Spring Hill or its authorized agents in
order to protect the public health, safety or welfare shall be jointly and
severally liable to the City of Spring Hill for the costs incurred by the city
in investigating, mitigating, minimizing removing and abating any such
discharge.
      (3)   When responding to the emergency caused by the unauthorized
discharge of hazardous substances, the Fire Department of the City of Spring
Hill shall keep a detailed record of the costs attributable thereto.
      (4)   The authority to recover costs under this section shall not include
costs incurred for actual fire suppression services which are normally or
usually provided by the City of Spring Hill Fire Department or its authorized
agents.
   (C)   (1)   Any person or persons responsible for causing or allowing an
unauthorized discharge of hazardous substances shall reimburse the City of
Spring Hill for the full amount of all costs, as defined herein, associated
with the investigating, mitigating, minimizing, removing and abating any such
discharge within a period of 30 days after receipt of an itemized bill for such
costs from the City of Spring Hill.
      (2)   Any person or persons responsible for causing or allowing an
unauthorized discharge of hazardous substances and who fails to promptly
reimburse the City of Spring Hill within the time set forth in subsection (C)
(1) hereof, shall be subject to a penalty payment as specified in appendix A,
comprehensive fees and penalties, for each month that the bill for such costs
remains unpaid.
      (3)   The remedy provided for in this section shall be supplemental to
and in addition to all other available remedies at law and equity.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-811 STORAGE, DISPENSING, USE AND HANDLING OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS,
RESTRICTED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to establish, erect, construct, or
enlarge a plant or place of business where hazardous materials are to be
manufactured or physically distributed or handled, except in the commercial and
industrial areas of the city.
   (B)   Storage, dispensing, use and handling of hazardous materials allowed
under the above provisions, shall meet requirements of the Fire Code.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge a hazardous material
by releasing, spilling, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping.
   (D)   Hazardous materials shall not be released into a sewer, storm drain,
ditch, drainage canal, creek, stream, river, lake or tidal waterway, or upon
the ground, sidewalk, street, highway or into the atmosphere; except materials
used for weed abatement, erosion control, soil amendment or similar
applications when applied in accordance with the manufacturer's specifications
and/or materials released in accordance with federal, state or local
governmental regulations.
   (E)   The Fire Department shall be immediately notified when an unauthorized
discharge of hazardous materials is discovered. The Fire Department shall
notify the other responsible agencies.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
CHAPTER 9: LITHIUM-ION (Li-ion) BATTERY DISPOSAL, CLASSIFICATION, SALE, SECOND
USE, STORAGE AND COMMERCIAL CHARGING
Section
   
7-901   Disposal, bulk storage, re-manufacturing, and resale of second-use
lithium ion batteries
   
7-902   Lithium-ion batteries, are considered a hazardous material
   
7-903   Sale of second-use lithium-ion batteries
   
7-904   Assembly or reconditioning
   
7-905   Commercial storage requirements for the storing or collecting of bulk
lithium-ion batteries
   
7-906   Limited indoor storage of lithium-ion batteries
   
7-907   Indoor storage areas not meeting "limited" storage requirements
   
7-908   Outside storage areas
   
7-909   Powered micro mobility devices
§ 7-901 DISPOSAL, BULK STORAGE, RE-MANUFACTURING, AND RESALE OF SECOND-USE
LITHIUM ION BATTERIES.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the following
meanings:
   LITHIUM-ION BATTERY. A storage battery in which an electrical current is
generated by lithium ions embedded in a carbon graphite or nickel metal-oxide
substrate placed in a high-viscosity carbonate mixture or gelled polymer
electrolyte.
   SECOND-USE LITHIUM-ION BATTERY. A lithium-ion battery that has been
assembled or  reconditioned using cells removed from used batteries.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-902 LITHIUM-ION BATTERIES, ARE CONSIDERED A HAZARDOUS MATERIAL.
   Per the EPA and are subject to DOT's Hazardous Materials Regulations (HMR;
49 CFR Parts 171-180) and should not be disposed of in standard household
trash.
   (A)   Used batteries should be disposed of at a recycling center or other
household hazardous waste collection point.
   (B)   Consumers should tape terminal ends and place batteries in separate
plastic bags prior to disposal.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-903 SALE OF SECOND-USE LITHIUM-ION BATTERIES.
   (A)   No person shall distribute, sell or offer for a sale a second-use
lithium-ion battery.
   (B)   Penalty. A person who violates subsection (A) of this section or any
rule promulgated thereunder is liable for a civil penalty as follows:
      (1)   For the first violation, a civil penalty of $200; and
      (2)   For each subsequent violation issued for the same offense within
two years of the date of a first violation, a civil penalty of not more than
$1,000.
      (3)   Each failure to comply with subdivision (A) of this section with
respect to each separate second-use lithium-ion battery constitutes a separate
violation.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-904 ASSEMBLY OR RECONDITIONING.
   It shall be unlawful to assemble or recondition a lithium-ion battery using
cells removed from used storage batteries.
(Ord. 24-16, passed 9-3-2024)
§ 7-905 COMMERCIAL STORAGE REQUIREMENTS FOR THE STORING OR COLLECTING OF BULK
LITHIUM-ION BATTERIES.
   Exceptions:
   (A)   Batteries installed in the equipment, devices, or vehicles they are
designed to power.
   (B)   Batteries packed for use with the equipment, devices, or vehicles they
are designed to power.
   (C)   Batteries in original retail packaging that are rated at 300 watt-
hours or less for lithium-ion batteries or contact 25 grams or less of lithium
metal for lithium metal batteries.
   (D)   Temporary storage of batteries or battery components during the
battery manufacturing process prior to completion of final quality control
checks.
   (E)   Temporary storage of batteries during the vehicle manufacturing or
repair process.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-906 LIMITED INDOOR STORAGE OF LITHIUM-ION BATTERIES.
   Shall not exceed 15 cubic feet (approx. two 55-gallon drums). A fire safety
plan shall be created by the owner/operator of the storage facility, reviewed,
and approved by the Fire Marshal’s office, and disseminated to staff working at
the facility. Containers must be:
   (A)   Open-top and non-combustible or approved for battery collection.
   (B)   Each container and groups of containers may not exceed seven and one-
half cubic feet.
   (C)   Second container or groups of containers must be seperated by not less
than three feet of open space, or ten feet of space that contains combustible
materials.
   (D)   Must be located not less than five feet from exits or exit access
doors.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-907 INDOOR STORAGE AREAS NOT MEETING "LIMITED" STORAGE REQUIREMENTS.
   Are identified as spaces with indoor storage with more than 15 cubic feet of
lithium batteries:
   (A)   must secure a permit and have a fire safety plan created, reviewed,
and approved by the Fire Marshal's Office and disseminate plan to staff working
at the facility; and
   (B)   Must authorize and conduct a technical opinion report to evaluate
level of hazard and protection measures.
   (C)   Indoor storage areas not meeting "limited" storage requirements shall
have a minimum two-hour fire rated barrier or horizontal assembly separating
battery storage areas. Exceptions:
      (1)   Prefabricated portable structure building with 2 hour rated fire
resistance rated enclosure.
      (2)   If battery storage is limited to new batteries in packaging that
has been demonstrated to and approved by Fire Code Official as sufficient to
isolate a fire in packaging.
   (D)   Must be protected with an automatic sprinkler system or approved
alternative suppression system.
   (E)   Must be protected with fire detection system using air aspirating
smoke detection, radiant energy-sensing fire detection or both.
   (F)   Explosion control plan, if applicable, and in accordance with
technical report.
   (G)   If batteries are stored at no more than 30% state of charge, "reduced
requirements" apply:
      (1)   Technical report is not required;
      (2)   Two-hour fire rated barriers not required;
      (3)   Must have defined procedure to verify battery state of charge
(SOC);
      (4)   Fire sprinkler system is required,;
      (5)   Fire detection system is required.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-908 OUTSIDE STORAGE AREAS.
   (A)   Separated by not less than 20 feet to buildings, property lines and
streets.
   (B)   Separated by not less than three feet to buildings, property lines and
streets if protected with free standing two hour fire-resistant rated assembly.
   (C)   Separated by not less than three feet to buildings, property lines and
streets if in portable prefabricted building with two hour fire-resistant rated
enclosure.
   (D)   Fire detection system is required, including for portable
prefabricated buildings.
   (E)   Storage building shall not exceed ten feet in height, shall not exceed
900 square feet, and shall be separated from other storage areas by ten feet.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-909 POWERED MICRO MOBILITY DEVICES.
   Include motorized bicycles, motorized scooters and other personal mobility
powered devices using lithium batteries.
   (A)   This subsection prohibits use of residential dwellings as a business
for charging of commercially owned devices for sale or rent.
   (B)   Requires a mandatory UL listing for devices, chargers, and batteries.
   (C)   Battery charging areas/rooms.
      (1)   All charging devices must be plugged directly into an outlet. The
use of a power strip to connect multiple separate devices into one wall outlet
is prohibited.
      (2)   Batteries must maintain minimum separation of 18 inches while
charging unless separated by approved fire-resistant material.
      (3)   Fire alarm is required.
      (4)   Fire safety and evacuation plans are required to be reviewed and
approved by the Fire Marshal’s Office.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
CHAPTER 10: FIRE WATCH
Section
   
7-1001   Requirement for special event fire watch permit
   
7-1002   Fire Department special event fire watch contract
   
7-1003   Fire watch for unprotected structures
§ 7-1001 REQUIREMENT FOR SPECIAL EVENT FIRE WATCH PERMIT.
   A permit is required when in the opinion of the Fire Code Official, it is
essential for public safety in a place of assembly or any other place where
people congregate, because of the number of persons, or the nature of the
performance, exhibition, display, contest, or activity. The owner/agent shall
provide one or more fire watch personnel, as required and approved, to remain
on duty during the times such places are open to the public, or when such
activity is being conducted. Conditions of this permit are as follows:
   (A)   Must have at least one dedicated person with a relief person. This
person must have a means of identifying themselves as an authorized
representative of fire loss prevention.
   (B)   This person shall be familiar with the building and physically able to
walk constantly.
   (C)   Must have keys to all areas of concern.
   (D)   Be trained to identify the fire hazards.
   (E)   Know how to use a fire extinguisher.
   (F)   Know how to initiate the alarm system.
   (G)   Know how to notify the Fire Department.
   (H)   Know the evacuation plan.
   (I)   Check all exits and ensure they are clear and assessable.
   (J)   Must do daily reports consisting of person on duty, times of patrol,
any occurring events, any deficiencies discovered and the corresponding
resolution.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-1002 FIRE DEPARTMENT SPECIAL EVENT FIRE WATCH CONTRACT.
   Should the owner/agent wish to contract with Spring Hill Fire Department for
special event fire watch coverage, notification must be made no sooner than
seven days prior to the event. Owner/agent will be responsible for signing
contract and issuing payment for services rendered as per the City of Spring
Hill fee schedule.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
§ 7-1003 FIRE WATCH FOR UNPROTECTED STRUCTURES.
   If an occupied building’s Fire Department protection system is deemed to be
out of service by the Fire Code Official, Fire Chief or designee the building
owner/manager/responsible party will be required to perform a fire watch. Fire
watch requires the following:
   (A)   Must have at least one dedicated person dedicated to maintaining the
fire watch until the system is placed back online.
   (B)   This person shall be familiar with the building and physically able to
walk constantly.
   (C)   Be trained to identify the fire hazards.
   (D)   Know how to use a fire extinguisher.
   (E)   Know how to initiate the alarm system.
   (F)   Know how to notify the Dire Department.
   (G)   Know the evacuation plan.
   (H)   Check all exits and ensure they are clear and assessable.
   (I)   Must document hourly checks with form provided by the Fire Department
or available on the city website and submit the form via email, fax or hand
deliver to the Fire Marshal’s Office within eight hours of the end of the fire
watch after the system is back in service.
   (J)   Failure to provide documentation of maintained fire watch shall result
in issuance of a fine established in the City of Spring Hill fee schedule.
(Ord. 23-02, passed 3-6-2023; Ord. 23-18, passed 11-20-2023; Ord. 24-16, passed
9-3-2024)
TITLE 8: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      Chapter
         
1.   INTOXICATING LIQUORS
         
2.   BEER
CHAPTER 1: INTOXICATING LIQUORS
Section
   
8-101   Business and the like unlawful, except under certain regulations
   
8-102   Definitions
   
8-103   Reserved
   
8-104   Reserved
   
8-105   Reserved
   
8-106   Proximity to schools, places of worship, and the like
   
8-107   Number of licenses to be determined by population
   
8-108   Reserved
   
8-109   Restrictions on license holders and employees
   
8-110   Display of license
   
8-111   Reserved
   
8-112   Reserved
   
8-113   Reserved
   
8-114   Reserved
   
8-115   Inspection fee
   
8-116   Regulations for purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors
   
8-117   Reserved
   
8-118   Regulation of retail sales
   
8-119   Reserved
   
8-120   Reserved
   
8-121   Violations and penalty
   
8-122   Possession of open containers
   
8-123   Chapter not applicable to beer
   
8-124   Consumption of alcoholic beverages on premise
   
8-125   Privilege tax on retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on
the premises
   
8-126   Annual privilege tax to be paid to the Recorder
   
8-127   City Administrator’s responsibility
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. Title 57
§ 8-101 BUSINESS AND THE LIKE UNLAWFUL, EXCEPT UNDER CERTAIN REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. Title 57, and a referendum held pursuant
thereto in the city, this chapter is enacted.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of selling, storing,
transporting or distributing, or to purchase or possess intoxicating liquor
within the corporate limits of the city, except in accordance with the
provisions of Tenn. Code Ann. Title 57, Ch. 5, and the rules and regulations
promulgated thereunder and as provided in this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 8-101) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-102 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      INTOXICATING LIQUOR or INTOXICATING DRINKS. As defined in this chapter
means and includes wines and every liquid or solid, patented or not, containing
alcohol, spirits, liquor or wine, and capable of being consumed by human beings
but nothing in this chapter shall be construed or defined as including or
relating to the manufacture of beer as defined in Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-101
(b).
      LICENSE. A license issued pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. Title 57, Chapter 3
or 4, and LICENSEE means any person to whom such license has been issued.
      MANUFACTURE. Distilling, rectifying and operating a winery.
      MANUFACTURER. A distiller, vintner and rectifier.
      RETAIL SALE or SALE AT RETAIL. A sale to a consumer or to any person for
any purpose other than for resale.
      RETAILER. Any person who sells at retail any beverage for the sale of
which a license is required under the provisions of this chapter.
      WHOLESALE SALE or SALE AT WHOLESALE. A sale to any person for purposes of
resale.
      WHOLESALER. Any person who sells at wholesale any beverage for the sale
of which a license is required under the provisions of Tenn. Code Ann. Title
57, Ch. 5.
      WINE. The product of the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of
fresh, sound, ripe grapes, with the usual cellar treatment and necessary
additions to correct defects due to climatic, saccharine and seasonal
conditions, including champagne, sparkling and fortified wine of an alcoholic
content not to exceed 21% by volume. No other product shall be called WINE
unless designated by appropriate prefixes descriptive of the fruit or other
product from which it was predominantly produced or an artificial or imitation
wine.
   (B)   Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
the neuter, and the singular shall include the plural.
   (C)   The term “federal license”, as used in this chapter, shall not mean
tax receipt or permit.
   (D)   The term “person” shall include natural person, corporation,
partnership, limited liability company and unincorporated association.
(2011 Code, § 8-102) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-103 RESERVED.
(2011 Code, § 8-103) (Ord. 14-09, passed 4-21-2014)
§ 8-104 RESERVED.
(2011 Code, § 8-104) (Ord. 14-09, passed 4-21-2014)
§ 8-105 RESERVED.
(2011 Code, § 8-105) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-106 PROXIMITY TO SCHOOLS, PLACES OF WORSHIP AND THE LIKE.
   No license shall be granted for the operation of a retail store for the sale
of intoxicating liquor when, the carrying on of such business at the premises
covered by the application for a license is 200 feet to the nearest school,
place of worship, or place of public gathering. The distance to be measured is
straight line from the nearest corner of the store to the nearest corner of the
school, place of worship, or place of public gathering. No permit shall be
suspended, revoked or denied a permit to a business engaged in selling
intoxicating liquor on the basis of the proximity of the business to a school,
residence, church, or other place of public gathering if a valid permit had
been issued to any business on that same location.
(2011 Code, § 8-106) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-107 NUMBER OF LICENSES TO BE DETERMINED BY POPULATION.
   No more than one license may be issued for each 8,000 in population that has
been determined by a certified census count.
(2011 Code, § 8-107) (Ord. 04-28, passed 11- -2004; Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-
2021; Ord. 22-05, passed 3-7-2022)
§ 8-108 RESERVED.
(2011 Code, § 8-108) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-109 RESTRICTIONS ON LICENSE HOLDERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   No retailer's license shall be issued to a person who is a holder of a
public office, either appointive or elective, or who is a public employee,
either national state city or county. It shall be unlawful for any such person
to have any interest in such retail business, directly or indirectly, either
proprietary or by means of any loan mortgage or lien or to participate in the
profits of any such business.
   (B)   Applicants for certificate who have criminal record. No certificate of
good moral character for the manufacture or sale at wholesale or retail of
alcoholic beverages or for the manufacture or vinting of wine shall be issued
to any person (or if the applicant is a partnership, any partner, or if the
applicant is a corporation any stockholder), who, within ten years preceding
the application for such certificate of good moral character, has been
convicted of any felony or of any offense under the laws of the state or of the
United States prohibiting the sale, possession, transportation, storage or
otherwise handling of intoxicating liquors or who has during such period been
engaged in business alone or with others, in violation of such laws.
   (C)   No manufacturer, brewer or wholesaler shall have any interest in the
business or building containing licensed premises of any other person having a
license hereunder, or in the fixture of any such person.
   (D)   No retailer, or any employee thereof, engaged in the sale of
intoxicating liquor shall be a person under the age of 18 years, and it shall
be unlawful for any retailer to employ any person under 18 years of age for the
physical storage, sale or distribution of intoxicating liquor, or to permit any
such person under that age on its place of business to engage in the storage,
sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages.
   (E)   No retailer shall employ, in the storage, sale or distribution of
alcoholic beverages, any person who, within ten years prior to the date of his
or her employment, shall have been convicted of a felony involving moral
turpitude and, in case an employee should be so convicted, he or she shall
immediately be discharged; provided, however that this subsection (E) shall not
apply to any person who has been so convicted, but whose rights of citizenship
have been restored, or judgment of infamy has been removed by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(2011 Code, § 8-109) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-110 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   Any person granted a license to carry on any of the businesses or
undertakings contemplated by this chapter shall, before being qualified to do
business, display and post, and keep in the most conspicuous place on the
premises, such license and shall promptly procure and keep at the place of
business a copy of the rules and regulations promulgated by the commission.
(2011 Code, § 8-110) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-111 RESERVED.
(2011 Code, § 8-111) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-112 RESERVED.
(2011 Code, § 8-112) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-113 RESERVED.
(2011 Code, § 8-113) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-114 RESERVED.
(2011 Code, § 8-114) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-115 INSPECTION FEE.
   The City of Spring Hill hereby imposes an inspection fee in the maximum
amount allowed by Tenn.  Code Ann. § 57-3-501 on all licensed retailers of
alcoholic beverages located within the corporate limits of the city.
(2011 Code, § 8-115) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-116 REGULATIONS FOR PURCHASE AND SALE OF INTOXICATING LIQUORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to buy any
intoxicating liquor from any person who does not hold the appropriate license
under this chapter authorizing the sale of these beverages to him or her.
   (B)   No retailer shall purchase any intoxicating liquor from anyone other
than a licensed wholesaler, nor shall any wholesaler sell any intoxicating
liquor to anyone other than a licensed retailer.
   (C)   No retail store shall be located, except on the ground floor and shall
have one main entrance opening on a public street. It shall have no other
entrance for use by the public, except as hereinafter provided. When a retail
store is located on the corner of two public streets, it may maintain a door
opening on each of the public streets. Any sales room adjoining the lobby of a
hotel or other public building may maintain an additional door into the lobby
so long as it is open to the public. Every retail store shall be provided with
whatever entrances and exits may be required by existing or future municipal
ordinances.
   (D)   No holder of a license for the sale of intoxicating liquor for retail
shall sell, deliver or cause, permit or procure intoxicating liquor to be sold
or delivered on credit.
   (E)   No intoxicating liquor shall be sold for consumption on the premises
of the seller.
   (F)   No form of entertainment, including pinball machines, music machines
or similar devices, shall be permitted to operate upon any premises from which
intoxicating liquors are sold.
   (G)   All advertisement fo the availability of liquor for sale by those
licensed pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. Title 57 Ch. 4, shall be in accordance
with the rules and regulations of the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission.
(2011 Code, § 8-116) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-117 RESERVED.
(2011 Code, § 8-117) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-118 REGULATION OF RETAIL SALES.
   (A)   No retail licensee shall, directly or indirectly hold more than two
retail licenses. In no event shall a retail licensee, directly or indirectly
hold more than 50% of the licenses authorized for issuance in such municipality
or county.
   (B)   No retailer shall sell, lend or give away any intoxicating liquor to
any person who is drunk, nor shall any retailer selling intoxicating liquor
sell, lend or give such to any person accompanied by a person who is drunk.
   (C)   No retailer shall sell, lend or give away any intoxicating liquor to a
person under 21 years of age.
   (D)   No retail store shall sell, give away, or otherwise dispense alcoholic
beverages except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Monday
through Saturday and between 10:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on Sunday.
   (E)   No retailer shall sell, lend or give away any intoxicating liquor on
Christmas, Thanksgiving, or Easter.
   (F)   No retailer shall keep or permit to be kept upon the licensed premises
any alcoholic beverages in any unsealed bottles or other unsealed containers.
(2011 Code, § 8-118) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-119 RESERVED.
(2011 Code, § 8-119) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-120 RESERVED.
(2011 Code, § 8-120) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-121 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTY.
   Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a civil offense and shall,
upon conviction, be punishable by a penalty under the general penalty provision
of this code. Upon conviction of any person under this chapter it shall be
mandatory for the city/town judge to immediately certify the conviction,
whether on appeal or not, to the Tennessee Alcoholic Beverage Commission.
(2011 Code, § 8-121) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-122 POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINERS.
   Visible possession of intoxicating liquors in an unsealed container upon any
public street or within any governmental building shall be a violation of this
chapter.
(2011 Code, § 8-122) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-123 CHAPTER NOT APPLICABLE TO BEER.
   No provision of this chapter shall be considered or construed as in any way
modifying, changing or restricting the rules and regulations governing the
sale, storage, transportation and the like or tax upon beer, as defined and
regulated by Ch. 2 of this title.
(2011 Code, § 8-123) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-124 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ON-PREMISE.
   Tenn. Code Ann. Title 57, Ch. 4 inclusive is hereby adopted so as to be
applicable to all sales of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption
which are regulated by said code when such sales are conducted within the
corporate limits of the City of Spring Hill, Tennessee. It is the intent of the
City Board of Mayor and Aldermen that Tenn. Code Ann. Title 57, Ch. 4, Tenn.
Code Ann. § 57-3-404(f) and Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-3-208(g) 8-5 inclusive, shall
be effective in the City of Spring Hill, Tennessee, the same as if said code
sections were copied herein verbatim.
(Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-125 PRIVILEGE TAX ON RETAIL SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES FOR CONSUMPTION ON
PREMISES.
   Pursuant to the authority contained in Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-4-301, there is
hereby levied a privilege tax (in the same amounts levied by Tenn. Code Ann.
Title 57, Ch. 4, § 301, for the City of Spring Hill Tennessee to be paid
annually as provided in the chapter, upon any person, firm, corporation, joint
stock company, syndicate or association engaging in the business of selling at
retail in the City of Spring Hill, Tennessee of alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises where sold.
(2011 Code, § 8-124) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-126 ANNUAL PRIVILEGE TAX TO BE PAID TO THE RECORDER.
   Annual privilege tax to be paid to the recorder. Any person, firm
corporation, joint stock company, syndicate or association exercising the
privilege of selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in the
City of Spring Hill Tennessee shall remit annually to the recorder the
appropriate tax described in § 8-124. Such payments shall be remitted not less
than 30 days following the end of each 12- month period from the original date
of the license. Upon the transfer of ownership of such business or the
discontinuance of such business said tax shall be filed within 30 days
following such event. Any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company,
syndicate, or association failing to make payment of the appropriate tax when
due shall be subject to the penalty provided by law.
(Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-127 CITY ADMINISTRATOR’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   It shall be the responsibility of the City Administrator to ensure that the
city receives and distributes proceeds in accordance with Tennessee Code.
(2011 Code, § 8-125) (Ord. 21-30, passed 12-20-2021)
CHAPTER 2: BEER
Section
   
8-201   Purpose of chapter
   
8-202   Beer business subject to regulation
   
8-203   “Beer” defined
   
8-204   Beer Board established
   
8-205   Meetings of the Beer Board
   
8-206   Record of Beer Board proceedings to be kept
   
8-207   Requirements for Beer Board quorum and action
   
8-208   Powers and duties of the Beer Board
   
8-209   Permit required for engaging in the beer business; term of permit
   
8-210   Restrictions on granting permits
   
8-211   Application forms; effect of false statements or misrepresentation
therein
   
8-212   Application requirements
   
8-213   Beer permits to be restrictive
   
8-214   Permits not transferable
   
8-215   Display of permit
   
8-216   Restrictions on permits that would cause congestion or interfere with
public health, safety and morals
   
8-217   Further restrictions on the issuance of permits
   
8-218   Issuance of permits to hotels, clubs and the like
   
8-219   Sanitation for the premises of the permit holder
   
8-220   Minors, fraudulent evidence of purchase in behalf of a minor by third
person and the like
   
8-221   Investigation of applicants, agents and/or employees
   
8-222   Prohibited conduct or activities by beer permit holders
   
8-223   Suspension and revocation of beer permits
   
8-224   City business license
   
8-225   Reserved
   
8-226   Civil penalty in lieu of revocation or suspension
   
8-227   Employees liable for violations
   
8-228   Notice to be given of permit suspension or revocation
   
8-229   Application fee for sale of beer
   
8-230   Privilege tax
Statutory reference:
   For a leading case on a municipality’s authority to regulate beer, see the
Tennessee Supreme Court decision in Watkins v. Naifeh, 635 S.W.2d 104 (1982)
§ 8-201 PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter is adopted to regulate the sale of beer or other beverages of
like content, as herein defined, within the corporate limits of the city.
(2011 Code, § 8-201) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-202 BEER BUSINESS SUBJECT TO REGULATION.
   It shall hereafter be lawful to transport, store, sell, distribute, possess,
receive or manufacture beer of alcoholic content of not more than such weight,
volume or alcoholic content as provided by the laws of the state, or any other
beverages of like alcoholic content, within the corporate limits of the city,
subject to all of the regulations, limitations and restrictions hereinafter
provided and subject to the rules and regulations promulgated by authorized
public officials or boards.
(2011 Code, § 8-202) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-203 “BEER” DEFINED.
   The term BEER, as used in this chapter, shall be the same definition
appearing in Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-101.
(2011 Code, § 8-203) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-204 BEER BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Beer Board to be composed of three
residents of the city over the age of 21 years who shall be appointed by the
Mayor and approved by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. The members of said
Board shall hold office for one year or until their successors are appointed
and qualified.
   (B)   Until such time as members are appointed to the Beer Board as herein
provided, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall serve as the Beer Board.
(2011 Code, § 8-204) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-205 MEETINGS OF THE BEER BOARD.
   All meetings of the Beer Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall
hold meetings as set by the Beer Board or its Chairperson (or Mayor until
members are appointed to the Board). A special meeting of the Beer Board may be
called by its Chairperson; provided, he or she gives reasonable notice  thereof
to each Board member, and the Board may adjourn a meeting at any time to
another time and place.
(2011 Code, § 8-205) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-206 RECORD OF BEER BOARD PROCEEDINGS TO BE KEPT.
   The Recorder shall act as Secretary and shall attend all meetings of the
Beer Board. This Secretary shall make a record of the proceedings of the Beer
Board which shall be a public record and shall contain the dates of meetings;
the names of the members present and absent; in cases of hearings before the
Beer Board, a record of evidence introduced and testimony heard before the
Board; the provision of each permit issued by the Board as to whether it is a
permit for sale for off-premises consumption or for sale for on- premises
consumption. The Secretary shall also maintain a current list of the names and
addresses of all holders of beer permits.
(2011 Code, § 8-206) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-207 REQUIREMENTS FOR BEER BOARD QUORUM AND ACTION.
   The attendance of at least a majority of the members of the Board shall be
required to constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business.
Matters before the Board shall be decided by a majority of the members present
if a quorum is constituted. Any member present, but not voting, shall be deemed
to have cast a “nay” vote.
(2011 Code, § 8-207) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-208 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BEER BOARD.
   (A)   The Beer Board shall have the power and it is hereby directed to
regulate the selling, storing for sale, distributing for sale and manufacturing
of beer within this municipality in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   The Beer Board is hereby given broad powers of investigation, and it
shall have the authority to inspect the premises of any applicant and, at all
reasonable hours, may investigate the premises of all permit holders.
(2011 Code, § 8-208) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-209 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ENGAGING IN THE BEER BUSINESS; TERM OF PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall engage in the storing, selling, distributing or
manufacturing of beer or other beverages of like alcoholic content within the
corporate limits of the city until he or she shall
receive a permit to do so from the Beer Board of the city. The permit shall, at
all times, be subject to all of the limitations and restriction herein
provided.
      (2)   Also, the applicant shall certify that he or she has read and is
familiar with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued for a longer period than one year, but the
Board may issue a permit for a shorter period if, in its discretion, it deems
proper. In no event shall a permit be issued without its approval by a majority
of the Beer Board.
   (C)   All permits in existence on 1-1-1992 shall expire on the next
anniversary date of their issuance.
   (D)   Each new applicant for a permit to sell beer within the city limits
shall be required to pay an application fee of $250 to the Recorder. No portion
of this fee shall be refunded to the applicant whether the application is
approved or denied.
(2011 Code, § 8-209) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-210 RESTRICTIONS ON GRANTING PERMITS.
   (A)   No permit shall be issued to sell any beverage coming within the
provisions of this chapter:
      (1)   In violation of any provisions of the state law or of this chapter,
or any amendments thereto; and/or
      (2)   In violation of the Zoning Ordinance of the city.
   (B)   The judgment of the Beer Board on such matters shall be final, except
as same is subject to review under Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-105.
(2011 Code, § 8-210) (Ord. 03-28, passed 10- -2003; Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-
2021)
§ 8-211 APPLICATION FORMS; EFFECT OF FALSE STATEMENTS OR MISREPRESENTATION
THEREIN.
   (A)   No permit shall be issued, except upon an application in writing
submitted to the Board.
   (B)   The application shall be on proper forms furnished by the Recorder,
shall be sworn to by the applicant and, for applications of natural persons,
verified by the affidavit of two respectable citizens who are acquainted with
the applicant. Any misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application upon which a permit is issued shall subject said permit to
immediate revocation upon a hearing after notice as provided below issued upon
a proper complaint charging that there has been a misrepresentation or false
statement in said application.
   (C)   At such hearing, the burden of proof shall be upon the holder of the
permit to establish the truth of each statement and representation made in his
or her application.
(2011 Code, § 8-211) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-212 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Each application must explicitly and affirmatively state:
      (1)   The location of the premises at which the business shall be
conducted;
      (2)   The owner or owners of such premises and the terms of any lease or
agreement pertaining thereto;
      (3)   The names and addresses of all other persons or firms who have any
financial interests whatsoever in the beer business proposed to be established;
      (4)   Whether the applicant will operate the business in person or by
agent and, if by agent, the name and address of such agent;
      (5)   No person will be employed in the storage, sale or manufacture of
such beverages who has been convicted within the past ten years of any law
against possession, sale, manufacture or transportation of intoxicating liquor
or any crime involving moral turpitude;
      (6)   The applicant will not engage in the sale of such beverages, except
at the place or places for which the Beer Board has issued a permit or permits
to such applicant;
      (7)   No sale of such beverages will be made, except in accordance with
the permit granted;
      (8)   If the application is for a permit to sell for consumption off the
premises, that no sale shall be made for consumption on the premises and that
no consumption will be allowed on the premises thereof;
      (9)   No sale will be made to minors, and that the applicant will not
permit minors or disorderly, intoxicated or disreputable persons to loiter
around the place of business;
      (10)   The applicant will be responsible for any gambling on its premises
and its permit subject to revocation by reason of the same. The applicant will
not allow, nor has allowed, its place of business to become a public nuisance
or a nuisance to law enforcing agencies of the city, nor that it has, or will,
create a nuisance;
      (11)   The applicant has secured a certificate or statement from the
Chief of Police or other officially designated official that the premises which
the application covers meets the requirements of this chapter. Such certificate
or statement must be attached to the original application; and
      (12)   The applicant has not had his or her license revoked in the past
year.
   (B)   No application shall be acted upon by the Board unless:
      (1)   The application is submitted to the City Recorder at least 20 days
prior to the Beer Board meeting at which it is to be considered unless said
period is waived by the Beer Board. The Recorder shall, within 20 days after
receipt of an application, notify each member of the Beer Board of such
application; and
      (2)   The application shall be reviewed by the City Attorney or City
Administrator to assure compliance with all questions required by a city
ordinance or state law governing the issuance of permits or the applications
therefor.
(2011 Code, § 8-212) (Ord. 03-28, passed 10- -2003; Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-
2021)
§ 8-213 BEER PERMITS TO BE RESTRICTIVE.
   (A)   All beer permits shall be restrictive as to the type of beer business
authorized under them and separate permits shall be required for:
      (1)   Selling at retail;
      (2)   Selling at retail where dancing is allowed;
      (3)   Storing;
      (4)   Distributing; and
      (5)   Manufacturing.
   (B)   Beer permits for the retail sale of beer may be further restricted by
the Beer Board so as to authorize sales only for:
      (1)   On-premises consumption; or
      (2)   Off-premises consumption.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any beer permit holder to engage in any type
or phase of the beer business not expressly authorized by his or her permit or
application therefor.
(2011 Code, § 8-213) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-214 PERMITS NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   (A)   Beer permits shall not be transferable from one person to another or
from one location to another.
   (B)   A new permit is required in the manner provided herein when a holder
disposes of his or her business or transfers to another location.
(2011 Code, § 8-214) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-215 DISPLAY OF PERMIT.
   The permit required by this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place
on the premises of the permit holder, together with all other permits, licenses
and stamps as required by law.
(2011 Code, § 8-215) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-216 RESTRICTIONS ON PERMITS THAT WOULD CAUSE CONGESTION OR INTERFERE WITH
PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY AND MORALS.
   (A)   No permit authorizing the sale of beer will be issued when such
business is within 200 feet, measured from the nearest building corner of the
premises to the nearest building corner of any schools.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued which would interfere with the public
health, safety and morals, or would cause congestion of traffic.
(2011 Code, § 8-216) (Ord. 09-21, passed 6- -2009; Ord. 12-17, passed 8-20-
2012; Ord. 21-22, passed 12- 20-2021))
§ 8-217 FURTHER RESTRICTIONS ON THE ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   (A)   No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of
violating laws against possession, sale, manufacture or transportation of
intoxicating liquors or any crime involving moral turpitude within the past ten
years.
   (B)   The Board, in its discretion, may refuse to issue a permit for any
place of business which in the period immediately preceding the application for
a permit, was operated in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or which
was operated in such a manner as to materially contribute with places of like
character in its vicinity in the creation or maintaining of a public nuisance.
   (C)   In determining whether a permit shall be issued, the Board shall
consider the character of the neighborhood, the space available for building,
space available for off-street parking and the effect of the business on
neighboring users.
(2011 Code, § 8-217) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-218 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS TO HOTELS, CLUBS AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be lawful for the Beer Board to issue a permit, for the sale of any
beverage coming within the provisions of this chapter, to bona fide
restaurants, hotels, motels, clubs or lodges, subject to the limitations and
restrictions contained in state law, and the rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder, and subject to all the limitations and restrictions contained in
the permit provided for by this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 8-218) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-219 SANITATION FOR THE PREMISES OF THE PERMIT HOLDER.
   The premises of the permit holder shall be defined as the lot or property
under control of the permit holder, both inside the building and outside the
building. The permit holder shall be responsible for the sanitation of the
premises including refuse storage, both inside and outside the building,
lavatory facilities and general cleanliness of the grounds and structure. The
Chief of Police, the Mayor, the City Administrator or any properly authorized
person is hereby authorized to enter the premises at all reasonable hours for
the making of such inspections as may be necessary. The determination of the
sanitary conditions is solely a question for the city.
(2011 Code, § 8-219) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-220 MINORS, FRAUDULENT EVIDENCE OF PURCHASE IN BEHALF OF A MINOR BY THIRD
PERSON AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor to purchase, attempt to purchase or
to possess any such beverage covered under this chapter, or for anyone to
purchase such beverage for a minor. It shall be unlawful for any minor to
present or offer to the holder of a permit, his or her agent or employee, any
written evidence of his or her age which is false, fraudulent or not actually
his or her own, for the purpose of purchasing or attempting to purchase such
beverages.
   (B)   Any person who acts in violation of any one or more of the provisions
of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and if 18 years of age
or more shall, upon conviction, be subject to a penalty under the general
penalty clause for this code; if 17 years of age or less, he or she shall be
taken before the juvenile judge for appropriate proceedings.
(2011 Code, § 8-220) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-221 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANTS, AGENTS AND/OR EMPLOYEES.
   Applicants for, and holders of, retail permits under this chapter and their
agents or employees are subject to be investigated by any municipal, county or
state authorities, including members of the Beer Board, and must submit such
information and records as the Beer Board may require.
(2011 Code, § 8-221) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-222 PROHIBITED CONDUCT OR ACTIVITIES BY BEER PERMIT HOLDERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any beer permit holder to:
   (A)   Employ any person who, within the previous ten years, has been
convicted of any law against possession, sale, manufacture or transportation of
intoxicating liquors or any crime involving moral turpitude;
   (B)   Employ any minor in the sale or dispensing of beer at retail for
consumption on the premises. The holder of a beer permit shall be held strictly
accountable for the violation of this provision and the burden of ascertaining
the age of any minor shall be upon the holder and operator of such place of
business;
   (C)   Make or allow any sale of beer, or make, cause or allow to be made any
gift thereof, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. during any night of
the week and the hours of 3:01 a.m. and 12:00 on Sunday;
   (D)   Allow any loud, unusual or obnoxious noises to emanate from his or her
premises;
   (E)   Make or allow any sale of beer, or make, cause or allow to be made any
gift thereof to a minor, or permit such sale by any employee or any person in
any way connected with his or her place of business. The holder of a beer
permit shall be held strictly accountable for the violation of this provision
and the burden of ascertaining the age of any customer shall be upon the owner
or operator of such place of business and he or she shall be held strictly
accountable for all acts of his or her employees;
   (F)   Allow any minor to loiter in his or her place of business. The burden
of ascertaining the age of any person shall be upon the owner or operator of
such place of business and he or she shall be held strictly accountable for any
actions of his or her employees for the violation of this provision;
   (G)   Make or allow any sale of beer, or make, cause or allow to be made any
gift thereof, to any intoxicated person;
   (H)   Allow drunk or intoxicated persons to loiter on his or her premises;
   (I)   Allow dancing on his or her premises unless specified in his or her
license application;
   (J)   Fail to provide and maintain adequate separate sanitary toilet
facilities for men and women;
   (K)   Allow any sale or delivery of beer for consumption on the premises
outside of the building occupied by the holder of the permit. Any sales for
consumption on the premises, but outside of the building from which the
business is operated, shall be made from within the building, it being the
intention of this provision to prohibit the sale of beer by what are commonly
called “curb sales”; and/or
   (L)   Allow its business to operate in such a way as to create any of the
conditions described in §§
8-216 or
8-217 of this chapter or to violate any of the prohibitions set forth therein.
(2011 Code, § 8-222) (Ord. 03-28, passed - -2003; Ord. 07-26, passed 8- -2007;
Ord. 11-08, passed 6-20-2011; Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-223 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF BEER PERMITS.
   (A)   (1)   All permits issued by the Beer Board under the provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to suspension or revocation by the Beer Board
when the holder thereof is guilty of making false statement or
misrepresentation in his application or for the violation of any provision of
the state beer laws, or any provision of this chapter. However, no beer permit
shall be revoked or suspended until a public hearing is held by the Beer Board
after reasonable notice to all the known parties in interest. Suspension or
revocation proceedings may be initiated by any interested person, by the Chief
of Police or any member of the police force of the city, the City Administrator
or by any member of the Beer Board of the city.
      (2)   The Board is vested with full and complete power to investigate any
charges against any permit holder and to cite any permit holder to appear and
show cause why his or her permit should not be suspended or revoked.
   (B)   Complaints filed against any permit holder for the purpose of
suspending or revoking his or her permit shall be made in writing and filed
with the Secretary to the Board. When the Chairperson of the Beer Board shall
have reason to believe that any permit holder shall have violated the
provisions of the state’s Beer Act or any of the provisions of this chapter,
the Chairperson of the Beer Board is authorized to notify the permit holder of
said violations, and to cite said permit holder by written notice to appear and
show cause why his or her permit should not be suspended or revoked for such
violations at a special or regular meeting of the Beer Board. The notice to
appear and show cause shall state the alleged violations charged and shall be
served upon the permit holder either by registered letter or by a member of the
Police Department of the city. The notice shall be served upon the permit
holder at least five days before the date of the hearing. The permit holder is
required to be present in person to answer the charges and the failure of the
permit holder to appear in person will result in the immediate suspension of
the beer permit until such time as the permit holder does appear before the
Beer Board in person. At the hearing, the Board shall publicly hear the
evidence both in support of the charges and on behalf of the permit holder.
After such hearing, the Board may, in its discretion, suspend or revoke said
permit. The action of the Board in all such hearings shall be final, subject to
review by the courts as provided in the state’s Beer Law.
   (C)   At any hearing held pursuant to this chapter for the suspension or
revocation of a beer permit, the hearing shall be broad in character and
evidence may be heard upon any facts or circumstances pertinent to or
applicable to the charges made in the complaint.
   (D)   Pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-608, the Beer Board shall not
revoke or suspend the permit of a "responsible vendor" qualified under the
requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. § 57-5-606 for a clerk's illegal sale of beer
to a minor if the clerk is properly certified and has attended annual meetings
since the clerk's original certification, unless the vendor's status as a
certified responsible vendor has been revoked by the alcoholic beverage
commission. If the responsible vendor's certification has been revoked, the
vendor shall be punished by the Beer Board as if the vendor were not certified
as a responsible vendor. "Clerk" means any person working in a capacity to sell
beer directly to consumers for off-premises consumption. Under Tenn. Code Ann.
§ 57-5-608, the alcoholic beverage commission shall revoke a vendor's status as
a responsible vendor upon notification by the Beer Board that the board has
made a final determination that the vendor has sold beer to a minor for the
second time in a consecutive 12-month period. The revocation shall be for three
years.
(2011 Code, § 8-223) (Ord. 04-10, passed 5- -2004; Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-
2021)
§ 8-224 CITY BUSINESS LICENSE.
   Each applicant granted a permit to sell any beverage coming within the
provisions of this chapter shall, before engaging in such sale, secure from the
City Recorder a city business license as provided in the Tennessee Code
Annotated.
(2011 Code, § 8-224) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-225 RESERVED.
(2011 Code, § 8-225) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-226 CIVIL PENALTY IN LIEU OF REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   (A)   The Beer Board may, at the time it imposes a revocation or suspension,
offer a permit holder that is not a responsible vendor the alternative of
paying a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500 for each  offense of making or
permitting to be made any sales to minors, or a civil penalty not to exceed
$1,000 for any other offense.
   (B)   The Beer Board may impose on a responsible vendor a civil penalty not
to exceed $1,000 for each offense of making or permitting to be made any sales
to minors, or for any other offense.
   (C)   If a civil penalty is offered as an alternative to revocation or
suspension, the holder shall have seven days within which to pay the civil
penalty before the revocation or suspension shall be imposed. If the civil
penalty is paid within that time, the revocation or suspension shall be deemed
withdrawn. Payment of the civil penalty in lieu of suspension or revocation by
a permit holder shall be an admission by the holder of the violation so charged
and shall be paid to the exclusion of any other penalty that the city may
impose.
(2011 Code, § 8-226) (Ord. 02-34, passed 10- -2002; Ord. 06-37, passed 5- -
2006; Ord. 21-22, passed 12- 20-2021)
§ 8-227 EMPLOYEES LIABLE FOR VIOLATIONS.
   Any employee of any permit holder who violates the provisions of this
chapter or any provision of the state’s Beer Act while so employed by such
permit holder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be punishable under
the general penalty clause for this code.
(2011 Code, § 8-227) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-228 NOTICE TO BE GIVEN OF PERMIT SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION.
   The Board shall cause the Secretary to notify the Chief of Police and all
interested wholesalers of the suspension or revocation of any permit.
(2011 Code, § 8-228) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-229 APPLICATION FEE FOR SALE OF BEER.
   All new applicants for a beer permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall
pay to the city the sum of $250 for use in offsetting the expenses of
investigating the applicant to determine whether a permit shall be issued.
Regardless of whether the permit is approved or denied, any portion of the fee
collected in excess of that actually used in the investigation shall become the
property of the city at the end of each calendar year and shall be used at the
discretion of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the city. Any applicant for a
renewal of an existing permit shall not be required to pay this fee. Any
application for a change in location shall be required to pay this fee.
(2011 Code, § 8-229) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
§ 8-230 PRIVILEGE TAX.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed on the business of selling, distributing,
storing or manufacturing beer within the city an annual privilege tax of $100.
Any person, firm, corporation, joint stock company, syndicate or association
engaged in the sale, distribution, storage or manufacture of beer shall remit
this fee on 1-1-1994, and each successive January 1 thereafter, to the Recorder
of the city. At the time a new permit is issued to any business subject to this
tax, the permit holder shall be required to pay the privilege tax on a prorated
basis for each month or portion thereof remaining until the next tax payment
date.
   (B)   The privilege tax hereby imposed shall be addition to any and all
other privilege taxes to which the holder of beer permits are subject.
(2011 Code, § 8-230) (Ord. 21-22, passed 12-20-2021)
TITLE 9: BUSINESS, PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND THE LIKE
      Chapter
         
1.   MISCELLANEOUS
         
2.   PEDDLERS AND THE LIKE
         
3.   CHARITABLE SOLICITORS
         
4.   TAXICABS
         
5.   CABLE TELEVISION
         
6.   LICENSING AND REGULATION OF ADULT BUSINESS
         
7.   HOTEL OR MOTEL OCCUPANCY PRIVILEGE TAX
CHAPTER 1: MISCELLANEOUS
Section
   
9-101   “Going out of business” sales
§ 9-101 “GOING OUT OF BUSINESS” SALES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person falsely to represent a sale as being a
“going out of business” sale. A GOING OUT OF BUSINESS sale, for the purposes of
this section, shall be a fire sale, bankrupt sale, loss of lease sale or any
other sale made in anticipation of the termination of a business at its present
location. When any person, after advertising a “going out of business” sale,
adds to his or her stock or fails to go out of business within 90 days, he or
she shall prima facie be deemed to have violated this section.
(2011 Code, § 9-101)
CHAPTER 2: PEDDLERS AND THE LIKE
Section
   
9-201   Permit required
   
9-202   Exemptions
   
9-203   Application for permit
   
9-204   Issuance or refusal of permit
   
9-205   Appeal
   
9-206   Bond
   
9-207   Loud noises and speaking devices
   
9-208   Use of streets
   
9-209   Exhibition of permit
   
9-210   Police officers to enforce
   
9-211   Revocation or suspension of permit
   
9-212   Reapplication
   
9-213   Expiration and renewal of permit
   
9-214   Temporary and transient vendors or peddlers
§ 9-201 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, canvasser, solicitor or
transient merchant to ply his or her trade within the corporate limits without
first obtaining a permit therefor in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   No permit shall be used at any time by any person other than the one
to whom it is issued.
(2011 Code, § 9-201)
§ 9-202 EXEMPTIONS.
   The terms of this chapter shall not be applicable to persons selling at
wholesale to dealers, nor to newsboys, nor to bona fide merchants who merely
deliver goods in the regular course of business, nor to bona fide charitable,
religious, patriotic or philanthropic organizations.
(2011 Code, § 9-202)
§ 9-203 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   Applicants for a permit under this chapter must file with the City
Recorder a sworn written application containing the following:
      (1)   Name and physical description of applicant;
      (2)   Complete permanent home address and local address of the applicant
and, in the case of transient merchants, the local address from which proposed
sales will be made;
      (3)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold;
      (4)   If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with
credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship;
      (5)   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;
      (6)   A recent clear photograph approximately two inches square showing
the head and shoulders of the applicant;
      (7)   The names of at least two reputable local property owners who will
certify as to the applicant’s good moral reputation and business
responsibility, or in lieu of the names of references, such other available
evidence as will enable an investigator to evaluate properly the applicant’s
moral reputation and business responsibility;
      (8)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted
of any crime or misdemeanor or for violating any municipal ordinance and, if
so, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor;
and
      (9)   The last three cities or towns, if that many, where applicant
carried on business immediately preceding the date of application and, in the
case of transient merchants, the addresses from which such business was
conducted in those municipalities.
   (B)   At the time of filing the application, a fee of $10 shall be paid to
the city to cover the cost of investigating the facts stated therein.
(2011 Code, § 9-203)
§ 9-204 ISSUANCE OR REFUSAL OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Each application shall be referred to the Chief of Police for
investigation. The Chief shall report his or her findings to the City Recorder
within 72 hours.
   (B)   If, as a result of such investigation, the Chief reports the
applicant’s moral reputation and/or business responsibility to be
unsatisfactory the City Recorder shall notify the applicant that his or her
application is disapproved and that no permit will be issued.
   (C)   If, on the other hand, the Chief’s report indicates that the moral
reputation and business responsibility of the applicant are satisfactory, the
City Recorder shall issue a permit upon the payment of all applicable privilege
taxes and the filing of the bond required by §
9-206 of this chapter. The City Recorder shall keep a permanent record of all
permits issued.
(2011 Code, § 9-204)
§ 9-205 APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police and/or the City
Recorder in the denial of a permit shall have the right to appeal to the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Mayor
within 14 days after notice of the action complained of, a written statement
setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Mayor shall set a time and
place for a hearing on such appeal and notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be given to the appellant. The notice shall be in writing and
shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the applicant at his or her last known
address at least five days prior to the date set for hearing, or shall be
delivered by a police officer in the same manner as a summons at least three
days prior to the date set for hearing.
(2011 Code, § 9-205)
§ 9-206 BOND.
   Every permittee shall file with the City Recorder a surety bond running to
the city in the amount of $1,000. The bond shall be conditioned that the
permittee shall comply fully with all the provisions of the ordinances of the
city and the statutes of the state regulating peddlers, canvassers, solicitors,
transient merchants, itinerant merchants or itinerant vendors, as the case may
be, and shall guarantee to any citizen of the city that all money paid as a
down payment will be accounted for and applied according to the representations
of the permittee, and further guaranteeing to any citizen of the city doing
business with said permittee that the property purchased will be delivered
according to the representations of the permittee. Action on such bond may be
brought by any person aggrieved and for whose benefit, among others, the bond
is given. The surety may be relieved without costs of all further liability by
paying, pursuant to order of the court, the face amount of the bond to the
clerk of the court in which the suit is commenced.
(2011 Code, § 9-206)
§ 9-207 LOUD NOISES AND SPEAKING DEVICES.
   No permittee, nor any person in his or her behalf, shall shout, cry out,
blow a horn, ring a bell or use any sound amplifying device upon any of the
sidewalks, streets, alleys, parks or other public places of the city or upon
private premises where sound of sufficient volume is emitted or produced
therefrom to be capable of being plainly heard upon the adjacent sidewalks,
streets, alleys, parks or other public places, for the purpose of attracting
attention to any goods, wares or merchandise which such permittee proposes to
sell.
(2011 Code, § 9-207)
§ 9-208 USE OF STREETS.
   No permittee shall have any location in the public streets, nor shall any be
permitted a stationary location thereon, nor shall any be permitted to operate
in a congested area where the operation might impede or inconvenience the
public use of the streets. For the purpose of this chapter, the judgment of a
police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to
whether the area is congested and the public impeded or inconvenienced.
(2011 Code, § 9-208)
§ 9-209 EXHIBITION OF PERMIT.
   Permittees are required to exhibit their permits at the request of any
police officer or citizen.
(2011 Code, § 9-209)
§ 9-210 POLICE OFFICERS TO ENFORCE.
   It shall be the duty of all police officer to see that the provisions of
this chapter are enforced.
(2011 Code, § 9-210)
§ 9-211 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by
the Board of Mayor and Aldermen after notice and hearing, for any of the
following causes:
      (1)   Fraud, misrepresentation or incorrect statement contained in the
application for permit, or made in the course of carrying on the business of
solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient merchant, itinerant merchant or
itinerant vendor;
      (2)   Any violation of this chapter;
      (3)   Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor; and
      (4)   Conducting the business of peddler, canvasser, solicitor, transient
merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor, as the case may be, in an
unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or
to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.
   (B)   Notice of the hearing for revocation of a permit shall be given by the
City Recorder in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint
and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed to the permittee
at his or her last known address at least five days prior to the date set for
hearing, or it shall be delivered by a police officer in the same manner as a
summons at least three days prior to the date set for hearing.
   (C)   The Mayor may suspend a permit pending the revocation hearing where he
or she deems it reasonably necessary in the public interest.
(2011 Code, § 9-211)
§ 9-212 REAPPLICATION.
   No permittee whose permit has been revoked shall make further application
until a period of at least six months has elapsed since the last revocation.
(2011 Code, § 9-212)
§ 9-213 EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL OF PERMIT.
   Permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on the same
date that the permittee’s privilege license expires and shall be renewed
without cost if the permittee applies for and obtains a new privilege license
within 30 days thereafter. Permits issued to permittees who are not subject to
a privilege tax shall be issued for one year. An application for a renewal
shall be made substantially in the same form as an original application.
However, only so much of the application shall be completed as is necessary to
reflect conditions which have changed since the last application was filed.
(2011 Code, § 9-213)
§ 9-214 TEMPORARY AND TRANSIENT VENDORS OR PEDDLERS.
   (A)   (1)   A TRANSIENT VENDOR is hereby defined to be an individual who is
not a resident of the city who intends to offer for sale goods or services
within the city. A TEMPORARY VENDOR is hereby defined to be an individual who
intends to offer goods or services for sale within the city only for special
events or on an infrequent basis.
      (2)   In addition to all of the other requirements of this chapter,
either of such vendors shall be required to cause the bond required under §
9-206 of this chapter to contain an additional condition that the permittee
shall remove all debris and refuse from the area occupied by such permittee in
conducting its sales or other activities.
      (3)   In the event such permittee is unable to post this bond, it may in
lieu thereof deposit the sum of $100 with the City Recorder, which will be
returned to such permittee ten days after the vendor ceases to operate within
the city if, at that time, the Chief of Police certifies that all of the
conditions of this section and §
9-206 of this chapter have been satisfied.
   (B)   In addition to all other fees, any such permittee shall likewise
deposit the sum of $10 for each day that it intends to be engaged in business
within the city.
(2011 Code, § 9-214)
CHAPTER 3: CHARITABLE SOLICITORS
Section
   
9-301   Permit required
   
9-302   Prerequisites for a permit
   
9-303   Denial of a permit
   
9-304   Exhibition of permit
   
9-305   Aggressive panhandling prohibited
§ 9-301 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall solicit contributions or anything else of value for any real
or alleged charitable or religious purpose without a permit from the City
Recorder authorizing such solicitation. This section shall not apply to any
locally established organization or church operated exclusively for charitable
or religious purposes if the solicitations are conducted exclusively among the
members thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for making such
solicitations, or if the solicitations are in the form of collections or
contributions at the regular assemblies of any such established organization or
church.
(2011 Code, § 9-301)
§ 9-302 PREREQUISITES FOR A PERMIT.
   The Recorder shall issue a permit authorizing charitable or religious
solicitations when, after a reasonable investigation, he or she finds the
following facts to exist:
   (A)   The applicant has a good character and reputation for honesty and
integrity or, if the applicant is not an individual person, that every member,
managing officer or agent of the applicant has a good character or reputation
for honesty and integrity;
   (B)   The control and supervision of the solicitation will be under
responsible and reliable persons;
   (C)   The applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or
enterprise;
   (D)   The solicitation will not be a fraud on the public but will be for a
bona fide charitable or religious purpose; and
   (E)   The solicitation is prompted solely by a desire to finance the
charitable cause described by the applicant.
(2011 Code, § 9-302)
§ 9-303 DENIAL OF A PERMIT.
   Any applicant for a permit to make charitable or religious solicitations may
appeal to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen if he or she has not been granted a
permit within 15 days after he or she makes application therefor.
(2011 Code, § 9-303)
§ 9-304 EXHIBITION OF PERMIT.
   Any solicitor required by this chapter to have a permit shall exhibit such
permit at the request of any police officer or person solicited.
(2011 Code, § 9-304)
§ 9-305 AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section, PANHANDLING means any vocal solicitation,
bodily gestures or written signs made in person upon any street, public place
or park in the city, in which a person requests an immediate donation of money
or other gratuity from another person.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling on any day
between one-half hour before sunset and one-half hour before sunrise.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling when either
the panhandler or the person being solicited is located at any of the following
locations:
      (1)   At a bus stop;
      (2)   In a public transportation vehicle or public transportation
facility;
      (3)   In a vehicle which is parked or stopped on a public street or
alley;
      (4)   In a sidewalk café;
      (5)   Within 100 feet in any direction from an automatic teller machine
or entrance to a bank; or
      (6)   Any panhandling, or other solicitation, which may impede the normal
flow of traffic.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling in an
aggressive manner, including any of the following:
      (1)   Touching the solicited person without the solicited person’s
consent;
      (2)   Panhandling a person while such person is standing in line and
waiting to be admitted to a commercial establishment;
      (3)   Blocking the path of a person being solicited or the entrance to
any building or vehicle;
      (4)   Following behind, ahead or alongside a person who walks away from
the panhandler after being solicited;
      (5)   Using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation
or following a refusal to make a donation or making any statement, gesture or
other communication which would cause a reasonable person to be intimidated or
placed in fear;
      (6)   Panhandling in a group of two or more persons; or
      (7)   Panhandling within 25 feet of the entrance or exit of any building
open to the public, including commercial buildings.
   (E)   Each act of panhandling prohibited by this section shall constitute a
separate violation of this code. Each violation shall be punishable as provided
in the general penalty section of this code.
(Ord. 13-12, passed 5-20-2013; Ord. 13-29, passed 11-18-2013)
CHAPTER 4: TAXICABS
Section
   
9-401   Taxicab franchise and privilege license required
   
9-402   Requirements as to application and hearing
   
9-403   Liability insurance required
   
9-404   Revocation or suspension of franchise
   
9-405   Mechanical condition of vehicles
   
9-406   Cleanliness of vehicles
   
9-407   Inspection of vehicles
   
9-408   License and permit required for drivers
   
9-409   Qualifications for driver’s permit
   
9-410   Revocation or suspension of driver’s permit
   
9-411   Drivers not to solicit business
   
9-412   Drivers to use direct routes
   
9-413   Taxicabs not to be used for illegal purposes
   
9-414   Miscellaneous prohibited conduct by drivers
   
9-415   Transportation of more than one passenger at the same time
§ 9-401 TAXICAB FRANCHISE AND PRIVILEGE LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the taxicab business unless
he or she has first obtained a taxicab franchise from the city and has a
currently effective privilege license.
(2011 Code, § 9-401)
§ 9-402 REQUIREMENTS AS TO APPLICATION AND HEARING.
   No person shall be eligible to apply for a taxicab franchise if he or she
has a bad character or has been convicted of a felony within the last ten
years. Applications for taxicab franchises shall be made under oath and in
writing to the Chief of Police. The application shall state the name and
address of the applicant, the name and address of the proposed place of
business, the number of cabs the applicant desires to operate, the makes and
models of said cabs and such other pertinent information as the Chief of Police
may require. The application shall be accompanied by at least two affidavits of
reputable local citizens attesting to the good character and reputation of the
applicant. Within ten days after receipt of an application, the Chief of Police
shall make a thorough investigation of the applicant; determine if there is a
public need for additional taxicab service; present the application to the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen; and make a recommendation to either grant or
refuse a franchise to the applicant. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall
thereupon hold a public hearing, at which time witnesses for and against the
granting of the franchise shall be heard. In deciding whether or not to grant
the franchise, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall consider the public need
for additional service, the increased traffic congestion, parking space
requirements and whether or not the safe use of the streets by the public, both
vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved by the granting of such an
additional taxicab franchise.
(2011 Code, § 9-402)
§ 9-403 LIABILITY INSURANCE REQUIRED.
   No taxicab franchise shall be issued or continued in operation unless there
is in full force and effect a liability insurance policy for each vehicle
authorized in the amount equal to that required by the state’s Financial
Responsibility Law, as set out in Tenn. Code Ann. Title 55, Ch. 12. The
insurance policy required by this section shall contain a provision that it
shall not be cancelled, except after at least 20 days’ written notice is given
by the insurer to both the insured and the Recorder of the city.
(2011 Code, § 9-403)
§ 9-404 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF FRANCHISE.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen, after a public hearing, may revoke or
suspend any taxicab franchise for misrepresentations or false statements made
in the application therefor or for traffic violations or violations of this
chapter by the taxicab owner or any driver.
(2011 Code, § 9-404)
§ 9-405 MECHANICAL CONDITION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab in the city
unless it is equipped with four wheel brakes, front and rear lights, safe
tires, horn, muffler, windshield wipers and rear vision mirror, all of which
shall conform to the requirements of state’s Motor Vehicle Law.
   (B)   Each taxicab shall be equipped with a handle or latch or other opening
device attached to each door of the passenger compartment so that such doors
may be operated by the passenger from the inside of the taxicab without the
intervention or assistance of the driver.
   (C)   The motor and all mechanical parts shall be kept in such condition or
repair as may be reasonably necessary to provide for the safety of the public
and the continuous satisfactory operation of the taxicab.
(2011 Code, § 9-405)
§ 9-406 CLEANLINESS OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   All taxicabs operated in the city shall, at all times, be kept in a
reasonably clean and sanitary condition.
   (B)   They shall be thoroughly swept and dusted at least once each day.
   (C)   At least once every week, they shall be thoroughly washed and the
interior cleaned with a suitable antiseptic solution.
(2011 Code, § 9-406)
§ 9-407 INSPECTION OF VEHICLES.
   All taxicabs shall be inspected at least semiannually by the Chief of Police
to ensure that they comply with the requirements of this chapter with respect
to mechanical condition, cleanliness and the like.
(2011 Code, § 9-407)
§ 9-408 LICENSE AND PERMIT REQUIRED FOR DRIVERS.
   No person shall drive a taxicab unless he or she is in possession of a state
special chauffeur’s license and a taxicab driver’s permit issued by the Chief
of Police.
(2011 Code, § 9-408)
§ 9-409 QUALIFICATIONS FOR DRIVER’S PERMIT.
   No person shall be issued a taxicab driver’s permit unless he or she
complies with the following to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police:
   (A)   Makes written application to the Chief of Police;
   (B)   Is at least 18 years of age and holds a state special chauffeur’s
license;
   (C)   Undergoes an examination by a physician and is found to be of sound
physique, with good eyesight and hearing and not subject to epilepsy, vertigo,
heart trouble or any other infirmity of body or mind which might render him or
her unfit for the safe operation of a public vehicle;
   (D)   Is clean in dress and person and is not addicted to the use of
intoxicating liquor or drugs;
   (E)   Produces affidavits of good character from two reputable citizens of
the city who have known him or her personally and have observed his or her
conduct for at least two years next preceding the date of his or her
application;
   (F)   Has not been convicted of a felony, drunk driving, driving under the
influence of an intoxicant or drug or of frequent minor traffic offenses; and
   (G)   Is familiar with the state and local traffic laws.
(2011 Code, § 9-409)
§ 9-410 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S PERMIT.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen, after a public hearing, may revoke or
suspend any taxicab driver’s permit for violation of traffic regulations, for
violation of this chapter, or when the driver ceases to possess the
qualifications as prescribed in §
9-409 of this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 9-410)
§ 9-411 DRIVERS NOT TO SOLICIT BUSINESS.
   All taxicab drivers are expressly prohibited from indiscriminately
soliciting passengers or from cruising upon the streets of the city for the
purpose of obtaining patronage for their cabs.
(2011 Code, § 9-411)
§ 9-412 DRIVERS TO USE DIRECT ROUTES.
   Taxicab drivers shall always deliver their passengers to their destinations
by the most direct available route.
(2011 Code, § 9-412)
§ 9-413 TAXICABS NOT TO BE USED FOR ILLEGAL PURPOSES.
   No taxicab shall be used for or in the commission of any illegal act,
business or purpose.
(2011 Code, § 9-413)
§ 9-414 MISCELLANEOUS PROHIBITED CONDUCT BY DRIVERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver, while on duty, to be under the
influence of, or to drink any intoxicating beverage or beer; to use profane or
obscene language; to shout or call to prospective passengers; to unnecessarily
blow the automobile horn; or otherwise unreasonably to disturb the peace, quiet
and tranquility of the city in any way.
(2011 Code, § 9-414)
§ 9-415 TRANSPORTATION OF MORE THAN ONE PASSENGER AT THE SAME TIME.
   No person shall be admitted to a taxicab already occupied by a passenger
without the consent of such other passenger.
(2011 Code, § 9-415)
CHAPTER 5: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
   
9-501   To be furnished under franchise
§ 9-501 TO BE FURNISHED UNDER FRANCHISE.
   Cable television service shall be furnished to the city and its inhabitants
under franchise as the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall grant. The rights,
powers, duties and obligations of the city and its inhabitants and the grantee
of the franchise shall be clearly stated in the franchise agreement, which
shall be binding upon the parties concerned.
(2011 Code, § 9-501)
Editor’s note:
   For complete details relating to the cable television franchise agreement,
see Ord. 80-5 and Ord. 83-4 in the office of the City Recorder.
CHAPTER 6: LICENSING AND REGULATION OF ADULT BUSINESS
Section
   
9-601   Definitions
   
9-602   License required
   
9-603   Application for license
   
9-604   Licensing Board
§ 9-601 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT. The regular presentation, for the fee or incidentally
to another service, of material or exhibitions distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matter depicting describing, or relating to specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined below for observation by
patrons therein.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT.
      (1)   Any commercial establishment, including, but not limited to, adult
bookstore, adult video store, adult theater, adult nightclub, sexual encounter
center, massage parlor, rap parlor, lingerie modeling or sauna, which for a fee
or incidentally to another service, regularly presents material or exhibitions
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depiction, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as
defined below for observation by patrons therein.
      (2)   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT further means any commercial
establishment to which the public patrons or members are invited or admitted
and which are so physically arranged as to provide booths, cubicles, rooms,
compartments or stalls separate from the common areas of the premises for the
purpose of viewing sexually-oriented motion pictures, sexually-oriented movies,
sexually-oriented films, adult videos or wherein an entertainer provides
sexually-oriented entertainment to a member of the public, a patron or a
member.
         (a)   ADULT BOOKSTORE. An establishment having any of its stock and
trade in books, magazines, other periodicals or any other items which are
distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting,
describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, as defined below, for observation of the patrons therein; or in
conjunction therewith has facilities for the presentation of sexually-oriented
entertainment, including, but not limited to, sexually-oriented films, or
sexually-oriented live entertainment, for observation by patrons therein.
         (b)   ADULT NIGHTCLUB. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, nightclub,
bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment which regularly features
live performances that are characterized by any actual or simulated performance
of specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas,
as defined below.
         (c)   ADULT SERVICES. A video, CD, laser disk or similar medium with a
cover that depicts specified anatomical areas or a transparent or less than
opaque cover through which specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas can be viewed.
         (d)   ADULT THEATER. An enclosed building regularly used for
presenting films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions or other material depicting or relating to specified
sexually activities or specified anatomical areas, as defined below, for
observation by patrons therein.
         (e)   ADULT VIDEO STORES. A commercial establishment having any stock
in adult videos, as defined below, which are rented or sold and presented for a
fee or incidentally to another service; or in conjunction therewith, regularly
presents on the premises sexually-oriented motion pictures or sexually-oriented
films, adult videos or sexually-oriented live exhibitions which are
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depiction, describing
or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, as
defined below for observation by patrons therein.
         (f)   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED. Any exhibition of any motion pictures, films,
videos or live performance, display or dance of any type, removal of articles
of clothing or appearing unclothed, pantomime, modeling or any other personal
service offered customers which has a significant or substantial portion of
such performance any actual or simulated performance of specified sexually
activities or exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical areas.
   AGGRAVATED RAPE. As defined in the Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-15-502.
   AGGRAVATED SEXUAL BATTERY. As defined in the Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-15-504.
   EMPLOYEE. Any and all persons, including independent contractors, who work
in or at or render any services directly related to the operation of an adult
entertainment establishment.
   ENTERTAINER. Any persons, including independent contractors, who work in or
at or render any service directly related to the operation of an adult
entertainment establishment.
   INDECENT EXPOSURE. As defined in the Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-15-511.
   LOCATION. A single site for which only one use and occupancy permit would be
required.
   OBSCENITY. As defined in the Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-17-901(10).
   OPERATOR. Any person, partnership or corporation operating, conducting or
maintaining an adult entertainment establishment.
   PATRONIZING PROSTITUTION. As defined in Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-13-512.
   PROMOTING PROSTITUTION. As defined in Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-13-512.
   PROSTITUTION. As defined in the Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-13-512.
   RAPE. As defined in the Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-15-503.
   RAPE OF A CHILD. As defined in the Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-15-522.
   SEXUAL BATTERY. As defined in the Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-15-505.
   SEXUAL EXPLOITATION OF A MINOR. As defined in the Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 39-17-
1003, 39-17-1004 and 39-17-1005.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
         (a)   Human genitals, pubic region;
         (b)   Buttocks; and/or
         (c)   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola.
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernible turgid state, even if
completely opaquely covered.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
      (2)   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; and/or
      (3)   Fondling or erotic touching of human genital, pubic region,
buttocks or female breast.
   STATUTORY RAPE. As defined in the Tenn. Code Ann. § 39-15-506.
(2011 Code, § 9-601)
§ 9-602 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except as provided in subsection (F) below, from and after the
effective date of this chapter, no adult entertainment establishment shall be
operated or maintained within the city without first obtaining a license to
operate issued by the Board.
   (B)   Any person, partnership or corporation which desires to operate more
than one adult entertainment establishment must have a license for each
establishment.
   (C)   Only one license may be issued for each adult entertainment
establishment location.
   (D)   No license or interest in a license may be transferred to any person,
partnership or corporation.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any entertainer or operator to work in or
about, or to perform any service directly related to the operation of any
unlicensed adult entertainment establishment. It shall be unlawful for any
employee to knowingly work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service
directly related to the operation of any unlicensed adult entertainment
establishment while adult entertainment is being presented.
   (F)   All existing adult entertainment establishments at the time of the
passage of this chapter must submit an application for a license within 120
days of the effective date of this chapter. If a license is not applied for
within said 120-day period, then such existing adult entertainment
establishment shall cease operations.
(2011 Code, § 9-602)
§ 9-603 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   Application.
      (1)   Any person, partnership, corporation or any other entity desiring
to secure a license shall make application to the Board. The applicant shall
file the original application with six copies. The original application shall
be dated by the Board and held in the files of the Board. A copy of the
application shall be distributed promptly by the Board to: the Police
Department, the Department of Codes Administration, the Health Department, the
Fire Department and to the applicant.
      (2)   Application forms shall be available at the office of the Board.
      (3)   The application form shall include all the information indicated in
subsections (A)(5)(a) through (A)(5)(c) below.
      (4)   The following persons must obtain a license: any partner of a
partnership who will participate in the day to day operation of the business,
any officer or director of a corporate applicant, and any stockholder holding a
majority controlling percentage of the stock of a corporate applicant and who
will participate in the day-to-day operation of the business.
      (5)   The applicant shall furnish the following information under oath:
         (a)   Name and address, including all aliases (business address is
sufficient);
         (b)   Proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age;
         (c)   All residential addresses of the applicant for the past three
years (for the purpose of facilitation the police investigation into the
applicant’s criminal background);
         (d)   The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for five
years immediately preceding the date of the application (for the purpose of
facilitating the police investigation into the applicant’s criminal
background);
         (e)   Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other
county, city or state under an adult entertainment establishment license or
similar business license. Whether the applicant has ever had such a license
revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and the business entity or trade name
under which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension or
revocation;
         (f)   All violations, convictions or any or pleas of nolo contendere
to any crime of rape, aggravated rape, aggravated sexual assault, statutory
rape, rape of a child, sexual exploitation of a minor, indecent exposure,
prostitution, patronizing prostitution, promoting prostitution, obscenity or
other similar crimes of a sexual nature or any crime involving moral turpitude;
         (g)   All citations issued and sustained by a court within the past
two years for violations of any provisions of the city code applicable to adult
entertainment establishments;
         (h)   Fingerprints and two portrait photographs at least two inches by
two inches of the applicant (for the purpose of facilitating the police
investigation into the applicant’s criminal background);
         (i)   The address of the adult entertainment establishment to be
operated by the applicant;
         (j)   If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall specify
the name of the corporation the date and state of incorporation the name and
address of the registered agent and the name and address of all officers and
directors of the corporation, and any stockholder holding a majority
controlling percentage of the stock of a corporate applicant and who will be
involved in the day to day operation of the business;
         (k)   If the applicant is a partnership, joint venture or any other
type of business the application shall specify the name and address of all
persons who will be involved in the day to day operation of the business; and
         (l)   A statement by the applicant that he or she is familiar with the
provisions of this chapter and is in compliance with them.
      (6)   If the applicant intends to have both, stalls, cubicles or rooms on
the premises for the purpose of viewing sexually-oriented movies, sexually-
oriented films or adult videos, or sexually-oriented live exhibitions, then
along with the application, the applicant shall provide the Board with his or
her application a diagram, drawn to scale, of the premises including, but not
limited to, the location and layout of all booths, stalls, cubicles or rooms
and the location of the clerk/managers stand or counter. Though the diagram
shall be drawn to scale, it does not have to be professionally prepared.
   (B)   Inspections.
      (1)   The Police Department, Building Inspector and Fire Department
shall, upon receipt of a copy of the application, inspect the premises to
ensure that the establishment complies with the city code including the
applicable zoning ordinances, fire code, statutes, ordinances and regulation
and the health code statutes, ordinances and regulations.
      (2)   The Police Department, Building Inspector and Fire Department shall
complete their respective inspections and shall communicate the results of
their respective inspections to the Board in writing within 30 days of receipt
of the application. The writing shall end with one of the following statements:
         (a)   The location at City Hall complies with the relevant and
applicable code sections and applicable rules and regulations of the Board; or
         (b)   The location at City Hall does not comply with the relevant and
applicable code sections or does not comply with the relevant and applicable
rules and regulations of the Board. It is in violation of the following
provisions: section numbers of code violations.
      (3)   If the building/structure has a valid use and occupancy permit, the
applicant shall provide the Board with a copy of the valid use and occupancy
permit which shall be made part of the file.
   (C)   Board action on inspection results.
      (1)   Within 20 days of receiving the results of the investigation
conducted by the Police Department, Codes Department, Fire Department and
Health Department, the Board will meet and determine if the applicant is in
compliance with the applicable statutes, ordinances and regulation. If the
Board determines that the applicant is in compliance with the applicable
statutes, ordinances and regulations, including, but not limited to, the Zoning
Code, and the applicant has not committed any of the crimes listed herein, is
at least 18 years of age, and has not given any false or misleading information
on the application or omitted any material facts from the application, then the
Board shall grant the license.
      (2)   Any applicant convicted of or who pleaded nolo contendere to any
crime of rape, aggravated rape, aggravated sexual assault, statutory rape, rape
of a child, sexual exploitation of a minor, indecent exposure, prostitution,
patronizing prostitution, promoting prostitution, obscenity or other similar
crime of a sexual nature, or any crime involving moral turpitude in any
jurisdiction shall be ineligible to receive a permit for the time period
described below. Such denial and the reason for the denial shall be mailed to
the applicant within ten days of receiving the results of the investigation.
The applicant may re-apply to the Board once the time period has expired.
         (a)   If the conviction or plea was for a misdemeanor violation, then
the applicant shall be ineligible to receive a permit for two years from the
date of the conviction, plea or release from confinement impose for the
conviction, whichever is later.
         (b)   If the conviction or plea was for a felony violation, then the
applicant shall be ineligible to receive a permit for five years from the date
of the conviction, plea or release from confinement imposed for the conviction,
whichever is later.
         (c)   The time is computed from the date of the application to the
date of the conviction, plea or release from confinement based on the
conviction.
      (3)   If it is determined by the Board, using the application and
investigation information, that the applicant has violated the provisions of
the Zoning Code applicable to adult entertainment with the past two years, then
the applicant is ineligible for a license for one year from the date the
citation was sustained. A violation of the Zoning Code shall be evidenced by a
citation which has been sustained by the Municipal Court for the city.
      (4)   If, in the course of the investigation, it is discovered any false
or misleading statement or information was given on the application, or
material facts were omitted from the applicant, the Board shall deny the
application. Moreover, the applicant shall be ineligible to receive a permit
for one year from the date of the application which contained the misleading
statements or omissions unless the omission or misleading statement referred to
the age of the applicant.
(2011 Code, § 9-603)
§ 9-604 LICENSING BOARD.
   (A)   Establishment. An adult entertainment licensing board is hereby
created and designated the “City of Spring Hill Adult Entertainment Licensing
Board” (herein “Board”).
   (B)   Membership; terms.
      (1)   The Board shall consist of nine members, who shall be the then
duly-elected Mayor and Aldermen of the city, and who shall serve as ex-officio
members of such Board and shall continue to be eligible so long as they serve
on the Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the city.
      (2)   Any vacancy other than the expiration of terms shall be filled for
the un-expired term by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
   (C)   Meetings; quorum required; minutes and transcript.
      (1)   The Board shall hold one regular meeting each quarter at a time
fixed by the Board and may hold such special meetings as may be necessary.
      (2)   The attendance of at least a majority of the members of the Board,
not including unfilled positions, shall be required to constitute quorum for
the purpose of transacting business.
      (3)   Minutes shall be kept of the meetings in permanent form and a
record shall be kept of the action of the Board with respect to every
application for a license and/or a permit. The concurring vote of a majority of
the members present and voting shall be necessary for the granting, revoking,
suspending or any other action involving licenses or permits.
      (4)   No transcript of the proceedings had before the Board shall be in
any form other than narrative, unless the Board shall have been requested to
provide for an exact copy of the testimony by an interested party at least 24
hours prior to a Board meeting. The cost of an exact copy shall be borne by the
person requesting the same.
   (D)   Powers and duties.
      (1)   The Board shall have jurisdiction over the licensing, regulating
and controlling of all adult entertainment establishments, as provided herein,
located in the city.
      (2)   The Board may promulgate such bylaws, rules and regulations not
inconsistent with state law, the city’s charter or any ordinance, as it deems
appropriate for the conducting of its business.
      (3)   The Board has the authority to subpoena witnesses to testify before
the Board.
   (E)   Inspectors; authority. The Board is empowered to employ suitable
person(s) as inspectors, which inspectors shall not hold any service status.
The Board shall prescribe the duties of such inspectors so as to enforce the
applicable provisions of this title.
   (F)   Procedures for hearings. This section shall apply to all hearings by
the Board including, but not limited to, hearings for revocation suspension or
denial of a license/permit.
      (1)   Upon receiving written request for a hearing, the Board shall send
the party requesting the hearing a notice stating the time and place of the
hearing and the right to be represented by counsel.
      (2)   At the hearing, the party requesting the hearing shall appear on
his or her own behalf or be represented by counsel. All witnesses shall be
sworn. The Chair shall allow the party requesting the hearing to present
witnesses on his or her own behalf and to cross-examine all witnesses
testifying against him or her.
      (3)   All decisions of the Board shall be in writing, setting forth the
findings of the Board, and shall be signed by the Chair or Vice-Chair. Any
decisions of the Board to deny a renewal, suspend or revoke a license/permit
shall not take effect earlier than ten days after the date the decision was
rendered to allow the effected party adequate time to seek judicial review.
      (4)   Minutes shall be kept of all proceedings before the Board in
permanent form and a record shall be kept of all actions of the Board with
respect to all hearings.
      (5)   A record (which may consist of a tape or similar electronic
recording) shall be made of all oral proceedings. The record must be maintained
by the Board for a period of 90 days. Such record or any art thereof shall be
transcribed at the request of any party at such party’s expense.
      (6)   Any party desiring a court reporter to be present at the hearing
must arrange for the court reporter to be present.
(2011 Code, § 9-601)
CHAPTER 7: HOTEL OR MOTEL OCCUPANCY PRIVILEGE TAX
Section
   
9-701   Definitions
   
9-702   Permit required
   
9-703   Not transferable
   
9-704   Duration
   
9-705   Register required; availability for inspection
   
9-706   Rooms to be numbered
   
9-707   Privilege tax levied; use
   
9-708   Payment of the tax
   
9-709   Compensation to the hotel
   
9-710   Interest and penalty for late payment
   
9-711   Monthly tax return and annual audit
   
9-712   Records requirement
§ 9-701 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSIDERATION. The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the
occupancy in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods,
labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, property and
services of any kind or nature without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.
Nothing in this definition shall be construed to imply that consideration is
charged when the space provided to the person is complimentary from the
operator and no consideration is charged to or received from any person.
   HOTEL and/or MOTEL. Any structure or space, or any portion thereof, that is
occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling,
lodging, or sleeping purposes, and includes privately, publicly, or government-
owned hotels, inns, tourist camps, tourist courts, tourist cabins, motels,
short-term rental units, primitive and recreational vehicle campsites and
campgrounds, or any place in which rooms, lodgings or accommodations are
furnished to transients for consideration.
   MUNICIPALITY. An incorporated city or town or a county, but does not include
a county with a metropolitan form of government.
   OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of
any room, lodgings or accommodations in any hotel.
   OPERATOR. The person operating the hotel, whether as owner, lessee or
otherwise.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate,
trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or
combination acting as a unit.
   TOURISM. Attracting nonresidents to visit a particular municipality and
encouraging those nonresidents to spend money in the municipality, which
includes travel related to both leisure and business activities.
   TOURISM DEVELOPMENT. The acquisition and construction of, and finance and
retirement of debt for, facilities related to tourism.
   TRANSIENT. Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy of
any rooms, lodgings or accommodations in a hotel for a period of less than 30
continuous days.
(Ord. 21-19B, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 9-702 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person will conduct, keep, manage, operate, or cause to be conducted,
kept, managed or operated either as owner, lessor, agent or attorney, any hotel
in the city without having obtained a permit for same from the City
Administrator or his or her designee.
(Ord. 21-19B, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 9-703 NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   No permit issued under this chapter shall be transferred or assigned.
(Ord. 21-19B, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 9-704 DURATION.
   Hotel permits shall be issued annually and shall expire on the last day of
December of each year.
(Ord. 21-19B, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 9-705 REGISTER REQUIRED; AVAILABILITY FOR INSPECTION.
   Every person to whom a permit is issued under this chapter shall at all
times keep a standard hotel register, in which shall be inscribed the names of
all guests renting or occupying rooms in the hotel. Such register shall be
signed in every case by the person renting a room or by someone under his
direction and after registration is made and the name of the guest if inscribed
as herein provided, the manager shall write the number of the room such guest
is to occupy, together with the time such room is rented, before such person is
permitted to occupy such roonm The register shall be open to inspection at all
times to the City Administrator or his or her designee.
(Ord. 21-19B, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 9-706 ROOMS TO BE NUMBERED.
   Each sleeping room and apartment in every hotel in the City shall be
numbered in a plain and conspicuous manner. The number of each room shall be
placed on the outside of the door of such room, and no two doors shall bear the
same number.
(Ord. 21-19B, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 9-707 PRIVILEGE TAX LEVIED; USE.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of Tenn. Code Ann. § 67-4-1401 et seq, and
specifically 567-4-1402 as amended by Public Chapter 496, there is hereby
levied a privilege of occupancy tax in any hotel of each transient. From and
after the operative date of this chapter the rate of the levy shall be 4% of
the consideration charged by the operator. This privilege tax shall be
collected pursuant to and subject to the provisions of state law. The City
Administrator or his/her designee shall be designated the authorized collector
to administer and enforce this chapter.
   (B)   The proceeds received from this tax must be allocated to and placed in
the general fund or other fund of the city and used exclusively for the
promotion of Tourism and Tourism Development.
(Ord. 21-19B, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 9-708 PAYMENT OF THE TAX.
   Payment of the tax by the hotel to the city shall be no later than the 20th
day of each month for the preceding month.
(Ord. 21-19B, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 9-709 COMPENSATION TO THE HOTEL.
   The hotel may deduct 2% from the amount paid to the city in order to defray
the administrative burden of collecting the tax.
(Ord. 21-19B, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 9-710 INTEREST AND PENALTY FOR LATE PAYMENT.
   The hotel operator is responsible for paying interest on delinquent taxes,
from the due date at the rate of 12% per annum, plus a penalty of 1% for each
month or fraction thereof such taxes are delinquent.
(Ord. 21-19B, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 9-711 MONTHLY TAX RETURN AND ANNUAL AUDIT.
   (A)   (1)   The City Administrator or his or her designee, as authorized
collector of the tax, shall be responsible for the collection of such tax and
shall place the proceeds of such tax in accounts for the purposes stated in
this chapter.
      (2)   A monthly tax return shall be filed under oath with the City
Administrator or his or her designee by the operator with such number of copies
of the return as he or she may reasonably require for the collection of such
tax.
      (3)   The report of the operator shall include such facts and information
as may be deemed reasonable for the verification of the tax due. The form of
such report shall be developed by the City Administrator and approved by the
Board of Mayor and Alderman prior to use.
      (4)   The City Administrator or his or her designee shall audit each
operator in the municipality at least once per year and shall report on the
audits made on a quarterly basis to the Board of Mayor and Alderman.
   (B)   The Board of Mayor and Alderman is authorized to adopt reasonable
rules and regulations for the implementation of the provisions of this chapter,
including the form of such reports.
(Ord. 21-19B, passed 8-16-2021)
§ 9-712 RECORDS REQUIREMENT.
   The hotel operator shall maintain such records as may be necessary to
determine the amount of such tax for which the operator may have been liable
for the collection of taxes for three years thereafter, with the right of
inspection by the city.
(Ord. 21-19B, passed 8-16-2021)
TITLE 10: ANIMAL CONTROL
      Chapter
         
1.   IN GENERAL
         
2.   DOGS
CHAPTER 1: IN GENERAL
Section
   
10-101   Running at large prohibited
   
10-102   Keeping near a residence or business restricted
   
10-103   Pen or enclosure to be kept clean
   
10-104   Adequate food, water, shelter and the like to be provided
   
10-105   Keeping in such manner as to become a nuisance prohibited
   
10-106   Cruel treatment prohibited
   
10-107   Seizure and disposition of animals
   
10-108   Inspections of premises
   
10-109   Health Officer
§ 10-101 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or being in charge of any cats,
cows, swine, sheep, horses, mules or goats, or any chickens, ducks, geese,
turkeys or other domestic fowl, cattle, livestock and the like knowingly or
negligently to permit any of them to run at large in any street, alley or
unenclosed lot within the corporate limits.
(2011 Code, § 10-101) (Ord. 02-01, passed 2- -2002; Ord. 13-30, passed 12-16-
2013)
§ 10-102 KEEPING NEAR A RESIDENCE OR BUSINESS RESTRICTED.
   No person shall keep any animal or fowl enumerated in the preceding section
within 1,000 feet of any residence, place of business or public street, without
a permit from the Health Officer. The Health Officer shall issue a permit only
when, in his or her sound judgment, the keeping of such an animal in a yard or
building under the circumstances as set forth in the application for the permit
will not injuriously affect the public health.
(2011 Code, § 10-102) (Ord. 13-30, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 10-103 PEN OR ENCLOSURE TO BE KEPT CLEAN.
   When animals or fowls are kept within the corporate limits, the building,
structure, corral, pen or enclosure in which they are kept shall, at all times,
be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
(2011 Code, § 10-103) (Ord. 13-30, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 10-104 ADEQUATE FOOD, WATER, SHELTER AND THE LIKE TO BE PROVIDED.
   No animal or fowl shall be kept or confined in any place where the food,
water, shelter and ventilation are not adequate and sufficient for the
preservation of its health, condition and wholesomeness for food is so
intended. All feed shall be stored and kept in a rat-proof and fly-tight
building, box or receptacle.
(2011 Code, § 10-104) (Ord. 13-30, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 10-105 KEEPING IN SUCH MANNER AS TO BECOME A NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   No animal or fowl shall be kept in such a place or condition as to become a
nuisance because of either noise, odor, contagious disease or other reason.
(2011 Code, § 10-105) (Ord. 13-30, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 10-106 CRUEL TREATMENT PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person unnecessarily to beat or otherwise abuse
or injure any dumb animal or fowl.
(2011 Code, § 10-106) (Ord. 13-30, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 10-107 SEIZURE AND DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
   Any animal or fowl found running at large or otherwise being kept in
violation of this chapter may be seized by the Health Officer or by any police
officer and confined in a pound provided or designated by the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen. If the owner is known, he or she shall be given notice in person,
by telephone or by a postcard addressed to his or her last-known mailing
address. If the owner is not known or cannot be located, a notice describing
the impounded animal or fowl will be posted in at least three public places
within the corporate limits. In either case, the notice shall state that the
impounded animal or fowl must be claimed within five days by paying the pound
costs or the same will be humanely destroyed or sold. If not claimed by the
owner, the animal or fowl shall be sold or humanely destroyed, or it may
otherwise be disposed of as authorized by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. The
pound keeper shall collect from each person claiming an impounded animal or
fowl a reasonable fee to cover the costs of impoundment and maintenance.
(2011 Code, § 10-107) (Ord. 13-30, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 10-108 INSPECTIONS OF PREMISES.
   For the purpose of making inspections to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this title, the Health Officer or his or her authorized
representative shall be authorized to enter, at any reasonable time, any
premises where he or she has reasonable cause to believe an animal or fowl is
being kept in violation of this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 10-108) (Ord. 13-30, passed 12-16-2013)
§ 10-109 HEALTH OFFICER.
   The Health Officer shall be such municipal, county or state officer as the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall appoint or designate to administer and
enforce health and sanitation regulations within the city.
(2011 Code, § 13-101) (Ord. 13-30, passed 12-16-2013)
CHAPTER 2: DOGS
Section
   
10-201   Rabies vaccination and registration required
   
10-202   Dogs to wear tags
   
10-203   Running at large prohibited
   
10-204   Vicious dogs to be securely restrained
   
10-205   Noisy dogs prohibited
   
10-206   Confinement of dogs suspected of being rabid
   
10-207   Seizure and disposition of dogs
Cross-reference:
   General animal regulations, see
Title 10, Ch. 1
§ 10-201 RABIES VACCINATION AND REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any dog without
having the same duly vaccinated against rabies and registered in accordance
with the provisions of the state’s Anti-Rabies Law (Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 68-8-101
through 68-8-114) or other applicable law.
(2011 Code, § 10-201)
§ 10-202 DOGS TO WEAR TAGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or harbor any dog which
does not wear a tag evidencing the vaccination and registration required by §
10-201 of this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 10-202)
§ 10-203 RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to permit any dog owned by him
or her or under his or her control to run at large within the corporate limits.
(2011 Code, § 10-203)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 68-8-108 and 68-8-109
§ 10-204 VICIOUS DOGS TO BE SECURELY RESTRAINED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep any dog known to be
vicious or dangerous unless such dog is so confined and/or otherwise securely
restrained as to reasonably provide for the protection of other animals and
persons.
(2011 Code, § 10-204)
§ 10-205 NOISY DOGS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog which, by loud and frequent
barking, whining or howling, annoys or disturbs the peace and quiet of any
neighborhood.
(2011 Code, § 10-205)
§ 10-206 CONFINEMENT OF DOGS SUSPECTED OF BEING RABID.
   If any dog has bitten any person or is suspected of having bitten any person
or is for any reason suspected of being infected with rabies, the Health
Officer or Chief of Police may cause such dog to be confined or isolated for
such time as he or she reasonably deems necessary to determine if such dog is
rabid.
(2011 Code, § 10-206)
§ 10-207 SEIZURE AND DISPOSITION OF DOGS.
   (A)   Any dog found running at large may be seized by the Health Officer or
any police officer and placed in a pound provided or designated by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen. If said dog is wearing a tag, the owner shall be notified
in person, by telephone or by a postcard addressed to his or her last-known
mailing address, to appear within five days and redeem his or her dog by paying
a reasonable pound fee, to be fixed by the pound keeper, or the dog will be
humanely destroyed or sold. If said dog is not wearing a tag, it shall be
humanely destroyed or sold unless legally claimed by the owner within two days.
No dog shall be released in any event from the pound unless or until such dog
has been vaccinated and a tag placed on its collar.
   (B)   When, because of its viciousness or apparent infection with rabies, a
dog found running at large cannot be safely impounded it may be summarily
destroyed by the Health Officer or any police officer.
(2011 Code, § 10-207)
Statutory reference:
   For a Tennessee Supreme Court case upholding the summary destruction of dogs
pursuant to appropriate legislation, see Darnell v. Shapard, 156 Tenn. 544, 3
S.W.2d 661 (1928)
TITLE 11: MUNICIPAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
1.   ALCOHOL
         
2.   FORTUNE TELLING AND THE LIKE
         
3.   OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
         
4.   OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE AND QUIET
         
5.   INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC OPERATIONS AND PERSONNEL
         
6.   FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND MISSILES
         
7.   TRESPASSING, MALICIOUS MISCHIEF AND INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC
         
8.   MISCELLANEOUS
         
9.   CURFEW REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1: ALCOHOL
Section
   
11-101   Drinking beer and the like on streets and the like
   
11-102   Minors in beer places
§ 11-101 DRINKING BEER AND THE LIKE ON STREETS AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or consume, or have an open
container of beer or intoxicating liquor in or on any public street, alley,
avenue, highway, sidewalk, public park, public school ground or other public
place unless the place has a permit and/or license for on premises consumption.
(2011 Code, § 11-101)
Statutory reference:
   Arrest for public intoxication, cities may not pass separate legislation,
see Tenn. Code Ann. § 33-10-203
§ 11-102 MINORS IN BEER PLACES.
   No person under 21 years of age shall loiter in or around, work in or
otherwise frequent any place where beer is sold at retail for consumption on
the premises.
(2011 Code, § 11-102)
CHAPTER 2: FORTUNE TELLING AND THE LIKE
Section
   
11-201   Fortune telling and the like
§ 11-201 FORTUNE TELLING AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct the business of, solicit for
or ply the trade of fortune teller, clairvoyant, hypnotist, spiritualist,
palmist, phrenologist or other mystic endowed with supernatural powers.
(2011 Code, § 11-201)
CHAPTER 3: OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
Section
   
11-301   Assault and battery
§ 11-301 ASSAULT AND BATTERY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault or an assault and
battery upon any person.
(2011 Code, § 11-301)
CHAPTER 4: OFFENSES AGAINST THE PEACE AND QUIET
Section
   
11-401   Disturbing the peace
   
11-402   Unnecessary noise standard
§ 11-401 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   No person shall disturb, tend to disturb or aid in disturbing the peace of
others by violent, tumultuous, offensive or obstreperous conduct, and no person
shall knowingly permit such conduct upon any premises owned or possessed by him
or her or under his or her code.
(2011 Code, § 11-401) (Ord. 08-16, passed 2- -2008)
§ 11-402 UNNECESSARY NOISE STANDARD.
   (A)   General. Subject to the provisions of this section any loud noise or
any noise, which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort,
repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limit of the city shall
be prohibited. The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but said
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
      (1)   Horns, signaling devices and the like. The sounding of any horn or
signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, truck or other vehicle on any
street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by
means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and
the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of
time. The use of any signaling device, except one operated by hand or
electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine
exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any
reason held up;
      (2)   Radio, phonographs, live bands, amplifiers, loudspeakers and the
like. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any
radio-receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, live band, amplifiers,
loudspeakers or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of
sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the
neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for
convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or
chamber in which such live band, machine or device is operated and who are
voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument,
phonograph, live band, machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:
00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. on Friday and Saturday, in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a
distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is
located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section;
      (3)   Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or
permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio-receiving set, musical
instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device
for the producing or reproducing of sound which is broadcast upon the public
streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention
of the public to any building or structure;
      (4)   Yelling, shouting and the like. Yelling, shouting, hooting,
whistling or singing on the public streets, or in the parking lots of
commercial business open to the public, particularly between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at anytime or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other
type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. If the owner or manager
of a commercial enterprise operates his or her business and is open to the
public between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time on Sunday
or holidays, he or she shall locate his or her customer parking so his or her
customers and patrons will not violate this chapter. A failure of the owner or
manager to so locate his or her customer parking constitutes a violation of the
chapter, when a customer or patron is convicted of violation of this subsection
(A)(4); provided, the owner or manager permits customer or patron parking
within 100 feet of a residential zone;
      (5)   Animals, birds and the like. The keeping of any animal or bird
which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort or
repose of any persons in the vicinity;
      (6)   Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or
steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the
time to begin to stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request
of proper city authorities;
      (7)   Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any
steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat or other
vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom;
      (8)   Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or
vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and
unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise;
      (9)   Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and
excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or dumpster
or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers,
particularly other than during the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.;
      (10)   Construction or repairing of buildings.
         (a)   Hours of construction regulated.
            1.   Hours of construction restrictions apply to acts that
constitute "construction activity," as defined in this section. These
restrictions shall apply only to work that requires a permit issued by the city
but shall apply to all work done on such projects.
            2.   Construction activity is allowed Monday through Friday, 7:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m. (7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., June 1 - August 30), and Saturday,
9:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. No work shall be performed on New Year's Day, Memorial
Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
            3.   No construction activity that requires a permit shall occur on
Sundays and city holidays.
         (b)   Definition of construction activity. For purposes of determining
the application of this section, construction activity includes, but is not
limited to, the following:
            1.   Grading and excavating.
            2.   Pouring and placing concrete or the presence of concrete
mixing trucks or pumping vehicles/equipment.
            3.   Operating construction-related equipment and tools, including
but not limited to, pile drivers, power shovels, pneumatic hammers, power
hoists, compressors, and other construction-type devices.
            4.   Continual use of portable generators where the electric
utility will connect temporary power service.
            5.   The presence of workers performing indoor or outdoor
construction, site preparation, and landscaping work, including but not limited
to, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building, structure, or property.
This includes, but is not limited to, electrical, building, plumbing, HVAC,
roofing, siding, painting, trimming, and landscaping work.
            6.   The presence of construction workers more than 30 minutes
before and after permitted hours of construction, providing radios, noisy
equipment or loud conversations do not take place.
         (c)   Exemptions. The following types of activities are exempt from
the requirements of this section.
            1.   Greenfield development and unoccupied buildings located
greater than 1,000 feet from a residentially-occupied building, measured in the
most direct means from a construction site and/or building to a residentially-
occupied building.
            2.   Activities occurring inside occupied buildings and structures
if not audible at any immediately adjacent street.
            3.   Construction commissioned or conducted by the city.
            4.   Cleaning of streets (including street sweeping vehicles),
trash, and maintaining/installing erosion control.
            5.   Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets, or highways by or
on behalf of the city, the county, or the state during the night, when the
public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work
during the day.
            6.   Emptying and setting dumpsters and servicing portable toilets.
            7.   Construction activity approved in advance by the City
Administrator or designee. A contractor who needs to work outside normal
construction hours must submit a request for approval in advance. If the City
Administrator or designee should determine that the interest of the public
health and safety are served, and if the City Administrator or designee should
determine that any loss of inconvenience that might result is outweighed by the
public's interest in its safety and welfare, he/she may grant permission for
such construction activity to be done between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded
or during the progress of the work with notification given to the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen.
            8.   Emergency activities of the city, the county, or the state and
emergency activities of public utilities by private contractors, when they are
seeking to provide electricity, water, or other public utility services, and
the public health, safety, or welfare is involved.
         (d)   Accountability for violations.
            1.   In addition to those persons actively engaged in construction
activity as defined above, when an infraction under this chapter occurs the
owner, developer, and general contractor may any or all of them be deemed to be
in violation of this chapter.
            2.   Those causing work to be done may be issued citations for
violations committed by their employees, subcontractors, or agents.
            3.   In addition to property owners, developers, and general
contractors, citations may be issued, where appropriate, to subcontractors,
suppliers of concrete, suppliers of concrete pumper trucks/equipment, and
supply and rental equipment delivery companies.
         (e)   Violations.
            1.   Any violation of this section shall be punishable by a fine
and any applicable court costs.
            2.   Violators may be cited to Spring Hill Municipal Court, or
where necessary, to other courts of competent jurisdiction in Tennessee.
            3.   In addition to all other remedies available, repeat violators
may be issued stop work orders by the Building Official or designee until the
violation or condition is abated, for a minimum of five business days.
         (f)   Conflicts with other chapters and sections of the Municipal
Code, including those sections of the Municipal Code which adopt the
International Building Code, the International Property Maintenance Code, and
all other similar code adoptions. If at any time these requirements conflict
with other requirements elsewhere in the Spring Hill Municipal Code or the
building codes adopted therein, the more restrictive requirements shall apply.
      (11)   Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any
excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning,
church or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which
unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions, or which
disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital; provided, conspicuous signs
are displayed in such streets, indicating that the same is a school, hospital
or court street;
      (12)   Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers
and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood;
      (13)   Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show
or sale;
      (14)   Metal rails, pillars and columns, transportation thereof. The
transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material,
over and along streets and other public places upon carts, trays, cars, trucks
or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the
peace of such streets or other public places;
      (15)   Pile drivers, hammers and the like. The operation between the
hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic
hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which
is attended by loud or unusual noise; and
      (16)   Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan
or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to
the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noises from such blower
or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient
to deaden such noise.
   (B)   General provisions; tests for unlawful noise. The standards which
shall be considered in determining whether a violation of subsection (A) above
exists shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   The volume of the noise;
      (2)   The intensity of the noise;
      (3)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
      (4)   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;
      (5)   The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any;
      (6)   The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;
      (7)   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;
      (8)   The density of inhabitation of the area within the noise emanates;
      (9)   The time of the day or night the noise occurs;
      (10)   The duration of the noise;
      (11)   Whether the noise if recurrent, intermittent or constant; and
      (12)   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or non-commercial
activity.
   (C)   Decibel provision.
      (1)   Definitions.
         (a)   For the purpose of this subsection (C), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
            A BAND LEVEL. The total sound level of all noise as measured with a
sound level meter using the “A” weighing network. The unit of measurement of
the Db(A).
            AMBIENT NOISE. The all-encompassing noise associated with a given
environment, being usually a composite of sounds from many sources, near and
far.
            BAND PRESSURE LEVEL. Of sound for a specified frequency band, the
sound pressure level for the sound contained within the restricted bank. The
reference pressure must be specified.
            BEL. A unit of level when the base of logarithm is ten. Use of the
BEL is restricted to levels of quantities proportional to power.
            CYCLE. The complete sequence of values of a periodic quantity that
occur during a period.
            DECIBEL. One-tenth of a bel and is a unit of level when the base of
the logarithm is the tenth root of ten and the quantities concerned are
proportional to power.
            EMERGENCY WORK. Work made necessary to restore property to a safe
condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or
property from any imminent exposure to danger.
            FREQUENCY. Of a function periodic in time, the reciprocal of the
primitive period. The unit is the cycle per unit time and must be specified.
            MICROBAR. A unit of pressure commonly used in acoustics and is
equal to one dyne per square centimeter.
            PERIOD. Of a periodic quantity, the smallest increment of time for
which the function repeats itself.
            PERIODIC QUANTITY. An oscillating quantity, the values of which
recur for equal increments of time.
            PERSON. Any person, person’s firm, association, copartnership,
joint venture, corporation or any entity public or private in nature.
            SOUND ANALYZER. A device for measuring the band pressure level or
pressure spectrum level of a sound as a function of frequency.
            SOUND-LEVEL METER. An instrument including a microphone, an
amplifier, an output meter and frequency weighting networks for the measurement
of noise and sound levels in a specified manner.
            SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. In decibels of sound, 20 times the logarithm
to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of this sound to the reference
pressure, which pressure must be explicitly stated.
            SPECTRUM. A function of time and is a description of its resolution
into components, each of different frequency and usually of different amplitude
and phase and is also used to signify continuous range of components usually
wide in extent within which waves have some specified characteristics such as
“audio frequency spectrum” and is also applied to functions of variables other
than time.
         (b)   All technical definitions are in accordance with the American
Standards S11-1960 entitled Acoustical Terminology.
      (2)   Classification of use districts, residential, industrial,
commercial. For the purpose of this section, the reference to “residential”
shall include areas of the city zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 and any
subsequent residential or office zone created by ordinance; “commercial” shall
include areas of the city zoned AG, B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, M-1, M-2 and M-3. It
shall be unlawful to project a sound or noise excluding noise emanating from
cars, trucks or motorcycles from one property into another, within the boundary
of a use district which exceeds either the limiting noise spector set forth in
Table I below, or exceeds the ambient noise level by more than three decibels.
         (a)   Sound or noise projecting from one use district into another use
district with a different noise level limit shall not exceed the limits of the
district into which the noise is projected.
         (b)   Measurement of noise.
            1.   The measurement of sound or noise may be made with a sound
level meter and octave band analyzer meeting the standards prescribed by the
American Standards Association. The instruments shall be maintained in
calibration and good working order. Octave band corrections may be employed in
meeting the response specification. Calibration check shall be made of the
system at the time of any noise measurement. Measurements recorded shall be
taken so as to provide a proper representation of the noise source. The
microphone during measurement shall be positioned so as not to create any
unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured noise. A windscreen for the
microphone shall be used when required. Traffic, aircraft and other
transportation noise sources and other background noises shall not be
considered in taking measurements, except where such background noise
interferes with the primary noise being measured.
            2.   The slow meter response of the sound level meter shall be used
in order to best determine that the average amplitude has not exceeded the
limiting noise spectra set forth in Table I below.
            3.   The measurement shall be made at the property line of the
property on which such noise is generated or perceived, as appropriate, five
feet above ground.
            4.   In case of an elevated or directional sound or noise source,
compliance with the noise limits is to be maintained at any elevation at the
boundary.
         (c)   The limits hereinabove referred to shall be in accordance with
the following table:
Table I. Limiting Noise Levels for Use Districts
                             Maximum permissible sound pressure (levels in
Octave Band Center Frequency decibels re 0.0002 microbars)
Cycles per Second            Use District
                             Residential Commercial Industrial
Table I. Limiting Noise Levels for Use Districts
                             Maximum permissible sound pressure (levels in
Octave Band Center Frequency decibels re 0.0002 microbars)
Cycles per Second            Use District
                             Residential Commercial Industrial
Below 75                     65          79         80
75 - 150                     60          74         75
150 - 300                    55          66         70
300 - 600                    55          59         64
600 - 1,200                  45          53         58
1,200 - 2,400                45          47         53
2,300 - 4,800                40          41         49
Above 4,800                  40          49         46
 
         (d)   If the noise is not smooth and continuous, one or more of the
corrections in Table II below shall be added to or subtracted from each of the
decibel levels given in Table I of subsection (C)(2)(c) above.
Table II. Type of Operation in Character of Noise
Table II. Type of Operation in Character of Noise
[Correction in Decibels]
Noise source operated less than 20% of any 1-hour period; plus 5.*
Noise source operated less than 5% of any 1-hour period; plus 10.*
Noise source operated less than 1% of any 1-hour period; plus 15.*
Noise of impulsive character (hammering and the like); minus 5.
Noise of impulsive character (hum, screech and the like); minus 5.
NOTES TO TABLE:
*Apply 1 of these corrections only.
 
         (e)   If the noise occurs between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m. on Monday through Saturday or at any time on Sunday or holidays, seven
shall be subtracted from each of the decibel levels given in Table I of
subsection (C)(2)(c) above.
      (3)   Enclosed places of public entertainment.
         (a)   It shall be unlawful to sustain in any enclosed place of public
entertainment including but not limited to a restaurant, bar, café,
discotheque, dance hall, any amplitude equal to or in excess of 95 dB(A)
sustained for more than 30 seconds.
         (b)   Such sound or noise is to be measured by a sound level meter
approved by the American Standards Association from any area to which the
public is invited within any enclosed public place of public entertainment.
      (4)   Noises; aircraft. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or
cause to be operated any type of aircraft over the city which produces noise
levels exceeding 87 dB(A) within the city.
      (5)   Exemptions. The following uses and activities shall be exempt from
noise level regulations:
         (a)   Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure
relief valves;
         (b)   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency;
         (c)   Noises resulting from emergency work;
         (d)   Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary
duration permitted by law and for which a license or permit therefor has been
granted by the city;
         (e)   Any aircraft operated in conformity with, or pursuant to,
federal law, federal air regulations and air-traffic control instruction used
pursuant to and within the duly adopted federal air regulations shall be exempt
from the provisions of this section. Any aircraft operating under technical
difficulties, in any kind of distress, under emergency orders of air-traffic
control or being operated pursuant to and subsequent to the declaration of an
emergency under the federal air regulations shall also be exempt from the
provisions of this section; and
         (f)   Noise resulting from any auction company or service which is
lawfully registered to do business within the municipal corporate limits of the
city and while operating within reasonable business hours.
      (6)   Application for special permit. Applications for a permit for
relief from the noise level designated in this section on the basis of undue
hardship may be made the Board of Zoning Appeals. Any permit granted by the
Board of Zoning Appeals hereinunder shall contain all conditions upon which
said permit has been granted and shall specify a reasonable time that the
permit shall be effective. The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant the relief as
applied for, if it finds:
         (a)   Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or
modify his or her activity or operation to comply with this section;
         (b)   The activity, operation or noise source will be of temporary
duration, and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with other
subsections of this section;
         (c)   No other reasonable alternative is available to the applicant;
and
         (d)   The Board of Zoning Appeals may prescribe any conditions of
requirements it deems necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community
or the surrounding neighborhood. Applications for a permit for relief from the
noise level designated in this section for the purpose of a public parade,
street fair of similar activity sponsored and conducted by a public entity,
agency or committee thereof may be made to the Mayor or City Administrator. The
Mayor and City Administrator are each authorized to issue a special permit for
said purposes.
   (D)   Penalty for violation.
      (1)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in
an amount not exceeding $500. Each day such violation is committed or permitted
to continue a separate offense.
      (2)   Any person violating any subsection of this section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount as
provided in subsection (D)(1) above, and the judge may require the guilty party
to pay the reasonable rental expense of audio equipment and the reasonable
expenses for payment to operate the audio equipment in order to detect and
prove a violation and the reasonable time of the audio engineer(s) or trained
operator(s); provided, notice was pursuant to this subsection (D). This
subsection (D)(2) shall apply only to persons employed and equipment rented by
the city and shall not apply to equipment or persons employed by private
citizens.
   (E)   Manner of enforcement.
      (1)   Violations of this section shall be prosecuted in the same manner
as other misdemeanor violations of the city’s code. A written notice of
intention to prosecute will be given the alleged violator not less than five
calendar days and not more than 360 calendar days prior to the issuance of a
misdemeanor citation or warrant. No citation or warrant shall be issued in the
event the cause of the violation is removed, the condition abated or fully
corrected within such five-day period and not resumed before issuance of the
citation or warrant.
      (2)   In the event the alleged violator cannot be located in order to
serve the notice of intention to prosecute, the notice as required herein shall
be deemed to be given upon mailing such notice by registered or certified mail
to the alleged violator at his or her last known address or at the place where
the violation occurred, in which even the five-day period shall commence at the
date of the day following the mailing of such notice.
   (F)   Additional remedy; injunction. As an additional remedy, the operation
or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle or machinery in violation of
any provision hereof and which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable
persons of normal sensitiveness or which endangers the comfort, repose, health
or peace of residents in the area shall be deemed, and is declared to be, a
public nuisance and may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining
order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (G)   Separability. It is the intention of the City Council that each
separate provision of this section shall be deemed independent of all other
provisions herein, and it is further the intention of the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen that any provisions thereof shall remain valid and enforceable.
(2011 Code, § 11-402) (Ord. 08-16, passed 2- -2008; Ord. 13-10, passed 5-20-
2013; Ord. 14-07, passed 4-21-2014; Ord. 16-13, passed 7-18-2016; Ord. 24-05,
passed 5-20-2024)
CHAPTER 5: INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC OPERATIONS AND PERSONNEL
Section
   
11-501   Escape from custody or confinement
   
11-502   Impersonating a government officer or employee
   
11-503   False emergency alarms
   
11-504   Resisting or interfering with an officer
   
11-505   Coercing people not to work
§ 11-501 ESCAPE FROM CUSTODY OR CONFINEMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person under arrest or otherwise in custody of
or confined by the city to escape or attempt to escape, or for any other person
to assist or encourage such person to escape or attempt to escape from such
custody or confinement.
(2011 Code, § 11-501)
§ 11-502 IMPERSONATING A GOVERNMENT OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE.
   (A)   No person other than an official police officer of the city shall wear
the uniform, apparel or badge, or carry any identification card or other
insignia of office like or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted
and worn or carried by the official police officers of the city.
   (B)   Furthermore, no person shall deceitfully impersonate or represent that
he or she is any government officer or employee.
(2011 Code, § 11-502)
§ 11-503 FALSE EMERGENCY ALARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally to make, turn in or give a
false alarm of fire, or of need for police or ambulance assistance, or to aid
or abet in the commission of such act.
(2011 Code, § 11-503)
§ 11-504 RESISTING OR INTERFERING WITH AN OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to resist or in any way
interfere with or attempt to interfere with any officer or employee of the city
while such officer or employee is performing or attempting to perform his or
her municipal duties.
(2011 Code, § 11-504)
§ 11-505 COERCING PEOPLE NOT TO WORK.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in association or agreement with any
other person to assemble, congregate or meet together in the vicinity of any
premises where other persons are employed or reside for the purpose of inducing
any such other person by threats, coercion, intimidation or acts of violence to
quit or refrain from entering a place of lawful employment. It is expressly not
the purpose of this section to prohibit peaceful picketing.
(2011 Code, § 11-505)
CHAPTER 6: FIREARMS, WEAPONS AND MISSILES
Section
   
11-601   Throwing missiles
   
11-602   Discharge of firearms
§ 11-601 THROWING MISSILES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person maliciously to throw any stone,
snowball, bottle or any other missile upon or at any vehicle, building, tree or
other public or private property or upon or at any person.
(2011 Code, § 11-601)
§ 11-602 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to discharge a firearm
within the corporate limits, unless such discharge occurs for lawful hunting
purposes and in all ways complies with state law and all regulations adopted by
the state’s Wildlife Resource Commission (Tenn. Op. Atty. Gen. No. 98-038).
(2011 Code, § 11-602) (Ord. 06-78, passed 11- -2006)
CHAPTER 7: TRESPASSING, MALICIOUS MISCHIEF AND INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC
Section
   
11-701   Trespassing
   
11-702   Trespassing on trains
   
11-703   Malicious mischief
   
11-704   Interference with traffic
§ 11-701 TRESPASSING.
   (A)   The owner or person in charge of any lot or parcel of land or any
building or other structure within the corporate limits may post the same
against trespassers. It shall be unlawful for any person to go upon any such
posted lot or parcel of land or into any such posted building or other
structure without the consent of the owner or person in charge.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and deemed to be a trespass for any peddler,
canvasser, solicitor, transient merchant or other person to fail promptly to
leave the private premises of any person who requests or directs him or her to
leave.
(2011 Code, § 11-701)
§ 11-702 TRESPASSING ON TRAINS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to climb, jump, step, stand upon or
cling to, or in any other way attach, himself or herself to any locomotive
engine or railroad car unless he or she works for the railroad corporation and
is acting the scope of his or her employment or unless he or she is a lawful
passenger or is otherwise lawfully entitled to be on such vehicle.
(2011 Code, § 11-702)
§ 11-703 MALICIOUS MISCHIEF.
   It shall be unlawful and deemed to be malicious mischief for any person
willfully, maliciously or wantonly to damage, deface, destroy, conceal, tamper
with, remove or withhold real or personal property which does not belong to him
or her.
(2011 Code, § 11-703)
§ 11-704 INTERFERENCE WITH TRAFFIC.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand, sit or engage in any activity
whatever on any public street, sidewalk, bridge or public ground in such a
manner as to prevent, obstruct or interfere unreasonably with the free passage
of pedestrian or vehicular traffic thereon.
(2011 Code, § 11-704)
CHAPTER 8: MISCELLANEOUS
Section
   
11-801   Abandoned refrigerators and the like
   
11-802   Caves, wells, cisterns and the like
   
11-803   Posting notices and the like
   
11-804   Reserved
   
11-805   Smoking and vaping in public parks
   
11-806   Civil emergency violations
§ 11-801 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave in any place accessible to
children any abandoned, unattended, unused or discarded refrigerator, icebox or
other container with any type latching or locking door without first removing
therefrom the latch, lock or door.
(2011 Code, § 11-801)
§ 11-802 CAVES, WELLS, CISTERNS AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to be maintained on property
owned or occupied by him or her any cave, well, cistern or other such opening
in the ground which is dangerous to life and limb without an adequate cover or
safeguard.
(2011 Code, § 11-802)
§ 11-803 POSTING NOTICES AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall fasten, in any way, any show-card, poster or other
advertising device upon any public or private property unless legally
authorized to do so.
(2011 Code, § 11-803)
§ 11-804 RESERVED.
§ 11-805 SMOKING AND VAPING IN PUBLIC PARKS.
   It shall be unlawful to smoke or vape in city parks.
(Ord. 12-10, passed 6-18-2012; Ord. 19-05, passed 3-18-2019)
§ 11-806 CIVIL EMERGENCY VIOLATIONS.
   Pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 38-9-105, any person violating the provisions
of orders issued by the Chief Administrative Officer during a proclaimed civil
emergency commits a Class C misdemeanor.
(Ord. 20-14, passed 9-21-2020)
CHAPTER 9: CURFEW REGULATIONS
Section
   
11-901   Short title
   
11-902   Purposes and findings
   
11-903   Definitions
   
11-904   Restrictions
   
11-905   Exceptions
   
11-906   Violations
   
11-907   Construction and severability
   
11-908   Continuing evaluation
   
11-909   Effective date
   
11-910   Notice
   
11-911   Ordinance cumulative
§ 11-901 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Curfew Ordinance”.
(2011 Code, § 11-901)
§ 11-902 PURPOSES AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the city has determined that
juveniles have been causing general disturbances to residents, and contributing
to an excessive number of incidents of damage to private and public property
and disturbances of the peace.
   (B)   The city’s Board of Mayor and Aldermen determines that special and
extenuating circumstances presently exist within the city that call for special
regulation of minors within the city in order to protect them from each other
and from other persons on the street during the nocturnal hours, and to aid in
crime prevention, to promote parental supervision and authority over minors and
to decrease juvenile crime rates.
   (C)   In accordance with the prevailing community standards, this chapter
serves to regulate the conduct of juveniles on streets during nocturnal hours
and those hours prohibited by any applicable state law, to be effectively and
consistently enforced for the protection of the juveniles in the city from each
other and from other persons on the streets during nocturnal hours, for the
enforcement of parental control of, authority over and responsibility for their
children, for the protection of the public from nocturnal mischief by
juveniles, for the reduction in the incidents of juvenile criminal activity,
for the furtherance of family responsibility and for the public good, safety
and welfare.
   (D)   After further review and continuing evaluation, the Board finds that
there is justification for the purposes and findings herein to adopt this
chapter.
(2011 Code, § 11-902)
§ 11-903 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular and words in the
singular number include the plural. The word “shall” is always mandatory and
not merely directory.
   CITY. The City of Spring Hill, Tennessee 37174.
   MINOR or JUVENILE. Any unemancipated person under the age of 18 years or, in
equivalent phrasing often herein employed, any person 17 or less years of age.
   PARENT. Any person having legal custody of a minor:
      (1)   As a natural or adoptive parent;
      (2)   As a legal guardian; or
      (3)   As a person to whom legal custody has been given by order of the
court.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Police Department of the City of Spring Hill, or any
officially designated precinct of said Department.
   REMAIN. To stay behind, to tarry and to stay unnecessarily upon the streets,
including the congregating of groups (or of interacting minors) totaling four
or more persons in which any minor involved would not be using the streets for
ordinary or serious purposes such as mere passage or going home. To implement
that thought with additional precision and precaution, numerous exemptions are
expressly defined in §
11-905 of this chapter so that this is not a mere prohibitory- or presence-type
curfew ordinance.
   STREET. A way or place, of whatsoever nature, open to the use of the public
as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or in the case of time,
whether Central Standard Time or Central Daylight Savings Time, generally
observed at that hour by the public in the city, prima facie the time when
observed in the city’s administrative offices and Police Department.
   YEAR OF AGE. Continues from one birthday, such as the seventeenth, to (but
not including the day of) the next, making it clear that 17 or less years of
age is herein treated as equivalent to the phrase “under 18 years of age”,
unless specifically defined differently herein.
(2011 Code, § 11-903)
§ 11-904 RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any minor between 17 and 18 years of age to
remain in or upon any public street, highway, park, vacant lot, establishment
or other public place within the city during the following time frames:
      (1)   Monday through Thursday between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.; and
      (2)   Friday through Sunday between the hours of 12:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any minor 16 years of age and under to remain
in or upon any public street, highway, park, vacant lot, establishment or other
public place within the city during the following time frames:
      (1)   Monday through Thursday between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.; and
      (2)   Friday through Sunday between the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(2011 Code, § 11-904)
§ 11-905 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following shall constitute valid exceptions to the operation of the
curfew:
   (A)   At any time, if a minor is accompanied by his or her parent;
   (B)   When accompanied by an adult authorized by a parent of such minor to
take said parent’s place in accompanying said minor for a designated period of
time and purpose within a specified area;
   (C)   Until the hour of 12:30 a.m. if the minor is on an errand as directed
by his or her parent;
   (D)   If the minor is legally employed, for the period from 45 minutes
before to 45 minutes after work, while going directly between his or her home
and place of employment. This exception shall also apply if the minor is in a
public place during curfew hours in the course of his or her employment. To
come within this exception, the minor must be carrying a written statement of
employment issued by employer pursuant to the authorization of the Chief of
Police to expire within 90 days;
   (E)   Until the hour of 12:30 a.m. if the minor is on the property of or the
sidewalk directly adjacent to the place where such minor resides or the place
immediately adjacent thereto if the owner of the adjacent building does not
communicate an objection to the minor and the police officer;
   (F)   When returning home by a direct route from (and within 30 minutes of
the termination of) a school activity or an activity of a religious or other
voluntary association, or a place of public entertainment, such as a movie,
play or sporting event. This exception will not apply beyond 1:30 a.m. If the
event is not commercial in nature or does not have a fixed, public known time
at which it will or does end, the sponsoring organization must register the
event with the Chief of Police of the city’s Police Department (or his or her
assigned representative) at least 24 hours in advance, informing the Police
Department of the time such event is scheduled to begin, the place at which it
shall be held, the time at which it shall end and the name of the sponsoring
organization;
   (G)   In the case of reasonable necessity, but only after such minor’s
parent has communicated to the Police Department personnel the facts
establishing such reasonable necessity relating to specified streets at a
designated time for a described purpose including place or origin and
destination. A copy of such communication, or the police record thereof, duly
certified by the Chief of Police to be correct, an appropriate notation of the
time it was received and of the names and addresses of such parent and minor
shall constitute evidence of qualification under this exception;
   (H)   When exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the
right of assembly. Such minor shall evidence the bona fides of such exercise
and provide notice to city officials by first delivering to the Police
Department a written communication, signed by such minor, with his or her home
address and telephone number, addressed to the Mayor of the city specifying
when, where and in what manner said minor will be on the streets at night
during hours when the curfew ordinance is still otherwise applicable to said
minor in the exercise of a First Amendment right specified in such
communication;
   (I)   When a minor is in a motor vehicle; and
   (J)   Each of the foregoing exceptions, and their several limitations, such
as provisions for notification, are severable, as hereinafter provided, but
here re-emphasized.
(2011 Code, § 11-905)
§ 11-906 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   A police officer of the city who has probable cause to believe that a
minor is in violation of this chapter shall:
      (1)   Ascertain the name and address of the minor;
      (2)   Issue the minor a written warning that the minor is in violation of
this chapter; and
      (3)   Order the minor to go promptly home by a direct route.
   (B)   Notwithstanding subsection (A)(1) above, a police officer who has
probable cause to believe that minor is in violation of this chapter, shall
transport the minor to the Police Department if:
      (1)   The minor has received one previous written warning for violation
of this chapter; or
      (2)   Reasonable grounds exist to believe the minor has engaged in
delinquent conduct.
   (C)   When a minor is taken to the Police Department, the minor’s parents
shall be immediately contacted. If after this contact there is still probable
cause to believe that the minor was violating this chapter, the minor shall be
held until the parent comes to take the minor home. When the parent arrives, he
or she shall be given a copy of this chapter. If no parent has arrived within
two hours, the minor shall be turned over to custody of the local juvenile
authorities until a parent can take custody of him or her.
   (D)   (1)   In case of a second violation by a minor, the Chief of Police
shall, by certified mail, send to the minor’s parent written notice of said
violation with a warning that any subsequent violation will result in a full
enforcement of the curfew ordinance, including enforcement of parental
responsibility and of applicable penalties. Said notice shall be sent to the
minor’s parent at his or her last known address and evidence of its mailing as
specified shall constitute sufficient notice of the minor’s violation.
      (2)   If, after the mailing of the warning notice set forth in subsection
(D)(1) above of a second violation by a minor, a parent violates §
11-904(C) of this chapter (in connection with the third violation by a minor),
this shall be treated as a first offense by the parent. For such first parental
offense, a parent shall be fined $25. For each subsequent offense by a parent,
the fine shall be increased by an additional $25 (e.g., $50 for the second, $75
for the third offense).
   (E)   Any minor who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter more
than two times shall be dealt with according to the juvenile laws of the state
and in accordance with the directives of the Juvenile Court of Maury or
Williamson County or such other court as shall have jurisdiction of said minor.
(2011 Code, § 11-906)
§ 11-907 CONSTRUCTION AND SEVERABILITY.
   Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of the curfew
ordinance. If any provision, including, inter alia, any exception, part, phrase
or term or the application to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the
application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby and
the validity of the curfew ordinance in any and all other respects shall not be
affected thereby. The Board does not intend a result that is absurd, impossible
to execute or unreasonable. It is intended that the curfew ordinance be held
inapplicable in such cases, if any, where its application would be
unconstitutional. A constitutional construction is intended and shall be given.
The Board does not intend to violate the Constitution of the state or the
Constitution of the United States of America.
(2011 Code, § 11-907)
§ 11-908 CONTINUING EVALUATION.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen will continue its evaluation and updating of
this chapter through methods including, but not limited to:
   (A)   Within six months after the implementation of this chapter, the Chief
of Police shall provide the Board of Mayor and Aldermen with a report
concerning the effect of this chapter on crimes committed by and against
minors, and of the number of warnings issued and arrests of minors and parents
hereunder, and such other information as Board may request; and
   (B)   After receipt of the Police Chief’s report by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen, the Recorder shall place this matter on the Board agenda for
discussion, review and continuing evaluation.
(2011 Code, § 11-908)
§ 11-909 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in force upon publication required by Tenn. Code Ann.
§ 6-2-201.
(2011 Code, § 11-909)
§ 11-910 NOTICE.
   The Recorder shall provide notice of this chapter and of the curfew
regulations established by it by having copies of the chapter posted in, on or
about such public or quasi-public places as may be determined by the Mayor,
Board and Police Department in order that the public may be constantly informed
of the existence of the chapter and its amendments and regulations.
(2011 Code, § 11-910)
§ 11-911 ORDINANCE CUMULATIVE.
   This chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any other laws in force.
(2011 Code, § 11-911)
TITLE 12: BUILDING, UTILITY CODES AND THE LIKE
      Chapter
         
1.   BUILDING CODE
         
2.   PLUMBING CODE
         
3.   GAS CODE
         
4.   RESIDENTIAL CODE
         
5.   MECHANICAL CODE
         
6.   ENERGY CODE
         
7.   INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
         
8.   RE-INSPECTION FEES ON CONSTRUCTION
         
9.   EXPLOSIVES USED IN CONSTRUCTION
CHAPTER 1: BUILDING CODE
Section
   
12-101   Building Code adopted
   
12-102   Modifications
   
12-103   Available in Recorder’s office
   
12-104   Violations
§ 12-101 BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to authority granted by Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-
506, and for the purpose of regulating the construction, alteration, repair,
use, occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building
or structure or any appurtenance connected or attached to any building or
structure, the International Building Code (for commercial buildings), 2018
edition, as prepared and adopted by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted and incorporated by reference as a part of this code, and is
hereinafter referred to as the “Building Code”.
(2011 Code, § 12-101) (Ord. 09-14, passed 4- -2009; Ord. 09-25, passed 8- -
2009; Ord. 13-19, passed 10-21-2013; Ord. 20-16, passed 9-21-2020)
Editor’s note:
   Copies of this Code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
§ 12-102 MODIFICATIONS.
   Whenever the Building Code refers to the “Chief Appointing Authority” or the
“Chief Administrator”, it shall be deemed to be a reference to the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen or the City Administrator. When the term “Building Official”
or “Director of Public Works” is named it shall, for the purposes of the
Building Code, mean the “Building Inspector of the City of Spring Hill” or such
person as the Board of Mayor and Aldermen has appointed and designated to
administer and enforce the provisions of the Building Code. When reference is
made to the duties of certain officials named therein including the Building
Official, that the Building Inspector of the city shall be deemed the
responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the Building Code
are concerned.
(2011 Code, § 12-102)
§ 12-103 AVAILABLE IN RECORDER’S OFFICE.
   Pursuant to the requirements of the Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-54-502, one copy of
the Building Code has been placed on file in the Recorder’s office and shall be
kept there for the use and inspection of the public.
(2011 Code, § 12-103)
§ 12-104 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any
provision of the Building Code as herein adopted by reference and modified.
(2011 Code, § 12-104)
CHAPTER 2: PLUMBING CODE
Section
   
12-201   Plumbing Code adopted
   
12-202   Modifications
   
12-203   Available in Recorder’s office
   
12-204   Violations
§ 12-201 PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to authority granted by Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-
506 and for the purpose of regulating plumbing installations, including
alterations, repairs, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and the
appurtenances thereto, within or without the municipality, when such plumbing
is or is to be connected with the municipal water or sewerage system, the
International Plumbing Code, 2018 edition, as prepared and adopted by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as
a part of this code and is hereinafter referred to as the “Plumbing Code”.
(2011 Code, § 12-201) (Ord. 09-14, passed 4- -2009; Ord. 09-25, passed 8- -
2009; Ord. 13-19, passed 10-21-2013; Ord. 20-16, passed 9-21-2020)
Editor’s note:
   Copies of this Code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
§ 12-202 MODIFICATIONS.
   Wherever the Plumbing Code refers to the “Chief Appointing Authority” or the
“Chief Administrator”, it shall be deemed to be a reference to the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen or the City Administrator. When the term “Building Official”
or “Director of Public Works” is named it shall, for the purposes of the
Plumbing Code, mean the “Building Inspector of the City of Spring Hill” or such
person as the Board of Mayor and Aldermen has appointed and designated to
administer and enforce the provisions of the Plumbing Code. When reference is
made to the duties of certain officials named therein including the Building
Official, that the Building Inspector of the city shall be deemed the
responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the Plumbing Code
are concerned. The recommended schedule of permit fees set forth therein are
hereby adopted.
(2011 Code, § 12-202) (Ord. 09-14, passed 4- -2009)
§ 12-203 AVAILABLE IN RECORDER’S OFFICE.
   Pursuant to the requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-54-502, one copy of the
Plumbing Code has been placed on file in the Recorder’s office and shall be
kept there for the use and inspection of the public.
(2011 Code, § 12-203)
§ 12-204 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any
provision of the Plumbing Code as herein adopted by reference and modified.
(2011 Code, § 12-204)
CHAPTER 3: GAS CODE
Section
   
12-301   Title and definitions
   
12-302   Purpose and scope
   
12-303   Use of existing piping and appliances
   
12-304   Bond and license
   
12-305   Gas Inspector and assistants
   
12-306   Powers and duties of Inspector
   
12-307   Permits
   
12-308   Inspections
   
12-309   Certificates
   
12-310   Fees
   
12-311   Violations and penalties
   
12-312   Non-liability
   
12-313   Modifications
§ 12-301 TITLE AND DEFINITIONS.
   This chapter and the code herein adopted by reference shall be known as the
“Gas Code” of the city. The following definitions are provided for the purpose
of interpretation and administration of the Gas Code.
   CERTAIN APPLIANCES. Conversion burners, floor furnaces, central heating
plants, vented wall furnaces, water heaters and boilers.
   CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL. A document or tag issued and/or attached by the
Inspector to the inspected material, piping or appliance installation, filled
out, together with date, address of the premises and signed by the Inspector.
   GAS COMPANY. Any person distributing gas within the corporate limits or
authorized and proposing to so engage.
   INSPECTOR. The person appointed as Inspector, and shall include each
assistant Inspector, if any, from time to time acting as such under this
chapter by appointment of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, corporation or any other
organized group of individuals.
(2011 Code, § 12-301)
§ 12-302 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   The purpose of the Gas Code is to provide minimum standards, provisions and
requirements for safe installation of consumer’s gas piping and gas appliances.
All gas piping and gas appliances installed, replaced, maintained or repaired
within the corporate limits shall conform to the requirements of this chapter
and to the International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, which is hereby
incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth
herein. One copy of the Gas Code shall be kept on file in the office of the
city’s Recorder for the use and inspection of the public.
(2011 Code, § 12-302) (Ord. 09-14, passed 4- -2009; Ord. 09-25, passed 8- -
2009; Ord. 13-19, passed 10-21-2013; Ord. 20-16, passed 9-21-2020)
Editor’s note:
   Copies of this Code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
§ 12-303 USE OF EXISTING PIPING AND APPLIANCES.
   Notwithstanding any provision in the Gas Code to the contrary, consumer’s
piping installed prior to the adoption of the Gas Code or piping installed to
supply other than natural gas may be converted to natural gas if the Inspector
finds, upon inspection and proper tests, that such piping will render
reasonably satisfactory gas service to the consumer and will not in any way
endanger life or property; otherwise, such piping shall be altered or replaced,
in whole or in part, to conform with the requirements of the Gas Code.
(2011 Code, § 12-303)
§ 12-304 BOND AND LICENSE.
   (A)   No person shall engage in or work at the installation, extension or
alteration of consumer’s gas piping or certain gas appliances, until such
person shall have secured a license as hereinafter provided, and shall have
executed and delivered to the city’s Recorder a good and sufficient bond in the
penal sum of $10,000, with corporate surety, conditioned for the faithful
performance of all such work, entered upon or contracted for, in strict
accordance and compliance with the provisions of the Gas Code. The bond herein
required shall expire January 1 next following its approval by the city’s
Recorder, and thereafter on January 1 of each year a new bond, in form and
substance as herein required, shall be given by such person to cover all such
work as shall be done during such year.
   (B)   Upon approval of said bond, the person desiring to do such work shall
secure from the city’s Recorder a non-transferable license which shall run
until January 1 next succeeding its issuance, unless sooner revoked. The person
obtaining a license shall pay any applicable license fees to the city’s
Recorder.
   (C)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting an
individual from installing or repairing his or her own appliances or
installing, extending, replacing, altering or repairing consumer’s piping on
his or her own premises, or as requiring a license or a bond from an individual
doing such work on his or her own premises. All such work must be done in
conformity with all other provisions of the Gas Code, including those relating
to permits, inspections and fees.
(2011 Code, § 12-304)
§ 12-305 GAS INSPECTOR AND ASSISTANTS.
   To provide for the administration and enforcement of the Gas Code, the
Office of Gas Inspector is hereby created. The Inspector, and such assistants
as may be necessary in the proper performance of the duties of the office,
shall be appointed or designated by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
(2011 Code, § 12-305)
§ 12-306 POWERS AND DUTIES OF INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The Inspector is authorized and directed to enforce all of the
provisions of the Gas Code. Upon presentation of proper credentials, he or she
may enter any building or premises at reasonable times for the purpose of
making inspections or preventing violations of the Gas Code.
   (B)   The Inspector is authorized to disconnect any gas piping or fixture or
appliance for which a certificate of approval is required, but has not been
issued, or which, upon inspection, shall be found defective or in such
condition as to endanger life or property. In all cases where such a
disconnection is made, a notice shall be attached to the piping, fixture or
appliance disconnected by the Inspector, which notice shall state that the same
has been disconnected by the Inspector, together with the reason or reasons
therefor, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove the notice or
reconnect said gas piping or fixture or appliance without authorization by the
Inspector and such gas piping or fixture or appliance shall not be put in
service or used until the Inspector has attached his certificate of approval in
lieu of his or her prior disconnection notice.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Inspector to confer from time to time with
representatives of the local Health Department, the local Fire Department and
the gas company, and otherwise obtain from proper sources all helpful
information and advice, presenting same to the appropriate officials from time
to time for their consideration.
(2011 Code, § 12-306)
§ 12-307 PERMITS.
   (A)   No person shall install a gas conversion burner, floor furnace,
central heating plant, vented wall furnace, water heater, boiler, consumer’s
gas piping or convert existing piping to utilize natural gas without first
obtaining a permit to do such work from the city’s Recorder; however, permits
will not be required for setting or connecting other gas appliances, or for the
repair of leaks in house piping.
   (B)   When only temporary use of gas is desired, the Recorder may issue a
permit for such use, for a period of not to exceed 60 days; provided, the
consumer’s gas piping to be used is given a test equal to that required for a
final piping inspection.
   (C)   Except when work in a public street or other public way is involved,
the gas company shall not be required to obtain permits to set meters, or to
extend, relocate, remove or repair its service lines, mains or other
facilities, or for work having to do with its own gas system.
(2011 Code, § 12-307)
§ 12-308 INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   A rough piping inspection shall be made after all new piping
authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any such piping has
been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been attached
thereto.
   (B)   A final piping inspection shall be made after all piping authorized by
the permit has been installed and after all portions thereof which are to be
concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any
fixtures or gas appliances have been attached thereto. This inspection shall
include a pressure test, at which time the piping shall stand an air pressure
equal to not less than the pressure of a column of mercury six inches in
height, and the piping shall hold this air pressure for a period of at least
ten minutes without any perceptible drop. A mercury column gauge shall be used
for the test. All tools, apparatus, labor and assistance necessary for the test
shall be furnished by the installer of such piping.
(2011 Code, § 12-308)
§ 12-309 CERTIFICATES.
   (A)   The Inspector shall issue a certificate of approval at the completion
of the work for which a permit for consumer piping has been issued if after
inspection it is found that such work complies with the provisions of the Gas
Code.
   (B)   A duplicate of each certificate issued covering consumer’s gas piping
shall be delivered to the gas company and used as its authority to render gas
service.
(2011 Code, § 12-309)
§ 12-310 FEES.
   The permit fee schedule as recommended in the Gas Code is hereby adopted.
(2011 Code, § 12-310)
§ 12-311 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of the
Gas Code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be fined under the general penalty clause for this code of ordinances, or the
license of such person may be revoked, or both fine and revocation of license
may be imposed.
(2011 Code, § 12-311)
§ 12-312 NON-LIABILITY.
   This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the city any liability
or responsibility for damages to any person injured by any defect in any gas
piping or appliance mentioned herein, or by installation thereof, nor shall the
city, or any official or employee thereof, be held as assuming any such
liability or responsibility by reason of the inspection authorized hereunder or
the certificate of approval issued by the Inspector.
(2011 Code, § 12-312)
§ 12-313 MODIFICATIONS.
   Wherever the Gas Code refers to the “Chief Appointing Authority” or the
“Chief Administrator”, it shall be deemed to be a reference to the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen or the City Administrator. When the term “Building Official”
or “Director of Public Works” is named, it shall, for the purposes of the Gas
Code, mean the “Building Inspector of the City of Spring Hill” or such person
as the Board of Mayor and Aldermen has appointed and designated to administer
and enforce the provisions of the Gas Code. When reference is made to the
duties of certain officials named therein including the Building Official, that
the Building Inspector of the city shall be deemed the responsible official
insofar as enforcing the provisions of the gas code are concerned. The
recommended schedule of permit fees set forth therein are hereby adopted.
(2011 Code, § 12-313)
CHAPTER 4: RESIDENTIAL CODE
Section
   
12-401   Residential Code adopted
   
12-402   Modifications
   
12-403   Available in Recorder’s office
   
12-404   Violations
§ 12-401 RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to authority granted by Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-
506, and for the purpose of securing the public safety, health and general
welfare through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate light and
ventilation in dwellings, apartment houses, rooming houses and buildings,
structures or premises used as such, the International Residential Code for
One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2018 edition, (except the removal of R313.2,
omitting on-family dwelling (single-family home) fire sprinkler requirement, as
per the state’s exemption), as prepared and adopted by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as a part of this code
and is hereinafter referred to as the “Housing Code”.
(2011 Code, § 12-401) (Ord. 09-14, passed 4- -2009; Ord. 09-25, passed 8- -
2009; Ord. 13-19, passed 10-21-2013; Ord. 14-04, passed 2-18-2014; Ord. 20-16,
passed 9-21-2020)
Editor’s note:
   Copies of this Code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
§ 12-402 MODIFICATIONS.
   The 2018 International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings is
hereby specifically amended, modified or deleted as follows.
   (A)   Section R101.1 is amended by deleting the phrase “[name of
jurisdiction]” and substituting in lieu thereof the phrase “the City of Spring
Hill, Tennessee”.
   (B)   (1)   Section R105.2 on building work exempted from the permit
requirement is amending exemptions 1, 2, 9 and 10 and adding 11 substituting in
lieu thereof the following:
      1.   Portable one-story detached accessory structures used as tool and
storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not
exceed 32 square feet.
      2.   Fences not over 32 inches high.
      5.   Sidewalks and Driveways is deleted.
      (2)   Section R 105.2 on mechanical work exempted from the permit
requirement is amended by deleting text and adding the following:
      9.   Replacement of an HVAC unit where unit heating and cooling capacity
and fuel source are not changed.
      10.   Decks not exceeding 9 square feet in area that are not more than 30
inches above grade at any point.
      11.   Roof covering replacement that does not involve the replacement of
the roof deck or framing.
   (C)   R105.3.2 “Time limitation of application” is deleted in its entirety
and replaced with the following:
      Building permits shall expire 180 days after issuance unless voided for
suspension, abandonment or failure to commence the work. The Building Official
may extend the expiration date for a period not to exceed 180 days upon written
request by the applicant showing circumstances beyond the reasonable control of
the applicant including, but not limited to, extreme weather conditions, labor
or strike, civil unrest, terrorism, earthquakes and other natural disasters,
plague, epidemics, acts of government, and the like. All such extensions shall
be reported to the Board of Mayor and Aldermen on a monthly basis. In the event
a building permit expires, a new building permit application shall be required.
      Any building permit issued under prior 365-day time limitation provision
shall be allowed to remain valid for the balance of its stated term. Building
permits under this circumstance will not be extended by the Building Official
as provided above unless the applicant pays the difference on any increases in
fees and/or taxes that may have been adopted by the City following the initial
issuance of said building permit. Failure to pay such increases in fees and/or
taxes by an applicant will result in the expiration at the end of the balance
of the stated term rendering the permit non-renewable.
   (D)   Section R313.2 is amended by deleting “one-family”.
   (E)   Section R317 “Protection of Wood and Wood Based Products Against
Decay” is amended deleting “18 inches” and replacing with “24 inches” and
deleting “12 inches” and replacing it with “24 inches” to read as below:
      1.   Wood joists or the bottom of a wood structural floor when closer
than 24 inches (553 mm) or wood girders when closer than 24 inches (553 mm) to
the exposed ground in crawl spaces or unexcavated area located within the
periphery of the building foundation.
   (F)   R317.1.4 "Wood Columns" is amended by deleting wood columns to replace
with masonry type building material or approved structural piers.
   (G)   R403.3.3 “Drainage” is amended by adding text to read:
      Final grade shall be sloped in accordance with Section R401.3. In other
than Group I soils, as detailed in Table R405.1 two (2) inches of gravel or
crushed stone beneath horizontal (class 1) retarder below ground shall have a
3-inch drain to daylight or into an approved system.
   (H)   Table R602.3(5) “Size, Height and Spacing of Wood Studs” is amended by
all columns that reflect “24” is deleted and replaced with “16”.
   (I)   Section R602.5 “Interior non-bearing walls” is amended by deleting
“studs spaced 24 inches”, replaced with “studs spaced 16 inches”.
   (J)   R602.7.3 “Nonbearing walls” is amended by deleting the text “a single
flat 2-inch by 4-inch (51 mm by 102 mm) member may be used as a header in
interior or exterior nonbearing walls”, replacing it with “a double 2-inch by
4-inch (102 mm by 204 mm) member on edge may be used as a header in interior or
exterior nonbearing walls”.
   (K)   R703.11.1 “Installation, vinyl siding” is amended by adding text:
“vinyl siding shall be installed over solid OSB sheathing”.
   (L)   R802.3 “Framing details” is amended by adding text to the end of the
paragraph: “All primary roofline structure design shall maintain a minimum of a
6:12 pitch, exclusive of dormers and porches, eaves, rakes, gable ends and/or
any other portion of a roof shall maintain a one-foot minimum overhang."
   (M)   Section R807.1 “Attic Access” is amended by adding the following text
at the end of the section’s second paragraph: “Attics that contain HVAC
equipment or appliances must provide permanent access by means of either a (25
inches by 54 inches) pull-down stair or permanent ladder.”
   (N)   R903.4 “Roof drainage” is amended by deleting the text “Unless roofs
are sloped to drain over roof edges” to read “Roof drains shall be installed at
each low point of the roof.”
   (O)   R1003.19 is amended by adding "all cables, PVC pipe, HVAC lines within
the fireplace chase shall be separated by approved fire blocking material."
   (P)   Chapter 11 “Energy Efficiency” is amended deleting the chapter’s text
in its entirety and in lieu thereof substituting the following: “The
International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition”.
   (Q)   Section M1805 “Masonry and Factory-Built Chimneys” is amended by
adding:
      M1805.1.1 All fireplace chimneys (wood or gas) to be in a chase
constructed with the same materials as the exterior of the structure or other
materials approved by the Building Codes Director regardless of height of
chimney.
   (R)   M2005.2.1 "Water Heater Access" is amended by deleting underfloor
crawlspace. No water heater shall be installed in an underfloor crawl space for
residential dwellings.   
   (S)   P2718 "Clothes Washing Machine" is amended by adding "all clothes
washing machines located on the second floor or above shall be required to have
a secondary drain and pan that drains to the exterior of the home."
   (T)   P3002.2 "Prohibited Joints" is amended by adding number 7. Elastomeric
Sealing Sleeves for unground sewer line.
   (U)   The adoption of the following Appendix contained in the International
Residential Code for One and Two-Family Dwellings: Appendix F, Radon Control
Methods.
(2011 Code, § 12-402) (Ord. 14-10, passed 4-21-2014; Ord. 18-11, passed 8-20-
2018; Ord. 20-16, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 12-403 AVAILABLE IN RECORDER’S OFFICE.
   Pursuant to the requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-54-502, one copy of the
Residential Code has been placed on file in the Recorder’s office and shall be
kept there for the use and inspection of the public.
(2011 Code, § 12-403)
§ 12-404 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any
provision of the Residential Code as herein adopted by reference and modified.
(2011 Code, § 12-404)
CHAPTER 5: MECHANICAL CODE
Section
   
12-501   Mechanical Code adopted
   
12-502   Modifications
   
12-503   Available in Recorder’s office
   
12-504   Violations
§ 12-501 MECHANICAL CODE ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to authority granted by Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-
513 and for the purpose of regulating the installation of mechanical systems,
including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures,
fittings and/or appurtenances thereto, including ventilating, heating, cooling,
air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-
related systems, the International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition, as prepared
and adopted by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as a part of this code and is hereinafter referred to
as the “Mechanical Code”.
(2011 Code, § 12-501) (Ord. 09-14, passed 4- -2009; Ord. 09-25, passed 8- -
2009; Ord. 13-19, passed 10- 21-2013; Ord. 20-16, passed 9-21-2020)
Editor’s note:
   Copies of this Code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
§ 12-502 MODIFICATIONS.
   Wherever the mechanical code refers to the “Chief Appointing Authority” or
the “Chief Administrator”, it shall be deemed to be a reference to the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen or the City Administrator. When the term “Building Official”
or “Director of Public Works” is named, it shall, for the purposes of the
Mechanical Code, mean the “Building Inspector of the City of Spring Hill” or
such person as the Board of Mayor and Aldermen has appointed and designated to
administer and enforce the provisions of the Mechanical Code. When reference is
made to the duties of certain officials named therein including the Building
Official, that the Building Inspector of the city shall be deemed the
responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the Mechanical Code
are concerned. The recommended schedule of permit fees set forth therein are
hereby adopted.
(2011 Code, § 12-502)
§ 12-503 AVAILABLE IN RECORDER’S OFFICE.
   Pursuant to the requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-54-502, one copy of the
Mechanical Code has been placed on file in the city’s Recorder’s office and
shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public.
(2011 Code, § 12-503)
§ 12-504 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any
provision of the Mechanical Code as herein adopted by reference and modified.
(2011 Code, § 12-504)
CHAPTER 6: ENERGY CODE
Section
   
12-601   Energy Code adopted
   
12-602   Modifications
   
12-603   Available in Recorder’s office
   
12-604   Violation and penalty
§ 12-601 ENERGY CODE ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to authority granted by Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-
506, and for the purpose of regulating the design of buildings for adequate
thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of
mechanical, electrical, water-heating and illumination systems and equipment
which will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction, the
International Energy Conservation Code, 2018 edition, as prepared and
maintained by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference as a part of this code, and is hereinafter referred
to as the “Energy Code”.
(2011 Code, § 12-601) (Ord. 09-14, passed 4- -2009; Ord. 09-25, passed 8- -
2009; Ord. 13-19, passed 10-21-2013; Ord. 18-11, passed 8-20-2018; Ord. 20-16,
passed 9-21-2020)
Editor’s note:
   Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
Statutory reference:
   Requires Tennessee cities either to adopt the Model Energy Code, 1992
edition, or to adopt local standards equal to or stricter than the standards in
the Energy Code, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 13-19-106
§ 12-602 MODIFICATIONS.
   The 2018 International Energy Conservation Code is hereby specifically
amended, modified, or deleted as follows.
   (A)   Delete in its entirety Table 402.1.2 and replace same with Table
402.1.1, Insulation and Fenestration Requirements by Component, as contained in
the International Energy Conservation Code, 2009 edition.
   (B)   Whenever the Energy Code refers to the “Responsible Government
Agency”, it shall be deemed to be a reference to the “City of Spring Hill”.
When the “Building Official” is named, it shall, for the purposes of the Energy
Code, mean such person as the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall have appointed
or designated to administer and enforce the provisions of the Energy Code.
(2011 Code, § 12-602) (Ord. 20-16, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 12-603 AVAILABLE IN RECORDER’S OFFICE.
   Pursuant to the requirements of the Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-54-502, one copy of
the Energy Code has been placed on file in the Recorder’s office and shall be
kept there for the use and inspection of the public.
(2011 Code, § 12-603)
§ 12-604 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to violate or fail to comply with
any provision of the Energy Code as herein adopted by reference and modified.
The violation of any section of this chapter shall be punishable by a penalty
of up to $500 for each offense. Each day a violation is allowed to continue
shall constitute a separate offense.
(2011 Code, § 12-604)
CHAPTER 7: INTERNATIONAL SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE
Section
   
12-701   Swimming Pool and Spa Code adopted
   
12-702   Modifications
   
12-703   Available in Recorder's office
   
12-704   Violation and penalty
§ 12-701 SWIMMING POOL AND SPA CODE ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to authority granted by Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-
506, and for the purpose of regulating the construction, alteration, repair,
use, occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of swimming pools
and spas or any appurtenance connected or attached to any swimming pool or spa,
the International Swimming Pool and Spa Code, 2018 edition, as prepared and
adopted by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated
by reference as a part of this code, and is hereinafter referred to as the
"Swimming Pool and Spa Code".
(Ord. 20-16, passed 9-21-2020)
Editor's note:
Copies of this Code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
§ 12-702 MODIFICATIONS.
   Whenever the Building Code refers to the "Chief Appointing Authority" or the
"Chief Administrator", it shall be deemed to be a reference to the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen or the City Administrator. When the term "Building Official"
or "Director of Public Works" is named it shall, for the purposes of the
Building Code, mean the "Building Inspector of the City of Spring Hill" or such
person as the Board of Mayor and Aldermen has appointed and designated to
administer and enforce the provisions of the Building Code. When reference is
made to the duties of certain officials named therein including the Building
Official, that the Building Inspector of the city shall be deemed the
responsible official insofar as enforcing the provisions of the Building Code
are concerned.
(Ord. 20-16, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 12-703 AVAILABLE IN RECORDER'S OFFICE.
   Pursuant to the requirements of the Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-54-502, one copy of
the Building Code has been placed on file in the Recorder's office and shall be
kept there for the use and inspection of the public.
(Ord. 20-16, passed 9-21-2020)
§ 12-704 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   It shall be a civil offense for any person to violate or fail to comply with
any provision of the Swimming Pool and Spa Code as herein adopted by reference
and modified. The violation of any section of this chapter shall be punishable
by a penalty of up to $500 for each offense. Each day a violation is allowed to
continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 20-16, passed 9-21-2020)
CHAPTER 8: RE-INSPECTION FEES ON CONSTRUCTION
Section
   
12-801   Fee schedule
§ 12-801 FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   The building and plumbing permit fees are acknowledged to be adequate
payment for the first time inspections on each major phase of work in
construction. Code re-inspections of the same work are not adequately paid for
by the initial building and plumbing permit fees.
   (B)   The following fee schedule will be in effect for re-inspections:
      (1)   First inspections, each construction phase: no additional fee;
      (2)   First re-inspection, each permit: no additional fee;
      (3)   Second re-inspection, each permit: $25; and
      (4)   Third and more re-inspections, each permit: $50 each.
   (C)   The term “each permit”, as used in the fee schedule, includes all
permits (building permit, plus amending permits), issued for a single building
or construction project, and also includes a single constructed entity or build
out on a continuous foundation or a single reconstruction, renovation or
remodeling permit of similar characteristics as a single new building permit.
   (D)   No further inspections per each permit will be done by city employees
until required re-inspection fees have been paid. No certificate of occupancy
will be issued until such fees have been paid.
(2011 Code, § 12-801)
CHAPTER 9: EXPLOSIVES USED IN CONSTRUCTION
Section
   
12-901   State’s Blasting Laws Annotated adopted
   
12-902   Permit required
   
12-903   Pre-blast inspection
   
12-904   Permit holder to give notice prior to blasting
   
12-905   Failure to comply
§ 12-901 STATE’S BLASTING LAWS ANNOTATED ADOPTED.
   The 1995 edition of Tennessee Blasting Laws Annotated, issued by the state’s
Division of Fire Prevention, is hereby adopted as the city’s code to be
applicable to use of all explosives used in construction; any later edition of
this code may be considered to be adopted as of the date of the edition
publication.
(2011 Code, § 12-901)
§ 12-902 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   All persons planning on the use of explosives in construction shall first
apply for a city permit; such permit shall require the sum of $50 to be paid as
a permit fee.
(2011 Code, § 12-902)
§ 12-903 PRE-BLAST INSPECTION.
   The Codes Department of the city shall be notified before explosives are
used so that a pre-blast inspection may be made.
(2011 Code, § 12-903)
§ 12-904 PERMIT HOLDER TO GIVE NOTICE PRIOR TO BLASTING.
   All persons holding a permit for the use of explosives in any type of
construction project shall give notice, prior to any blasting, to all occupants
of residential or commercial structures within 500 yards.
(2011 Code, § 12-904)
§ 12-905 FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   If the permit holder fails to comply with these regulations in any manner,
an immediate stop-work order will be issued and all blasting and construction
will cease until such time as the permit holder is in full compliance.
(2011 Code, § 12-905)
TITLE 13: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
1.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
         
2.   JUNKYARDS
         
3.   SLUM CLEARANCE FOR BOARDING/ROOMING HOUSES
         
4.   ALARM SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 1: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
   
13-101   Property Maintenance Code adopted
   
13-102   Modifications
   
13-103   Additional property maintenance regulations
   
13-104   Available in Recorder’s office
   
13-105   Violations
§ 13-101 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to authority granted by Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 6-54-501 through 6-54-
506 and for the purpose of regulating and governing the conditions and
maintenance of all property, buildings and structures, including the standards
for supplied utilities and facilities, conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use, the condemnation
of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use, and the
demolition of such existing structures, the International Property Maintenance
Code, 2006 edition, (IPMC), as prepared and adopted by the International Code
Council, Inc., is hereby adopted and incorporated, by reference, as a part of
this code, with the additions, insertions, revisions, exclusions and changes,
if any, prescribed in §
13-102 of this chapter and is hereinafter referred to as the “Property
Maintenance Code”.
(2011 Code, § 12-701) (Ord. 13-25, passed 11-18-2013)
§ 13-102 MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Responsible Official. When, within the Property Maintenance Code,
reference is made to the duties of certain officials designated therein, that
the Building Inspector of the city shall be deemed the responsible official
insofar as enforcing the provisions of the Property Maintenance Code are
concerned.
   (B)   Exclusions. The following sections of the 2006 IPMC are hereby
excluded:
      (1)   IPMC Chapters 4, 5, 6 and 7;
      (2)   IPMC Section 111;
      (3)   IPMC Section 304.14;
      (4)   IPMC Sections 304.18.1, 304.18.2, 304.18.3; and
      (5)   IPMC Section 305.
   (C)   Insertions. The following sections of the 2006 IPMC are hereby
revised:
      (1)   Section 101.1: Insert “City of Spring Hill” for “[NAME OF
JURISDICTION]”; and
      (2)   Section 302.4: Insert “Twelve inches (12”)” for “jurisdiction to
insert height in inches”.
   (D)   Amendments. The following sections of the 2006 IPMC are hereby
amended:
      IPMC Section 103.5, Fees. The fees for activities and services performed
by the department in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be
indicated in a fee schedule, a copy, as maintained and amended time to time, is
available for inspection by the City through the Building and Codes Office. The
City Administrator shall have the discretion to place an additional charge for
administrative expense of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) on each
parcel of real estate involved and, with the approval of the board, the same
shall be assessed as a part of the municipal taxes and as a lien upon the real
estate.
      IPMC Section 106.2, Notice of Violation. The code official shall serve a
notice of violation or order in accordance with Section 107. The notice of
violation or order shall inform the offender that they have ten (10) days to
remedy the violation. The code official has the authority to grant extensions
based on his judgement of the situation at hand.
      IPMC Section 106.3, Prosecution of Violation. Any person failing to
comply with a notice of violation or order served in accordance with Section
107 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or civil infraction as determined
by the local municipality, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability
offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the code official
shall institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain,
correct or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of
the unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this
code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by
the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the
real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such
real estate. The expense shall, thereupon become and constitute a lien and
charge upon the property which shall be payable with interest at the rate of
six percent (6%) per annum from the date of such certification, until paid,
collectable at the time ad valorem taxes on said property become due and
payable to the city. Such expense and charge shall be first and prior lien
against the property, subject only to the lien for taxes to the county and of
the same character as the lien of the city for municipal taxes. Upon failure of
the owner of the property to pay the lien, it may be enforced in the same
manner as tax liens in favor of the city and shall be certified by the city
recorder to the city attorney along with the certification of ad valorem taxes
assessed against the property in the city and not paid when due.
      IPMC Section 106.4, Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the
requirements thereof, shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state
or local laws, and shall be subject to a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00), plus
any court costs. Each occurrence constitutes a separate offense.
   (E)   Exemptions. The following items are exempt from the 2006 IPMC Section
302.4:
      (1)   Cultivation of plants or cover crops for agricultural purposes
including pastures;
      (2)   Those portions of properties lying 40 feet or more from boundary
lines or public rights-of-way on tracts of land containing a minimum of one
acre; and
      (3)   Those properties under current active damage claims from a licensed
insurance carriers or properties sustaining immediate damage caused as a result
of catastrophic weather, fire or natural disaster events.
(2011 Code, § 12-702) (Ord. 02-06, passed 4- -2002; Ord. 13-25, passed 11-18-
2013)
Editor’s note:
   Copies of this code (and any amendments) may be purchased from the
International Code Council, 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213.
§ 13-103 ADDITIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REGULATIONS.
   Lots, tracts and parcels of land within the city shall be maintained and
action is to be taken by the city according to subsections (A) through (F)
below.
   (A)   Stagnant water. It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to allow
any pool of stagnant water to accumulate and stand on his or her property
without treating it so as to effectively prevent the breeding of mosquitoes.
(2011 Code, § 13-103)
   (B)   Smoke, soot, cinders and the like. It shall be unlawful for any person
to permit or cause the escape of such quantities of dense smoke, soot, cinders,
noxious acids, fumes, dust or gases as to be detrimental to or to endanger the
health, comfort and safety of the public or so as to cause or have a tendency
to cause injury or damage to property or business.
(2011 Code, § 13-102)
   (C)   Recorder to keep files and records. The City Recorder shall keep a
complete set of files and records relating to such liens, and shall include the
amount of such liens in tax statements for ad valorem taxes thereafter
submitted to the owners of lots, tracts or parcels of land subject to such
liens.
   (D)   Dead animals. Any person owning or having possession of any dead
animal not intended for use as food shall promptly bury it or notify the Health
Officer and dispose of such animal in such manner as the Health Officer shall
direct.
(2011 Code, § 13-105)
   (E)   House trailers. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, locate or
occupy any house trailer or portable building unless it complies with all
plumbing, electrical, sanitary and building provisions applicable to stationary
structures and the proposed location conforms to the zoning provisions of the
city and unless a permit therefor shall have been first duly issued by the City
Recorder.
(2011 Code, § 13-107)
   (F)   Storage. It is a further violation of this section to allow the
storage of items on or adjacent to, any property or in any public roadway or
alleyway, such as, but not limited to: dilapidated furniture; appliances;
cleaning products; unused landscaping materials; paint or chemical products;
machinery; equipment; building materials; construction materials and/or tools;
automobile parts; tires; or any other item(s) which are in a wholly or
partially rusted, wrecked, junked, dismantled or inoperative condition, which
are not completely enclosed within a building, dwelling or opaque fencing or
screening, and as such are not visible to the general public from a common
public roadway, residence, parking lot, empty lot, school, city park and/or
gathering area, and such items are stored as to not endanger or cause injury to
the residents or occupants of nearby properties.
(2011 Code, § 13-101)
(Ord. 02-06, passed 4- -2002; Ord. 13-25, passed 11-18-2013)
§ 13-104 AVAILABLE IN RECORDER’S OFFICE.
   Pursuant to the requirements of Tenn. Code Ann. § 6-54-502, one copy of the
Property Maintenance Code has been placed on file in the City Recorder’s office
and shall be kept there for the use and inspection of the public.
(2011 Code, § 12-704) (Ord. 13-25, passed 11-18-2013)
§ 13-105 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any
provision of the Property Maintenance Code, as herein adopted by reference and
modified.
(2011 Code, § 12-704) (Ord. 13-25, passed 11-18-2013)
CHAPTER 2: JUNKYARDS
Section
   
13-201   Junkyards
§ 13-201 JUNKYARDS.
   All junkyards within the corporate limits shall be operated and maintained
subject to the following regulations.
   (A)   All junk stored or kept in such yards shall be so kept that it will
not catch and hold water in which mosquitoes may breed and so that it will not
constitute a place or places in which rats, mice or other vermin may be
harbored, reared or propagated.
   (B)   All such junkyards shall be enclosed within close-fitting plank or
metal solid fences touching the ground on the bottom and being not less than
six feet in height, such fence to be built so that it will be impossible for
stray cats and/or stray dogs to have access to such junkyards.
   (C)   Such yards shall be so maintained as to be in a sanitary condition and
so as not to be a menace to the public health or safety. Maintaining or
operating a junkyard in violation of this section is an offense under this
code; each day thereof, after notification by the Health Officer, shall
comprise a separate offense.
(2011 Code, § 13-201)
Statutory reference:
   The provisions of this section were taken substantially from the Bristol
ordinance upheld by the Tennessee Court of Appeals as being a reasonable and
valid exercise of the police power in the case of Hagaman v. Slaughter, 49
Tenn. App. 338, 354 S.W.2d 818 (1961)
CHAPTER 3: SLUM CLEARANCE FOR BOARDING/ROOMING HOUSES
Section
   
13-301   Findings of Board
   
13-302   Building requirements
   
13-303   License required
   
13-304   Application for license
   
13-305   Building Inspector; authority
   
13-306   Permit fee
§ 13-301 FINDINGS OF BOARD.
   (A)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen hereby declares that it finds that the
general safety, health and welfare of its citizens and those that might occupy
boarding houses could be compromised if persons engaged in renting rooms to
such persons allow or permit such properties to be maintained in unsafe or
unsanitary conditions.
   (B)   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen does thereby adopt this chapter to
regulate all entities engaged in the business of owning or operating rooming or
boarding houses in order to prohibit, abate, suppress and prevent unsafe and
unsanitary conditions from existing in the building committed to such use so
that they shall not be, or likely to be, detrimental to the health, morals,
comfort, safety, convenience or welfare of any of the inhabitants of the city.
(2011 Code, § 13-301)
§ 13-302 BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   Before any building or any part of any building may be used for housing more
than two occupants as a boarding house or rooming house, such facility must
meet the following requirements.
   (A)   Any room to be occupied by one person shall have a minimum of 70
square feet of floor space and an additional 50 square feet of floor space for
each additional person that will occupy the same room.
   (B)   The facilities must provide at least one bathroom for each four
sleeping rooms. The bathroom must contain at least a bath tub or shower and a
wash basin both of which must provide hot and cold running water. Each bathroom
must have at least 30 square feet of floor space, with no dimension being less
than four feet.
   (C)   Each room occupied for sleeping purposes shall have at least one
window opening directly to the outdoors which shall be of such size that its
area is at least 8% of the floor area in such room.
   (D)   The maximum distance of travel to reach an exit from any sleeping
facility shall not exceed 30 feet.
   (E)   Each room shall have a ceiling at least seven feet high and each such
room must have one working smoke detector.
   (F)   All space devoted to housing occupants as a rooming house or boarding
house must meet all of the requirements in any Housing Code adopted by the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen of the city.
(2011 Code, § 13-302)
§ 13-303 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No entity shall use any portion of a building for housing more than two
occupants as a rooming or boarding house without first having obtained a
license from the Building Inspector of the city.
(2011 Code, § 13-303)
§ 13-304 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   Each applicant for a license must complete and submit an application form to
the Building Inspector, who, before granting any permit under this chapter,
shall inspect the premises to determine if the building complies with the
minimum requirements set forth herein.
(2011 Code, § 13-304)
§ 13-305 BUILDING INSPECTOR; AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Building Inspector is granted the authority, at all reasonable
times, to inspect any premises, any portion of which is used for the
maintenance of a rooming house or boarding house housing more than two renters
to determine if it complies with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   If such inspection reflects any violation or other condition rendering
the same unfit for human occupancy, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized
to institute such proceedings as the Building Inspector deems appropriate for
the enforcement of this chapter, either by a warrant issued out of the City
Court or by institution of appropriate proceedings in the Chancery or Circuit
Court of Maury County.
(2011 Code, § 13-305)
§ 13-306 PERMIT FEE.
   There is hereby imposed a fee of $50 for the issuance of a permit under this
chapter which shall be in such form as the Building Inspector may prescribe.
Such license or permit must be displayed in an appropriate place within the
building any portion of which is devoted to use as a rooming house or boarding
house.
(2011 Code, § 13-306)
CHAPTER 4: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
13-401   Purpose
   
13-402   Definitions
   
13-403   Administration; funding; increases in fees and fines; annual
evaluation
   
13-404   Alarm registrations required; terms; fees and fee collection
   
13-405   Registration application; contents
   
13-406   Transfer of registration
   
13-407   Duties of alarm users
   
13-408   Audible alarms; restrictions, abatement of malfunctioning alarm
   
13-409   Duties of alarm installation companies and monitoring companies
   13-410   Duties and authority of the Alarm Administrator
   13-411   False alarm fines; fees; late charges
   13-412   Notice to alarm users of false alarms and suspension of a police
response
   13-413   Alarm registration suspension, fees, fines, violation to make alarm
dispatch request for suspended alarm site
   13-414   Appeals of determinations regarding alarm registrations, fees and
fines
   13-415   Reinstatement of suspended alarm registrations
   13-416   Police Department response
   13-417   Scope of police duty; immunities preserved
   13-418   Fee and fine schedule for alarm systems
§ 13-401 PURPOSE.
   The City of Spring Hill finds and declares that:
   (A)   The vast majority of alarms to which the Police and Fire Departments
respond are false alarms, which are reported to the dispatch center by alarm
companies.
   (B)   Most false alarms are the result of improper maintenance or improper
or careless use of an alarm system.
   (C)   The public, police and fire personnel are subjected to needless danger
when they are called to respond to false alarms.
   (D)   Personnel responding to false alarms are not available to carry out
other duties.
   (E)   In the interest of using limited police and fire resources most
effectively and efficiently, the number of false alarms can and must be
reduced.
   (F)   The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the dangers and
inefficiencies associated with false alarms and to encourage alarm companies
and property/business owners to maintain the operational reliability, properly
use alarm systems, and to reduce or eliminate false alarm dispatch requests.
   (G)   This chapter governs systems intended to summon a police and/or fire
response, establishes fees, fines, establishes a system of administration, sets
conditions for the suspension of a police and/or fire response and establishes
a public education and training program.
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 13-402 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM ADMINISTRATOR. The alarm management software designated by the Police
Department to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   ALARM ADMINISTRATOR LIAISON. The person designated by the Police Department
as the point of contact between the Alarm Administrator and the Police
Department.
   ALARM AGREEMENT.  The legal contract or agreement by and between the alarm
installation company and/or monitoring company and the alarm user.
   ALARM AGREEMENT HOLDING COMPANY. The alarm installation company or
monitoring company that holds the alarm agreement with the alarm user.
   ALARM INSTALLATION COMPANY. A person in the business of selling, providing,
maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing an
alarm system at an alarm site for compensation, and includes individuals or
firms that install and service alarm systems used in a private business or
proprietary facility.
   ALARM DISPATCH REQUEST. A notification to the Police and/or Fire Departments
that an alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular
alarm site.
   ALARM REGISTRATION. A registration which authorizes the operation of an
alarm system.
   ALARM RESPONSE MANAGER (ARM). A person designated by an alarm installation
company and monitoring company to handle alarm issues for the company and act
as the primary point of contact for the Alarm Administrator.
   ALARM SITE. A location served by one or more alarm systems. In a multi-unit
building or complex, each unit shall be considered a separate alarm site if
served by a separate alarm system. In a single unit building that houses two or
more separate businesses with separate alarm systems, each business will be
considered a separate alarm site.
   ALARM SYSTEM.  A device or series of devices, which emit or transmit an
audible or remote visual or electronic alarm signal, which is intended to
summon police and/or fire response. The term includes hardwired systems,
surveillance cameras and systems interconnected with a radio frequency method
such as cellular or private radio signals, and includes local alarm systems,
but does not include an alarm installed in a motor vehicle or a system which
will not emit a signal either audible or visible from the outside of the
building, residence or beyond, but is designed solely to alert the occupants of
a building or residence.
   ALARM USER. Any person who has contracted for monitoring, repair,
installation or maintenance service for an alarm system from an alarm
installation company or monitoring company, or who owns or operates an alarm
system which is not monitored, maintained or repaired under agreement.
   ALARM USER AWARENESS CLASS. A class conducted for the purpose of educating
alarm users about the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm
systems and the problems created by false alarms.
   APPEALS ADMINISTRATOR. The person designated by the city to handle appeals.
   ARMING STATION.  A device that controls an alarm system.
   AUTOMATIC VOICE DIALER. Any electronic, mechanical, or other device which,
when activated, is capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice
message to the dispatch center requesting an officer dispatch to an alarm site.
   BURGLAR ALARM. An alarm intended to identify the presence of an intruder in
either a business or residence.
   BOMA. The City of Spring Hill Board of Mayor and Alderman.
   CANCELLATION.  The termination of a police and/or fire response to an alarm
site after an alarm  dispatch request is made but before an officer's arrival
at the alarm site.
   CONVERSION OF ALARM USER.  The transaction or process by which one alarm
installation company or monitoring company begins the servicing or monitoring
of a previously unmonitored alarm system or an alarm system that was previously
serviced or monitored by another alarm company.
   CITY. City of Spring Hill.
   DISPATCH CENTER. The emergency communications center designated to receive
calls from alarm monitoring companies on behalf of the Police and Fire
Departments.
   DURESS ALARM. A silent alarm system signal generated by the entry of a
designated code into an arming station in order to signal that the alarm user
is being forced to turn off the system and requires an officer response.
   ENHANCED CALL CONFIRMATION (ECC).  An attempt by the monitoring company, or
its representative, to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user and/or the
alarm user's designated representatives by telephone and/or other electronic
means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to determine
whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting a police burglar alarm
dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the
purpose of this chapter, telephone confirmation shall require, as a minimum
that a second call be made to a different number, if the first attempt fails to
reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to determine whether
an alarm signal is valid before requesting an alarm dispatch request. Names and
numbers or those contacted or attempted to contact, shall be provided when
requested.
   FALSE ALARM. An alarm dispatch request to the Police and/or Fire Department
via the dispatch center, which results in the responding personnel finding no
evidence of a fire-related call, criminal offense or attempted criminal offense
after completing an investigation of the alarm site.
   FIRE DEPARTMENT. The Spring Hill Fire Department.
   FIRE RELATED ALARM. Includes, but is not limited to, fire alarm, smoke
alarm, gas alarm, medical alarm, sprinkler alarm, etc.
   HOLDUP ALARM. A silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a
device intended to signal a robbery in progress.
   LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM.  An unmonitored alarm system that annunciates an alarm
only at the alarm site or is a self-monitored alarm site.
   MONITORING. The process by which a monitoring company receives signals from
an alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the Police and/or Fire
Department.
   MONITORING COMPANY. A person in the business of providing monitoring
services.
   PANIC ALARM. An alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a
device intended to signal a life threatening or emergency situation requiring
an officer response.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, organization or similar entity.
   POLICE DEPARTMENT. The Spring Hill Police Department.
   PROTECTIVE OR REACTIVE ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm system that produces a
temporary disability or sensory deprivation through use of chemical,
electrical, sonic or other means, including use of devices that obscure or
disable a person’s vision.
   REGISTRATION NUMBER. A unique individual number assigned to an alarm user as
part of alarm registration issued by the alarm administrator.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. A person capable of appearing at the alarm site upon
request who has access to the alarm site, the code to the alarm system and the
authority to approve repairs to the alarm system.
   ROBBERY ALARM. An alarm signal generated by the manual or automatic
activation of a device, or any system, device or mechanism on or near the
premises intended to signal that a robbery is in progress and that a person
needs immediate police assistance in order to avoid bodily harm, injury or
death. The term has the same general meaning as holdup alarm or duress alarm.
   TAKEOVER. The transaction or process by which an alarm user Takes over
control of an existing alarm system that was previously controlled by another
alarm user.
   ZONES. A division of devices into which an alarm system is divided to
indicate the general location from which an alarm system signal is transmitted.
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 13-403 ADMINISTRATION; FUNDING; INCREASES IN FEES AND FINES; ANNUAL
EVALUATION.
   (A)   Responsibility for administration of this chapter is vested with the
Police Department.
   (B)   The Police Department shall designate an alarm administrator to carry
out the duties and functions described in this section.
    (C)   Monies generated by fees and fines assessed pursuant to this section
shall be deposited into the city's general fund.
   (D)   The amount of the fees and fines set forth in this section shall be
specified in the City fee schedule, which may only be revised by a duly-adopted
resolution of BOMA. For purposes of this division, “fees” include any type or
class of fee and includes late charges.
   (E)   The city shall conduct an annual evaluation and analysis of the
effectiveness of this chapter and identify and implement system improvements as
warranted.
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 13-404 ALARM REGISTRATIONS REQUIRED; TERMS; FEES AND FEE COLLECTION.
   (A)   An alarm user shall not operate, or cause to be operated, any alarm
system without a valid alarm registration. A separate alarm registration is
required for each alarm site having a distinct address or business name. A
registration fee including a completed alarm registration application shall be
received and approved by the alarm administrator prior to any alarm system
activation. A 20-day grace period shall be granted from the date of all new
alarm installations or takeovers between two alarm users, to accommodate the
registration application process.
   (B)   Owners of local alarm systems are required to adhere to all sections
of this chapter and are subject to all fees, fines, suspensions, penalties or
other requirements that are applicable.
   (C)   The fee for a new initial alarm registration and the alarm
registration renewal fee shall be collected by the alarm administrator.
   (D)   Alarm systems.
      (1)   Any alarm user that has a monitored alarm system on premises
located within the City of Spring Hill shall notify the alarm administrator
within 20 days.
      (2)   Failure of an alarm user to notify the alarm administrator of a new
alarm system installation within 20 days of installation shall result in a fine
as established by resolution of BOMA.
      (3)   The initial alarm registration fee shall be collected by the alarm
administrator. Failure of the alarm user to submit an application and
registration fee within the 20 days after notice shall result in the alarm
system being classified as non-registered and late charges being assessed.
   (E)   Alarm registration and renewal fees.
      (1)   An alarm registration shall expire one year from the date of
issuance, and must be renewed annually by the alarm user. The alarm
administrator shall notify the alarm user of the need to renew their
registration 30 days prior to the expiration of the registration. It is the
responsibility of the alarm user to submit the updated information and renewal
fees prior to the registration expiration date. Failure to renew shall be
classified as use of a non-registered alarm system and subject the alarm site
to a suspension and late charge.
      (2)   Registration fees shall be collected annually based on a one-year
registration period. The amount of the registration and renewal fees required
are established by resolution of BOMA.
   (F)   Late charge. Alarm users who fail to make payment for an alarm
registration prior to the registration’s expiration date will be assessed a
late charge as established by resolution of BOMA.
   (G)   Refunds. No refund of a registration fee or registration renewal fee
will be made.
   (H)   Upon receipt of a completed Alarm registration application form and
the alarm registration fee, the alarm administrator shall issue a registration
number or alarm registration renewal to the applicant unless:
      (1)   The applicant has failed to pay any fee or fine assessed under this
chapter; or
      (2)   An alarm registration for the alarm site has been suspended, and
the condition causing the suspension has not been corrected; or
      (3)   Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the
purpose of obtaining an alarm registration shall be sufficient cause for
refusal to issue an alarm registration.
   (I)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Government entities, including but not necessarily limited to the
city, county, state, federal and school districts, must obtain alarm
registrations for all alarm systems on property under their control within the
boundaries of Spring Hill, but are exempt from payment of alarm registration
and renewal fees.
      (2)   All registration-fee-exempted alarm sites are required to obtain
and maintain a valid alarm registration for a police response and are subjected
to all other fees, fines and suspension enforcements, except when this action
is prohibited by statute or through a court ruling. (FEDERAL SITES ARE EXEMPTED
FROM ALL FEES AND FINES)
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 13-405 REGISTRATION APPLICATION; CONTENTS.
   (A)   An application for an alarm registration must be complete on-line
through the alarm management portal in a format provided by the Police
Department.
   (B)   Registration applicants acknowledge that the police and/or fire
response may be influenced by factors including, but not limited to, the
availability of officers, priority of calls, traffic conditions, weather
conditions, emergency conditions, prior alarm history, administrative actions
and staffing levels.
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 13-406 TRANSFER OF REGISTRATION.
   (A)   An alarm registration cannot be transferred to another person.
   (B)   An alarm user is permitted to transfer their alarm registration from
one alarm site to another alarm site, as long as it is within the city limits
of Spring Hill. An alarm user shall inform the alarm administrator and their
alarm company of any change to the information listed on the alarm registration
application within ten business days after such change.
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 13-407 DUTIES OF ALARM USERS.
   (A)   An alarm user shall:
      (1)   Maintain the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarms;
      (2)   Make every reasonable effort to arrive at the alarm system's
location within 30 minutes after being requested by the monitoring company or
Police Department in order to:
         (a)   Deactivate an alarm system;
         (b)   Provide access to the alarm site; and/or
         (c)   Provide alternative security for the alarm site.
      (3)   Provide updated names and telephone numbers of at least two
individuals who are able and have agreed to:
         (a)   Receive notification of an alarm system activation at any time;
         (b)   Respond to the alarm site at any time; and
         (c)   Provide access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm
system, if necessary.
      (4)   Not activate an alarm system for any reason other than an
occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report.
      (5)   Notify monitoring company of any suspension of police response (as
provided for under this chapter) and request that the monitoring company not
make a burglar alarm dispatch request.
   (B)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any automatic voice
dialer which, when activated, uses a telephone device or attachment to
automatically dial a telephone line leading into the Police Department or the
city and then transmit any prerecorded message or signal.
   (C)   An alarm user shall keep a set of written operating instructions for
each alarm system at each alarm site.
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 13-408 AUDIBLE ALARMS; RESTRICTIONS, ABATEMENT OF MALFUNCTIONING ALARM.
   (A)   No alarm system shall emit a sound resembling an emergency vehicle
siren or civil defense warning. The chief of police shall make the final
determination regarding any question of an audible alarm within this section.
   (B)   After the effective date of this chapter no one shall install, modify
or repair an alarm system in the City of Spring Hill that has a siren, bell or
other signal that is audible from any property adjacent to the alarm site that
sounds for longer than 15 consecutive minutes after the alarm is activated, or
that repeats the 15-minute audible cycle more than two consecutive times during
a single armed period.
   (C)   In the event that an audible alarm is activated and fails to reset
itself or continues to activate for more than 60 minutes and the responsible
person listed on the alarm registration or other responsible person cannot or
will not respond and silence the alarm, and the continued activation of the
alarm is creating a disturbance, the Police and/or Fire Department may cause
the alarm to be silenced in a manner determined appropriate for the
circumstances. The alarm user shall be held responsible for the actual costs
involved to abate the malfunctioning alarm. The city, its employees or agents
shall not be responsible or liable for damage resulting from such
disconnection.
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 13-409 DUTIES OF ALARM INSTALLATION COMPANIES AND MONITORING COMPANIES.
   (A)   Alarm installation companies shall:
      (1)   Upon the installation or activation of an alarm system, the alarm
installation company shall distribute to the alarm user information
summarizing:
         (a)   How to prevent false alarms; and
         (b)   How to operate the alarm system.
      (2)   After the effective date of this chapter, alarm installation
companies shall not program alarm systems so that they are capable of sending
one plus duress alarms. Monitoring companies may continue to report one plus
duress alarms received from alarm systems programmed with one plus duress
alarms installed prior to the effective date of this chapter.
      (3)   After the effective date of this chapter, alarm installation
companies shall not install, modify or repair “single action” devices for the
activation of hold-up, robbery or panic alarms. New devices shall require two
actions or an activation time delay to provide more positive assurance that the
user intends to activate the device.
      (4)   All audible alarm systems shall include a device which will limit
the duration of the audible alarm to a period of not more than 15 minutes per
activation.
      (5)   An alarm installation company shall not use an automatic voice
dialer for any alarm system which, when activated, uses a telephone device or
attachment to automatically dial a telephone line leading into the dispatch
center and then transmit any pre-recorded message or signal.
      (6)   Ensure that alarm users of alarm systems equipped with a duress,
robbery, holdup or panic alarm has been provided adequate training as to the
proper use of the alarm system’s operation and function.
      (7)   All alarm systems shall be supplied with an uninterrupted power
supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of the normal electric
utility service for a period of up to four hours will not activate the alarm
system.
   (B)   A monitoring company shall:
      (1)   Report alarm signals by using telephone numbers or procedures
designated by the dispatch center.
      (2)   Employ enhanced call confirmation procedures on all burglar alarm
dispatch requests. The Police Department may refuse to accept an alarm dispatch
request from a monitoring company that has failed to comply with the procedures
required by enhanced call confirmation. This subsection becomes effective 90
days after the effective date of this chapter.
      (3)   Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the Police and/or Fire
Department via the dispatch center.
      (4)   Communicate cancellations to the Police and/or Fire Department via
the dispatch center.
      (5)   Communicate all available zone activations information (north,
south, front, back, door, window etc.) about the location of an alarm signal(s)
as part of an alarm dispatch request.
      (6)   Communicate the type of alarm activation (silent or audible,
interior or perimeter), if available, on any alarm dispatch request.
      (7)   Notify the dispatch center of any alarm site that it knows, or
reasonably should know has guard dog(s), pets or is fitted with a protective-
reactive alarm system. During any alarm at such a site, a responsible party
must be contacted and confirm that he or she will respond to the alarm site to
disarm the device or take control of the guard dog(s).
      (8)   After an alarm dispatch request, promptly advise the Police and/or
Fire Department if the monitoring company knows that the alarm user or a
responsible party is on the way to the alarm site.
      (9)   Each monitoring company shall, upon request, immediately provide
the Police and/or Fire Department with the names and phone numbers of the alarm
user's emergency contacts at the time of each alarm dispatch request.
   (C)   Conversion of alarm users. An alarm installation company or monitoring
company that converts the servicing of any alarm system account from another
company shall notify the alarm user of such conversion.
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 13-410 DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF THE ALARM ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The alarm administrator shall establish a procedure to acquire and
record information on alarm dispatch requests.
   (B)   The alarm administrator shall establish and implement a procedure to
notify the alarm user of a false alarm. The notice shall include the following:
      (1)   The date and time of response to the false alarm; and
      (2)   Any false alarm fine incurred.
   (C)   The alarm administrator may require that a conference be held with an
alarm user responsible for the alarm system to review the circumstances of each
false alarm. Failure to participate may result in suspension of the alarm
registration, as indicated by the facts of the case.
   (D)   If a false robbery, holdup or panic alarm has occurred and the alarm
was triggered using a single action, non-recessed device, the alarm
administrator may consider a waiver or partial waiver of the false alarm fine,
if action is taken by the alarm user to remove or replace the single action,
non-recessed device.
   (E)   The alarm administrator shall make a copy of this chapter and/or an
ordinance summary sheet available to each alarm user.
   (F)   The alarm administrator may use electronic means to communicate with
alarm users.
   (G)   The alarm administrator and the Alarm Administrator Liaison will
collaborate and combine efforts in order to maintain efficiency and compliance
of this chapter.
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 13-411 FALSE ALARM FINES; FEES; LATE CHARGES.
   (A)   The alarm administrator may assess the alarm user a fine for a false
alarm occurring at that alarm user’s alarm site. The amount of said fines for
the listed categories shall be established by BOMA and may be subsequently
amended by resolution of BOMA.
      (1)   Burglar false alarm fines.
      (2)   Robbery false alarm fines.
      (3)   Panic false alarm fines.
      (4)   Fire related false alarm fines.
   (B)   If a false alarm fine is not paid within 30 days after the invoice is
mailed, a late charge as established by resolution of BOMA shall be imposed.
   (C)   Fines for false alarms from non-registered alarm systems. For person
(s) operating a non-registered alarm system incurring a false alarm, fines
shall be imposed as established by resolution of BOMA.
   (D)   If cancellation of a police and/or fire response occurs prior to the
personnel’s arrival at the alarm site, the response is not considered a false
alarm and no false alarm fine will be assessed.
   (E)   Notice of the right of appeal under this chapter will be included with
notice of any fine.
   (F)   All registration fees, renewal registration fees or fines assessed
under this section are due within 30 days of written notice unless otherwise
noted. A late charge in an amount established by resolution of BOMA shall be
imposed for each individual fee or fine due that is not paid within 30 days.
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 13-412 NOTICE TO ALARM USERS OF FALSE ALARMS AND SUSPENSION OF A POLICE
RESPONSE.
   (A)   The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing or by
other electronic means after each false alarm. The notice shall include the
amount of the fine for the false alarm, the fact that police response to
further alarms may be suspended after the sixth false alarm during the alarm
user’s one-year alarm registration period, (excluding duress, robbery, holdup
and panic alarms), and that the alarm user has the right to appeal.
   (B)   The alarm administrator shall notify the alarm user in writing 30 days
beforehand that a Police Department response to further alarms is to be
suspended. The right of appeal under this chapter shall be included with the
notice. The notice of suspension shall also include the amount of any fees and/
or fines due and a description of the reinstatement process.
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 13-413 ALARM REGISTRATION SUSPENSION, FEES, FINES, VIOLATION TO MAKE ALARM
DISPATCH REQUEST FOR SUSPENDED ALARM SITE.
   (A)   The alarm administrator shall notify the Police Department of each
alarm user whose alarm registration qualifies for suspension under this
section. The alarm administrator may suspend an alarm registration if it is
determined that:
      (1)   There is a false statement of a material fact in the registration
application; or
      (2)   The alarm user has had six or more false burglar alarms within the
one-year registration period, except that the alarm administrator may waive a
suspension of a registration upon receipt of documented work orders showing
reasonable attempts to repair the alarm system prior to the notice of
suspension.
      (3)   The alarm user fails or refuses to pay an alarm registration or
alarm registration renewal fee, false alarm fine, late charge, or any other
fee, fine, or charge assessed under this section.
   (B)   False alarm fines under suspension status. In addition to the fines
set forth in §
13-411, a supplemental fine is hereby imposed upon any person operating a
suspended burglar alarm system. The amount of said fines shall be established
by resolution of BOMA set forth in § 13-418.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the alarm user to notify their
respective alarm monitoring company of their suspension status in order to
cease any further alarm dispatch requests. An alarm user shall be held
financially accountable for all false alarm fines incurred.
   (D)   Unless there is a separate indication that there is a crime in
progress, the Police Department may or may not dispatch an officer to an alarm
site for which an alarm registration is suspended.
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 13-414 APPEALS OF DETERMINATIONS REGARDING ALARM REGISTRATIONS, FEES AND
FINES.
   (A)   If the alarm administrator assesses a fee or fine, suspends an alarm
registration or denies the issuance, renewal or reinstatement of an alarm
registration, the alarm administrator shall send notice of the action and a
statement of the right to appeal to the affected applicant or alarm user.
   (B)   The alarm user may appeal any action described in subsection (A) above
to the alarm administrator within 15 days after receipt of notice of the
action.
   (C)   The alarm administrator will notify the appeals administrator that an
appeal has been filed. The appeals administrator shall resolve the appeal
within 15 days after receipt of notice of the appeal.
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 13-415 REINSTATEMENT OF SUSPENDED ALARM REGISTRATIONS.
   (A)   On the suspension of an alarm registration, a person whose alarm
registration has been suspended may obtain reinstatement of the registration by
the alarm administrator if the person:
      (1)   Pays a reinstatement fee as established by resolution of BOMA;
      (2)   Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding fees, fines, and other
charges;
      (3)   Submits a written notice from an alarm installation company stating
that the alarm system has been inspected and repaired (if necessary) by the
alarm installation company.
   (B)   The Police Department shall reinstate its response to an alarm site as
soon as is practicable after receiving notice of reinstatement from the alarm
administrator. The alarm user shall take notice that the alarm site has been
officially reinstated only after receiving notice from the alarm administrator
of that fact.
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 13-416 POLICE DEPARTMENT RESPONSE.
   (A)   Subject to the suspension provisions in §
13-413 above and the discretion discussed in § 13-417 below, the Police
Department at its discretion will respond to all “in progress” robbery, panic
or burglar alarms as promptly as possible, taking into account pending calls
for service and any policy establishing priority of dispatched calls following
notification of the receipt of the alarm from the monitoring company. Police
supervisors may, in their discretion, cancel a police response to any or all
alarms based on weather or other factors affecting police service needs.
   (B)   The Police Chief or his or her designee may re-prioritize assignment
of burglar alarms and response time at any time during a 24-hour period as may
be necessary due to the service needs of the community.
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 13-417 SCOPE OF POLICE DUTY; IMMUNITIES PRESERVED.
   The issuance of alarm registrations does not create a contract between the
Police Department and/or the City of Spring Hill and any alarm user, alarm
installation company or monitoring company, nor does it create a duty or
obligation, either expressed or implied, on the Police Department to respond to
any alarm. Any and all liability and consequential damage resulting from the
failure of the Police Department to respond to an alarm dispatch request is
hereby disclaimed and full governmental immunity as provided by law is
retained. By applying for an alarm registration, the alarm user acknowledges
that the Police Department response is influenced by the availability of
personnel, priority of calls, traffic conditions, weather conditions, emergency
conditions, staffing levels, prior response history and administrative actions.
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
§ 13-418 FEE AND FINE SCHEDULE FOR ALARM SYSTEMS.
FEES
Registration and Renewal                         $25.00
Appeal fees per request                          $25.00
FINES
Registration late charge                         $25.00
Alarm fines late charge                          $25.00
(All fees and fines late)
Reinstatement Fee                                $100.00
POLICE DEPARTMENT RELATED ALARM FINES
                                                 Registered Alarm
Burglar False Alarm                              4th Offense - $50.00
(First 3 false alarms are not fined for          5th Offense - $75.00
Registered Alarm Users)                          6th Offense -$100.00
                                                 7th Offense - Suspension
                                                 Non-Registered Alarm
Burglar False Alarm                              2nd Offense - $125.00
(First false alarm: letter sent to alarm user to 3rd Offense - $175.00
register alarm within 20 days)                   4th Offense - $225.00
                                                 5th Offense - Suspension
Robbery False Alarm                              1st Offense - $100.00
                                                 2nd Offense or more $200.00
Panic False Alarm                                1st Offense - $100.00
                                                 2nd Offense or more $200.00
Operating Suspended Alarm System                 1st Offense - $200.00
                                                 2nd Offense or more $300
FIRE DEPARTMENT RELATED ALARM FINES
Fire-Related False Alarm                         Registered Alarm
(First 3 false alarms are not fined for          4th Offense - $50.00
Registered Alarm Users)                          5th Offense - $75.00
                                                 6th Offense or more $100.00
Fire-Related False Alarm                         Non-Registered Alarm
(First false alarm: letter sent to alarm user to 2nd Offense - $125.00
register alarm within 20 days)                   3rd Offense - $175.00
                                                 4th Offense or more - $225.00
 
(Ord. 22-11, passed 6-6-2022)
TITLE 14: ZONING AND LAND USE CONTROL
      Chapter
         
1.   MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION
         
2.   ZONING 
CHAPTER 1: MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
   
14-101   Creation and membership
   
14-102   Organization, powers, duties and the like
   
14-103   Additional powers
§ 14-101 CREATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Pursuant to the provisions of Tenn. Code Ann. § 13-4-101, there is
hereby created a Municipal Planning Commission, hereinafter referred to as the
“Planning Commission”.
   (B)   The Planning Commission shall consist of seven members; two of these
shall be the Mayor and another member of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen
selected by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen; the other five members shall be
appointed by the Mayor. All members of the Planning Commission shall serve as
such without compensation. Except for the initial appointments, the terms of
the five members appointed by the Mayor shall be for three years each. The
first three members first appointed shall be appointed for terms of one, two
and three, respectively; the other two members appointed shall be appointed for
the same terms as the first and second members, respectively, so that the terms
of two members expire one year for two consecutive years and the term of one
member expires every third year. The terms of the Mayor and the member selected
by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall run concurrently with their terms of
office.
   (C)   Any vacancy in an appointive membership shall be filled for the
unexpired term by the Mayor.
   (D)   The Mayor shall also have the authority to remove any appointed member
at the Mayor’s discretion.
(2011 Code, § 14-101) (Ord. 14-25, passed 9-15-2014; Ord. 21-28, passed 11-15-
2021)
§ 14-102 ORGANIZATION, POWERS, DUTIES AND THE LIKE.
   The Planning Commission shall be organized and shall carry out its powers,
functions and duties in accordance with all applicable provisions of Tenn. Code
Ann. Title 13.
(2011 Code, § 14-102)
§ 14-103 ADDITIONAL POWERS.
   The Regional Planning Commission has no additional powers.
(2011 Code, § 14-103)
Charter reference:
   General powers, see Charter §
6-2-201
CHAPTER 2: ZONING
Section
   
14-201   Land use to be governed by the Unified Development Code
   
14-202   Board of Zoning Appeals created
§ 14-201 LAND USE TO BE GOVERNED BY THE UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE.
   Land use within the city shall be governed by Ord. 18-21, titled “Unified
Development Code”, and any amendments thereto.
(Ord. 18-21, passed 8-20-2018; Ord. 19-09, passed 4-15-2019; Ord. 19-20, passed
9-16-2019; Ord. 19-28, passed 9-16-2019; Ord. 24-01, passed 4-1-2024; Ord. 25-
14, passed 6-2-2025)
Editor’s note:
   Ord. 18-21, and any amendments thereto, are published as separate documents
and are of record in the office of the City Recorder.
§ 14-202 BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS CREATED.
   A Board of Zoning Appeals shall be created with five members, one of which
shall be an Alderman not serving on the Planning Commission, who is to be
approved by the governing board of the city, and the remaining four members
shall be appointed by the Mayor. The term of office shall be for a period of
four years with the Alderman’s term coinciding with his or her elected term of
office.
(2011 Code, § 14-202) (Ord. 01-37, passed 9- -2001)
TITLE 15: MOTOR VEHICLES, TRAFFIC AND PARKING
      Chapter
         
1.   MISCELLANEOUS
         
2.   EMERGENCY VEHICLES
         
3.   SPEED LIMITS
         
4.   TURNING MOVEMENTS
         
5.   STOPPING AND YIELDING
         
6.   PARKING
         
7.   ENFORCEMENT
         
8.   FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW
CHAPTER 1: MISCELLANEOUS
Section
   
15-101   Adoption of state traffic statutes
   
15-102   Motor vehicle requirements
   
15-103   Driving on streets closed for repairs and the like
   
15-104   Reckless driving
   
15-105   Unlaned streets
   
15-106   Laned streets
   
15-107   Yellow lines
   
15-108   Miscellaneous traffic-control signs and the like
   
15-109   General requirements for traffic-control signs and the like
   
15-110   Unauthorized traffic-control signs and the like
   
15-111   Presumption with respect to traffic-control signs and the like
   
15-112   School safety patrols
   
15-113   Driving through funerals or other processions
   
15-114   Clinging to vehicles in motion
   
15-115   Riding on outside of vehicles
   
15-116   Backing vehicles
   
15-117   Projections from the rear of vehicles
   
15-118   Causing unnecessary noise
   
15-119   Vehicles and operators to be licensed
   
15-120   Passing
   
15-121   Damaging pavements
   
15-122   Bicycle riders and the like
   
15-123   Truck traffic banned on certain streets
   
15-124   Vehicles to be covered
   
15-125   Commercial vehicle weight limit
   
15-126   Construction traffic
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-10-307
   The following offenses are exclusively state offenses and must be tried in a
state court or a court having state jurisdiction: driving while intoxicated or
drugged, as prohibited by Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-10-401; failing to stop after a
traffic accident, as prohibited by Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 55-10-101 et seq.;
driving while license is suspended or revoked, as prohibited by Tenn. Code Ann.
§ 55-7-116; and drag racing, as prohibited by Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-10-501
§ 15-101 ADOPTION OF STATE TRAFFIC STATUTES.
   By authority granted under Tenn. Code Ann. § 16-18-302, the City of Spring
Hill adopts by reference as if fully set forth in this section, the "Rules of
the Road," as codified in Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 55-8-101 through 55-8-131 and §§
55-8-133 through 55-8-180. Additionally, the City of Spring Hill adopts Tenn.
Code Ann. §§ 55-4-101 through 55-4-128, §§ 55-4-130 through 55-4-133, §§ 55-4-
135 through 55-4- 138, §§ 55-8-181 through 55-8-191, § 55-8-193, § 55-8-199, §
55-8-207, § 55-9-107, § 55-9-202, §§ 55-9-401 through 55-9-408, §§ 55-9-601
through 55-9-606, § 55-12-139, and § 55-50-351, by reference as if fully set
forth in this section.
(Ord. 18-25, passed 10-15-2018)
§ 15-102 MOTOR VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle within the
corporate limits unless such vehicle is equipped with properly operating
muffler, lights, brakes, horn and such other equipment as is prescribed and
required by Tenn. Code Ann. Title 55, Ch. 9.
(2011 Code, § 15-102)
§ 15-103 DRIVING ON STREETS CLOSED FOR REPAIRS AND THE LIKE.
   Except for necessary access to property abutting thereon, no motor vehicle
shall be driven upon any street that is barricaded or closed for repairs or
other lawful purpose.
(2011 Code, § 15-103)
§ 15-104 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   Irrespective of the posted speed limit, no person, including operators of
emergency vehicles, shall drive any vehicle in willful or wanton disregard for
the safety of persons or property.
(2011 Code, § 15-104)
§ 15-105 UNLANED STREETS.
   (A)   Upon all unlaned streets of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be
driven upon the right half of the street, except:
      (1)   When lawfully overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in
the same direction;
      (2)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair; or
      (3)   Upon a roadway designated and signposted by the city for one-way
traffic.
   (B)   All vehicles proceeding at less than the normal speed of traffic at
the time and place and under the conditions then existing shall be driven as
close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn.
(2011 Code, § 15-105)
§ 15-106 LANED STREETS.
   (A)   On streets marked with traffic lanes, it shall be unlawful for the
operator of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep his or her vehicle within the
boundaries of the proper lane for his or her direction of travel, except when
lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making a lawful turning
movement.
   (B)   On two-lane and three-lane streets, the proper lane for travel shall
be the right-hand lane unless otherwise clearly marked. On streets with four or
more lanes, either of the right-hand lanes shall be available for use; except
that, traffic moving at less than the normal rate of speed shall use the
extreme right-hand lane.
(2011 Code, § 15-106)
§ 15-107 YELLOW LINES.
   On streets with a yellow line placed to the right of any lane line or
centerline, such yellow line shall designate a no-passing zone, and no operator
shall drive his or her vehicle or any part thereof across or to the left of
such yellow line, except when necessary to make a lawful left turn from such
street.
(2011 Code, § 15-107)
§ 15-108 MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian or the operator of any vehicle
to violate or fail to comply with any traffic-control sign, signal, marking or
device placed or erected by the state or the city unless otherwise directed by
a police officer.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian or the operator of any vehicle
to willfully violate or fail to comply with the reasonable directions of any
police officer.
   (C)   It shall likewise be unlawful for the operator of any motor vehicle to
operate the vehicle in the speed in excess of 30 mph or in excess of a speed
limit designated by a traffic-controlled sign, marking or device placed or
erected by the state, the city or the developer of a subdivision, or in excess
of any speed limit for a particular area designated in § 15-305 of the code of
ordinances.
(2011 Code, § 15-108)
§ 15-109 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   All traffic-control signs, signals, markings and devices shall conform
to the latest revision of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for
Streets and Highways, published by the U.S. Department of Transportation,
Federal Highway Administration, and shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as
to type and location throughout the city.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed as being mandatory, but is merely
directive.
(2011 Code, § 15-109)
Editor’s note:
   This manual may be obtained from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S.
Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402.
§ 15-110 UNAUTHORIZED TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any street,
any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an
imitation of or resembles an official traffic- control sign, signal, marking or
device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to control the movement of
traffic or parking of vehicles, or which hides from view or interferes with the
effectiveness of any official traffic-control sign, signal, marking or device
or any railroad sign or signal.
(2011 Code, § 15-110)
§ 15-111 PRESUMPTION WITH RESPECT TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   When a traffic-control sign, signal, marking or device has been
placed, the presumption shall be that it is official and that it has been
lawfully placed by the proper authority.
   (B)   All presently installed traffic-control signs, signals, markings and
devices are hereby expressly authorized, ratified, approved and made official.
(2011 Code, § 15-111)
§ 15-112 SCHOOL SAFETY PATROLS.
   All motorists and pedestrians shall obey the directions or signals of school
safety patrols when such patrols are assigned under the authority of the Chief
of Police and are acting in accordance with instructions; provided that, such
persons giving any order, signal or direction shall at the time be wearing some
insignia and/or using authorized flags for giving signals.
(2011 Code, § 15-112)
§ 15-113 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERALS OR OTHER PROCESSIONS.
   Except when otherwise directed by a police officer, no driver of a vehicle
shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized
procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously
designated.
(2011 Code, § 15-113)
§ 15-114 CLINGING TO VEHICLES IN MOTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person traveling upon any bicycle, motorcycle,
coaster, sled, roller skates or any other vehicle to cling to, or attach
himself or herself or his or her vehicle to any other moving vehicle upon any
street, alley or other public way or place.
(2011 Code, § 15-114)
§ 15-115 RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, or for the owner or operator of
any motor vehicle being operated on a street, alley or other public way or
place, to permit any person to ride on any portion of such vehicle not designed
or intended for the use of passengers. This section shall not apply to persons
engaged in the necessary discharge of lawful duties, nor to persons riding in
the load-carrying space of trucks.
(2011 Code, § 15-115)
§ 15-116 BACKING VEHICLES.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back it unless such movement can be made
with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
(2011 Code, § 15-116)
§ 15-117 PROJECTIONS FROM THE REAR OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever the load or any projecting portion of any vehicle shall
extend beyond the rear of the bed or body thereof, the operator shall display,
at the end of such load or projection, in a position clearly visible from the
rear of such vehicle, a red flag being not less than 12 inches square.
   (B)   Between one-half hour after sunset and one-half hour before sunrise,
there shall be displayed in place of the flag a red light plainly visible under
normal atmospheric conditions at least 200 feet from the rear of such vehicle.
(2011 Code, § 15-117)
§ 15-118 CAUSING UNNECESSARY NOISE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause unnecessary noise by
unnecessarily sounding the horn, “racing” the motor or causing the “screeching”
or “squealing” of the tires on any motor vehicle.
(2011 Code, § 15-118)
§ 15-119 VEHICLES AND OPERATORS TO BE LICENSED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle in violation
of the state’s Motor Vehicle Title and Registration Law, being Tenn. Code Ann.
Title 55, Chapter 1 or the Uniform Classified and Commercial Driver License
Act, being Tenn. Code Ann. Title 55, Chapter 50.
(2011 Code, § 15-119)
§ 15-120 PASSING.
   (A)   (1)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted,
the driver of a vehicle passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again
drive to the right side of the street until safely clear of the overtaken
vehicle.
      (2)   The driver of the overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in
favor of the overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the
speed of his or her vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
   (B)   When the street is wide enough, the driver of a vehicle may overtake
and pass upon the right of another vehicle which is making or about to make a
left turn.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction either upon the left or upon the right on a
street of sufficient width for four or more lanes of moving traffic when such
movement can be made in safety.
   (D)   No person shall drive off the pavement or upon the shoulder of the
street in overtaking or passing on the right.
   (E)   When any vehicle has stopped at a marked crosswalk or at an
intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the street, no operator of any
other vehicle approaching from the rear shall overtake and pass such stopped
vehicle.
   (F)   No vehicle operator shall attempt to pass another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction unless he or she can see that the way ahead is
sufficiently clear and unobstructed to enable him or her to make the movement
in safety.
(2011 Code, § 15-120)
§ 15-121 DAMAGING PAVEMENTS.
   No person shall operate upon any street of the city any vehicle, motor
propelled or otherwise, which by reason of its weight or the character of its
wheels or track, is likely to damage the surface or foundation of the street.
(2011 Code, § 15-121)
§ 15-122 BICYCLE RIDERS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Every person riding or operating a bicycle, motorcycle or motor
scooter shall be subject to the provisions of all traffic ordinances, rules and
regulations of the city applicable to the driver or operator of other vehicles,
except as to those provisions which, by their nature, can have no application
to bicycles, motorcycles or motor scooter.
   (B)   No person operating or riding a bicycle, motorcycle or motor scooter
shall ride other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached
thereto, nor shall the operator carry any other person upon such vehicle other
than upon a firmly attached and regular seat thereon.
   (C)   No bicycle, motorcycle or motor scooter shall be used to carry more
persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
   (D)   No person operating a bicycle, motorcycle or motor scooter shall carry
any package, bundle or article which prevents the rider from keeping both hands
upon the handlebar.
   (E)   No person under the age of 16 years shall operate any motorcycle,
motorbike or motor scooter while any other person is a passenger upon said
motor vehicle.
   (F)   (1)   No person shall operate or ride upon any motorcycle, motorbike
or motor scooter unless such person is equipped with and wearing on the head a
safety helmet with a secured chin strap and suspension lining. The helmet shall
conform to the type and design manufactured for the use of the operators and
riders of such motor vehicles.
      (2)   This requirement for safety helmets shall also apply to any person
under the age of 18 years who is riding a bicycle upon the public right-of-way.
(2011 Code, § 15-122)
§ 15-123 TRUCK TRAFFIC BANNED ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   Through truck traffic shall be prohibited on Doc Robertson Road, Maury Hill
Street, Depot Street, Toone Prados Street, Spruce Street, Buckner Road,
McLemore Street and Hughes Street.
(2011 Code, § 15-123) (Ord. 24-06, passed 5-20-2024)
§ 15-124 VEHICLES TO BE COVERED.
   It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle, and/or trailer, which transports
litter, crushed stone, fill dirt and rock, soil, bulk sand, coal, phosphate,
muck, concrete debris, other building materials, agricultural lime or loose
material to transport these items unless hauling in an enclosed space or fully
covered by a tarpaulin. LOOSE MATERIAL includes any substance which could
spill, drop off or blow away from the open bed when the vehicle is operated. A
violation of this provision shall result in the imposition of a $50 fine.
(2011 Code, § 15-124) (Ord. 01-51, passed 1- -2002)
§ 15-125 COMMERCIAL VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle with a gross vehicular weight in excess
of 10,000 pounds to travel through any residential streets in the city. The use
of residential streets by commercial vehicles is permitted only when necessary
service calls, deliveries or pick up services are required for residents of
that street or neighborhood.
(Ord. 16-16, passed 9-19-2016)
§ 15-126 CONSTRUCTION TRAFFIC.
   Construction traffic and ancillary vehicles must utilize any and all
designated construction entrances and routes when so established by the
Planning Commission during the entitlement process or the City Infrastructure
Director or City Engineer and/or their designee any time thereafter. In no case
shall the city require the acquisition of additional property to serve as
construction entrance.
(Ord. 19-03, passed 3-18-2019)
CHAPTER 2: EMERGENCY VEHICLES
Section
   
15-201   “Authorized emergency vehicles” defined
   
15-202   Operation of authorized emergency vehicles
   
15-203   Following emergency vehicles
   
15-204   Running over fire hoses and the like
§ 15-201 “AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES” DEFINED.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES shall be Fire Department vehicles, police
vehicles and such ambulances and other emergency vehicles as are designated by
the Chief of Police.
(2011 Code, § 15-201)
§ 15-202 OPERATION OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call, or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of
the law, or when responding to, but not upon returning from, a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, subject to the conditions
herein stated.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may park or stand,
irrespective of the provisions of this title; proceed past a red or stop signal
or stop sign, but only after slowing down to ascertain that the intersection is
clear; exceed the maximum speed limit and disregard regulations governing
direction of movement or turning in specified directions so long as he or she
does not endanger life or property.
   (C)   The exemptions herein granted for an authorized emergency vehicle
shall apply only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds an
audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle and when the vehicle is
equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle; except that, an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police
vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front
of the vehicle.
   (D)   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of
his or her reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(2011 Code, § 15-202)
§ 15-203 FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   No driver of any vehicle shall follow any authorized emergency vehicle
apparently traveling in response to an emergency call closer than 500 feet or
drive or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in
answer to a fire alarm.
(2011 Code, § 15-203)
§ 15-204 RUNNING OVER FIRE HOSES AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive over any hose lines or other
equipment of the Fire Department, except in obedience to the direction of a
firefighter or police officer.
(2011 Code, § 15-204)
CHAPTER 3: SPEED LIMITS
Section
   
15-301   In general
   
15-302   At intersections
   
15-303   In school zones
   
15-304   In congested areas
   
15-305   Speed limits imposed for specific areas
   
15-306   Schedule of fines for speeding offenses
§ 15-301 IN GENERAL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor
vehicle upon any highway or street at a rate of speed in excess of 30 mph,
except where official signs have been posted indicating other speed limits, in
which cases the posted speed limit shall apply.
   (B)   It shall also be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on
any highway or street at a rate of speed in excess of that set forth in §
15-305 of this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 15-301)
§ 15-302 AT INTERSECTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle
through any intersection at a rate of speed in excess of 15 mph unless such
person is driving on a street regulated by traffic-control signals or signs
which require traffic to stop or yield on the intersecting streets.
(2011 Code, § 15-302)
§ 15-303 IN SCHOOL ZONES.
   (A)   Generally, pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-8-152, special speed
limits in school zones shall be enacted based on an engineering investigation;
shall not be less than 15 mph; and shall be in effect only when proper signs
are posted with a warning flasher or flashers in operation. It shall be
unlawful for any person to violate any such special speed limit enacted and in
effect in accordance with this subsection (A).
   (B)   When the Board of Mayor and Aldermen has not established special speed
limits as provided for above, any person who drives at a speed exceeding 15 mph
when passing a school during a recess period when a warning flasher or flashers
are in operation, or during a period of 40 minutes before the opening hour of a
school for a period of 40 minutes after the closing hour of a school, while
children are actually going to or leaving school, shall be prima facie guilty
of reckless driving.
(2011 Code, § 15-303)
§ 15-304 IN CONGESTED AREAS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle
through any congested area at a rate of speed in excess of any posted speed
limit when such speed limit has been posted by authority of the city.
(2011 Code, § 15-304)
§ 15-305 SPEED LIMITS IMPOSED FOR SPECIFIC AREAS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive a motor vehicle in
excess of 30 mph in the city or in excess of the speed limits herein designated
for the following specific areas of the city.
   (A)   The speed limit within the entire area of the subdivision known as
Spring Hill Estates is hereby fixed at 20 mph.
   (B)   The speed limit within the entire area of the subdivision known as
Witt Hill Subdivision is hereby fixed at 20 mph.
   (C)   A speed limit of 30 mph shall be in effect on S.R. 247 from 200 yards
west of the crest of the hill adjacent to the west side of the CSX railroad
tracks to the east side of the intersection of East Alex Drive with S.R. 247.
   (D)   A speed limit of 35 mph shall be in effect in the following locations:
      (1)   On Beechcroft Road (S.R. 247) from 200 yards west of the CSX
Railroad right-of-way to the eastern right-of-way of Town Center Parkway;
      (2)   On Beechcroft Road (S.R. 247) from the eastern right-of-way of Town
Center Parkway to a point 200 yards west of the western right-of-way of CSX
Railroad;
      (3)   On Kedron Road from the east end of Orphanage Creek to Main Street
(U.S. 31);
      (4)   On Main Street (U.S. 31) from the midpoint between the First
Baptist Church and Witt Hill Subdivision to the south end of the McCormack
Creek Bridge;
      (5)   On Duplex Road from Main Street to the easternmost city limits at
I-65; and
      (6)   On Buckner Road from (U.S. 31) Columbia Pike, to Buckner Lane.
   (E)   A speed limit of 45 mph shall be in effect in the following locations:
      (1)   On Route 31 from the midpoint between First Baptist Church and Witt
Hill Subdivision to the northern boundary of the city limits;
      (2)   On Route 31 from the north end of Route 396 (Saturn Parkway)
overpass to the south end of the McCormack Creek Bridge;
      (3)   On Kedron Road from the southern city limits to the east end of
Orphanage Creek Bridge near Jackson Subdivision;
      (4)   On Route 31 from the northern boundary of the city limits to the
mid-point between First Baptist Church and Witt Hill Subdivision; and
      (5)   On Beechcroft Road (S.R. 247) from the western city limits to a
point 200 yards west of the western right-of-way of the CSX Railroad.
   (F)   A speed limit of 55 mph shall be in effect in the following locations:
      (1)   On Route 31 from the northern city limits to the north edge of the
“Hitchin Post” tract; and
      (2)   On Route 31 from the southern city limits to the north end of Route
396 (Saturn Parkway).
   (G)   The maximum allowable speed limit on Tom Lunn Road shall be 45 mph and
that the public works staff is directed to install appropriate speed limit
signs on each end of that portion of Tom Lunn Road that are located inside the
corporate boundaries.
(2011 Code, § 15-305) (Ord. 01-50, passed 12- -2001)
§ 15-306 SCHEDULE OF FINES FOR SPEEDING OFFENSES.
   (A)   The City Judge is authorized to fine persons who plead or are found
guilty of driving between one and ten mph over the posted speed limit a fine in
the amount of $30, exclusive of Court costs and litigation taxes. The City
Judge shall have the discretion to assess the maximum fine of $50 where the
person’s driving record establishes one or more prior moving violations within
the three previous years from the date of the current citation under
adjudication.
   (B)   The City Judge is authorized to fine persons who plead or are found
guilty of driving between 11 and 20 mph over the posted speed limit a fine in
the amount of $40, exclusive of Court costs and litigation taxes. The City
Judge shall have the discretion to assess the maximum fine of $50 where the
person’s driving record establishes one or more prior moving violations within
the three previous years from the date of the current citation under
adjudication.
   (C)   The City Judge is authorized to fine persons who plead or are found
guilty of driving in excess of 20 mph over the posted speed limit a fine in the
amount of $50, exclusive of Court costs and litigation taxes.
   (D)   The City Judge shall have the discretion to fine persons who plead or
are found guilty of speeding in any amount over the posted 20 mph speed limit a
fine in the amount of $50, exclusive of Court costs and litigation taxes.
   (E)   The City Judge shall have the discretion to fine persons who plead
guilty or are found guilty of speeding in any amount over the speed limit in a
school zone a fine in the amount of $50, exclusive of Court costs and
litigation taxes.
   (F)   Persons opting to pay a fine for a cited speeding violation prior to
and in lieu of appearing in City Court to answer the citation for the alleged
offense shall pay the appropriate fine as set forth in subsections (A) through
(C) above.
   (G)   All fines provided for this section shall be payable to the Clerk of
the City Court. Failure to pay the applicable fine prior to and in lieu of
appearing in Court, or failure to appear in Court at the specified time to
answer the charge, will result in an adjudication of guilt for the alleged
offense, as well as an additional citation for failure to appear in accordance
with § 3-208 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 14-15, passed 6-16-2014; Ord. 18-08, passed 3-19-2018)
CHAPTER 4: TURNING MOVEMENTS
Section
   
15-401   Generally
   
15-402   Right turns
   
15-403   Left turns on two-way roadways
   
15-404   Left turns on other than two-way roadways
   
15-405   U-turns
§ 15-401 GENERALLY.
   No person operating a motor vehicle shall make any turning movement which
might affect any pedestrian or the operation of any other vehicle without first
ascertaining that such movement can be made in safety and signaling his or her
intention in accordance with the requirements of the state law.
(2011 Code, § 15-401)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-8-143
§ 15-402 RIGHT TURNS.
   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
(2011 Code, § 15-402)
§ 15-403 LEFT TURNS ON TWO-WAY ROADWAYS.
   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both directions on
each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left turn shall be
made in that portion of the right-half of the roadway nearest the centerline
thereof and by passing to the right of the intersection of the centerline of
the two roadways.
(2011 Code, § 15-403)
§ 15-404 LEFT TURNS ON OTHER THAN TWO-WAY ROADWAYS.
   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on one or
more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any
such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane
lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle
and after entering the intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave
the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left-hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in such direction upon the roadway being entered.
(2011 Code, § 15-404)
§ 15-405 U-TURNS.
   U-turns are prohibited.
(2011 Code, § 15-405)
CHAPTER 5: STOPPING AND YIELDING
Section
   
15-501   Upon approach of authorized emergency vehicles
   
15-502   When emerging from alleys and the like
   
15-503   To prevent obstructing an intersection
   
15-504   At railroad crossings
   
15-505   At “stop” signs
   
15-506   At “yield” signs
   
15-507   At traffic-control signals generally
   
15-508   At flashing traffic-control signals
   
15-509   Stops to be signaled
§ 15-501 UPON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of
audible and/or visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of the
state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible
signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall immediately drive to a
position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb
of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such
position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer.
(2011 Code, § 15-501)
§ 15-502 WHEN EMERGING FROM ALLEYS AND THE LIKE.
   The drivers of all vehicles emerging from alleys, parking lots, driveways or
buildings shall stop such vehicles immediately prior to driving onto any
sidewalk or street. They shall not proceed to drive onto the sidewalk or street
until they can safely do so without colliding or interfering with approaching
pedestrians or vehicles.
(2011 Code, § 15-502)
§ 15-503 TO PREVENT OBSTRUCTING AN INTERSECTION.
   No driver shall enter any intersection or marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of such intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of traffic in or on the intersecting street or crosswalk. This provision shall
be effective notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.
(2011 Code, § 15-503)
§ 15-504 AT RAILROAD CROSSINGS.
   Any driver of a vehicle approaching a railroad grade crossing shall stop
within not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such railroad and shall
not proceed further while any of the following conditions exist:
   (A)   A clearly visible electrical or mechanical signal device gives warning
of the approach of a railroad train;
   (B)   A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagger signals the approach of
a railroad train;
   (C)   A railroad train is approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of the
highway crossing and is emitting an audible signal indicating its approach;
and/or
   (D)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous
proximity to the crossing.
(2011 Code, § 15-504)
§ 15-505 AT “STOP” SIGNS.
   The driver of a vehicle facing a “stop” sign shall bring his or her vehicle
to a complete stop immediately before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection or, if there is no crosswalk, then immediately before
entering the intersection, and shall remain standing until he or she can
proceed through the intersection in safety.
(2011 Code, § 15-505)
§ 15-506 AT “YIELD” SIGNS.
   The drivers of all vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to approaching
vehicles before proceeding at all places where “yield” signs have been posted.
(2011 Code, § 15-506)
§ 15-507 AT TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS GENERALLY.
   (A)   Traffic-control signals exhibiting the words “go”, “caution” or “stop”
or exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with
arrows, shall show the following colors only and shall apply to drivers of
vehicles and pedestrians as follows.
      (1)   Green alone or “go”.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through
or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits such turn. But
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the
intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
      (2)   Steady yellow alone or “caution”.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the
red or “stop” signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such
vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red
or “stop” signal is exhibited.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway.
      (3)   Steady red alone or “stop”.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before
entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or “go” is
shown alone. A right turn on a red signal shall be permitted at all
intersections within the city, provided that the prospective turning car comes
to a full and complete stop before turning and that the turning car yields the
right-of-way to pedestrians and cross traffic traveling in accordance with
their traffic signal. However, the turn will not endanger other traffic
lawfully using said intersection. A right turn on red shall be permitted at all
intersections, except those clearly marked by a “no turns on red” sign, which
may be erected by the city at intersections which the city decides require no
right turns on red in the interest of traffic safety.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway.
      (4)   Steady red with green arrow.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, but shall yield
the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other
traffic lawfully using the intersection.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing such signal shall not enter the roadway.
   (B)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable, except as to those provisions which by their
nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the
absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made a vehicle length
short of the signal.
(2011 Code, § 15-507)
§ 15-508 AT FLASHING TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   (A)   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a
traffic sign or signal placed or erected in the city, it shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows.
      (1)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked or, if
there is no limit line, then before entering the intersection, and the right to
proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
   (B)   This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
the rules set forth in § 15-504 of this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 15-508)
§ 15-509 STOPS TO BE SIGNALED.
   No person operating a motor vehicle shall stop such vehicle, whether in
obedience to a traffic sign or signal or otherwise, without first signaling his
or her intention in accordance with the requirements of the state law, except
in an emergency.
(2011 Code, § 15-509)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-8-143
CHAPTER 6: PARKING
Section
   
15-601   Generally
   
15-602   Angle parking
   
15-603   Occupancy of more than one space
   
15-604   Where prohibited
   
15-605   Loading and unloading zones
   
15-606   Parking on narrow streets
   
15-607   Presumption with respect to illegal parking
   
15-608   Parking of commercial and recreational vehicles on public streets in
residential zones restricted
§ 15-601 GENERALLY.
   (A)   No person shall leave any motor vehicle unattended on any street
without first setting the brakes thereon, stopping the motor, removing the
ignition key and turning the front wheels of such vehicle toward the nearest
curb or gutter of the street.
   (B)   Except as hereinafter provided, every vehicle parked upon a street
within the city shall be so parked that its right wheels are approximately
parallel to and within 18 inches of the right edge or curb of the street.
   (C)   Notwithstanding anything else in this code to the contrary, no person
shall park or leave a vehicle parked on any public street or alley within the
fire limits between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. or on any other public
street or alley for more than 72 consecutive hours without the prior approval
of the Chief of Police.
   (D)   Furthermore, no person shall wash, grease or work on any vehicle,
except to make repairs necessitated by an emergency, while such vehicle is
parked on a public street.
(2011 Code, § 15-601)
§ 15-602 ANGLE PARKING.
   (A)   On those streets which have been signed or marked by the city for
angle parking, no person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle
indicated by such signs or markings.
   (B)   No person shall angle park any vehicle which has a trailer attached
thereto or which has a length in excess of 24 feet.
(2011 Code, § 15-602)
§ 15-603 OCCUPANCY OF MORE THAN ONE SPACE.
   No person shall park a vehicle in any designated parking space so that any
part of such vehicle occupies more than one such space or protrudes beyond the
official markings on the street or curb designating such space unless the
vehicle is too large to be parked within a single designated space.
(2011 Code, § 15-603)
§ 15-604 WHERE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall park a vehicle in violation of any sign placed or erected by
the city or state, nor:
   (A)   On a sidewalk;
   (B)   In front of, and opposite of, a public or private driveway;
   (C)   Within an intersection or within 15 feet thereof;
   (D)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
   (E)   Within a pedestrian crosswalk;
   (F)   Within 50 feet of a railroad crossing;
   (G)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, and on
the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet
of the entrance;
   (H)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when other
traffic would be obstructed;
   (I)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
   (J)   Upon any bridge; and/or
   (K)   Alongside any curb painted yellow or red by the city.
(2011 Code, § 15-604) (Ord. 15-33, passed 12-21-2015)
§ 15-605 LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES.
   No person shall park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than
for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or merchandise in any
place marked by the city as a loading and unloading zone.
(2011 Code, § 15-605)
§ 15-606 PARKING ON NARROW STREETS.
   The Public Safety Committee consisting of the City Administrator, Public
Works Director, Chief of Police and Fire Chief and/or their designees is
authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width
of the roadway does not exceed 22 feet or upon one side of a street when the
roadway does not exceed 36 feet. When official signs prohibiting parking are
erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this section, no person shall park
a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign.
(2011 Code, § 15-606) (Ord. 08-23, passed 7- -2008)
§ 15-607 PRESUMPTION WITH RESPECT TO ILLEGAL PARKING.
   When any unoccupied vehicle is found parked in violation of any provision of
this chapter, there shall be a prima facie presumption that the registered
owner of the vehicle is responsible for the illegal parking.
(2011 Code, § 15-607)
§ 15-608 PARKING OF COMMERCIAL AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES ON PUBLIC STREETS IN
RESIDENTIAL ZONES RESTRICTED.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall park any commercial vehicle on public streets
between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. at night, except for the purpose
of actively loading, unloading or servicing the adjacent property. During the
remaining hours between 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m., parking of commercial
vehicles is restricted to two hours daily. Commercial vehicles shall be allowed
to exceed said restriction; provided, they are currently in use for
construction, maintenance, servicing or emergency response servicing the
adjacent property. By virtue of this section, there shall be no overnight
parking of any commercial vehicle on public streets within residentially-zoned
districts unless specifically authorized by the Chief of Police or his or her
designate pursuant to subsection (D) below.
      (2)   For the purposes of this subsection (A), a COMMERCIAL VEHICLE is
defined as any of the following:
         (a)   Any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of 8,000 pounds or more;
         (b)   Any vehicle designed to carry 16 or more passengers, including
the driver;
         (c)   Any vehicle of any size that is being used in the transportation
of hazardous materials as defined in Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-212-101;
         (d)   Any trailer or semi-trailer in excess of 30 feet, regardless of
whether such trailer or semi-trailer is attached to another vehicle;
         (e)   Any vehicle with three or more axles; and
         (f)   Any vehicle licensed and/or used primarily for commercial
purposes.
   (B)   No motor homes, campers, fifth wheel, attached or unattached trailers
in excess of 30 feet or other recreational vehicles shall be permitted to be
parked on any public street between the hours of 12:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. at
night. During the remaining hours between 6:00 a.m. and 12:00 a.m., parking of
recreational vehicles is restricted to two hours daily. By virtue of this
section, there shall be no overnight parking of any of the vehicles listed
within this section on public streets within residentially owned districts
unless specifically authorized by the Chief of Police or his or her designate
pursuant to subsection (D) below.
   (C)   Excluded from this section entirely are emergency and public utility
service vehicles.
   (D)   Each residential lot within the city may request a permit from the
Chief of Police for overnight parking on public streets for vehicles referenced
in subsections (A) and (B) above. Valid permits issued by the Chief of Police
or his or her designate shall allow continuous on street parking for a period
of 72 hours from the effective time and date of the permit.
(Ord. 12-21, passed 1-22-2013; Ord. 13-16, passed 6-17-2013; Ord. 15-34, passed
1-19-2016)
CHAPTER 7: ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
15-701   Issuance of traffic citations
   
15-702   Failure to obey citation
   
15-703   Illegal parking
   
15-704   Impoundment of vehicles
   
15-705   Violation and penalty
   
15-706   Vehicle regulations within city limits
§ 15-701 ISSUANCE OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS.
   When a police officer halts a traffic violator other than for the purpose of
giving a warning, and does not take such person into custody under arrest, he
or she shall take the name, address and operator’s license number of said
person, the license number of the motor vehicle involved and such other
pertinent information as may be necessary, and shall issue to him or her a
written traffic citation containing a notice to answer to the charge against
him or her in the City Court at a specified time. The officer, upon receiving
the written promise of the alleged violator to answer as specified in the
citation, shall release such person from custody. It shall be unlawful for any
alleged violator to give false or misleading information as to his or her name
or address.
(2011 Code, § 15-701)
Statutory reference:
   Related provisions, see Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 7-63-101 et seq.
§ 15-702 FAILURE TO OBEY CITATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his or her written promise to
appear in court after giving said promise to an officer upon the issuance of a
traffic citation, regardless of the disposition of the charge for which the
citation was originally issued.
(2011 Code, § 15-702)
§ 15-703 ILLEGAL PARKING.
   Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in
violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this code, the officer finding
such vehicle shall take its license number and may take any other information
displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously
affix to such vehicle a citation for the driver and/or owner to answer for the
violation within ten days during the hours and at a place specified in the
citation.
(2011 Code, § 15-703)
§ 15-704 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES.
   Members of the Police Department are hereby authorized, when reasonably
necessary to prevent obstruction of traffic, to remove from the streets and
impound any vehicle whose operator is arrested, or any unattended vehicle which
is illegally parked, abandoned or otherwise parked so as to constitute an
obstruction or hazard to normal traffic. Any vehicle left parked on any street
or alley for more than 72 consecutive hours without permission from the Chief
of Police shall be presumed to have been abandoned if the owner cannot be
located after a reasonable investigation. Such an impounded vehicle shall be
stored until the owner claims it, gives satisfactory evidence of ownership and
pays all applicable fines and costs. The fee for impounding a vehicle shall be
$5 and a storage costs of $1 per day shall also be charged.
(2011 Code, § 15-704)
§ 15-705 VIOLATION AND PENALTY.
   Any violation of this title shall be a civil offense punishable as follows.
   (A)   Traffic citations. Traffic citations shall be punishable by a civil
penalty up to $50 for each separate offense.
   (B)   Parking citations. For parking violations, the offender may waive his
or her right to a judicial hearing and have the charges disposed of out of
court, by satisfying a civil penalty of $25 for the first offense and $50 for
second and subsequent offenses.
   (C)   Handicapped parking. The fine for unauthorized parking in a space
designated for handicap parking only will be $50, as permitted by Tenn. Code
Ann. §§ 55-21-108(b) and 55-8-160(a)(15).
(2011 Code, § 15-705) (Ord. 08-23, passed 7- -2008; Ord. 14-13, passed 5-19-
2014)
§ 15-706 VEHICLE REGULATIONS WITHIN CITY LIMITS.
   (A)   Storage of any non-compliant (inoperable, unlicensed or abandoned)
motor vehicle on any real property, alley, street or highway within the
corporate limits of the city is prohibited pursuant to the following
subsections. A violation of this section will constitute a misdemeanor offense.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of a non-compliant vehicle to allow
said vehicle to remain on any public alley, street or highway for a period
longer than 48 hours.
   (C)   It shall likewise be unlawful for the occupant or owner of any real
property to allow a non-compliant vehicle owned or in control of said occupant
or real property owner to remain on any adjacent public alley, street or
highway for a period longer than 48 hours.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any owner of a non-compliant vehicle to allow
said vehicle to remain on any real property for a period longer than 14 days.
   (E)   It shall likewise be unlawful for the occupant or owner of any real
property to allow a non-compliant vehicle owned or in control of said occupant
or real property owner to remain on any real property for a period longer than
14 days.
   (F)   Inoperable or unlicensed motor vehicles wholly concealed from public
view as in a garage, barn or other permanent building are excepted from the
aforementioned subsections (A) through (D) above.
   (G)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE. One in which the vehicle is left on either
public or private property with no owner or operator in close proximity to the
vehicle and a reasonable search of public records cannot establish ownership of
the vehicle.
      INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE. One which cannot be propelled by its own engine
or motor or would be hazardous to operate. Prima facie examples of
inoperability would include: missing wheels; deflated tires; missing parts
required for proper operation (“stripped”); a wrecked vehicle that requires
repair to be operated safely; or is burned throughout (“gutted”).
      NON-COMPLIANT MOTOR VEHICLE. One which is defined by this section as
being inoperable, unlicensed or abandoned.
      UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLE. One that does not display a current and valid
state registration plate, a valid dealer tag or temporary driving permit in
accordance with the provisions of the state requirements for registration of
vehicles.
   (H)   Any violation of this section is deemed to be a public nuisance and
the city or its agents can take reasonable actions to abate the violation with
the cost of such actions to revert back to and, upon said property owner, due
and payable to the city.
(Ord. 11-15, passed 10-17-2011)
CHAPTER 8: FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW
Section
   
15-801   Compliance with Financial Responsibility Law required
§ 15-801 COMPLIANCE WITH FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every vehicle operated within the corporate limits must be in
compliance with the Financial Responsibility Law.
   (B)   At the time the driver of a motor vehicle is charged with any moving
violation under Tenn. Code Ann. Title 55, Ch. 8 and 10, parts 1 through 5, Ch.
50; any provision of this title of the municipal code; or at the time of an
accident for which notice is required under Tenn. Code Ann. § 55-10-106, the
officer shall request evidence from all drivers involved in the accident,
without regard to apparent or actual fault.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY means:
      (1)   Documentation, such as the declaration page of an insurance policy,
an insurance binder or an insurance card from an insurance company authorized
to do business in the state, stating that a policy of insurance meeting the
requirements of the state’s Financial Responsibility Law of 1977 (“the Law”),
compiled in Tenn. Code Ann. Title 55, Ch. 12, has been issued;
      (2)   A certificate, valid for one year and issued by the Commissioner of
Safety stating that a cash deposit or bond required by the law, has been paid
or filed with the Commissioner or has been qualified as a self-insurer under
the law; and
      (3)   The motor vehicle being operated at the time of the violation was
owned by a carrier subject to the jurisdiction of the Department of Safety or
the Interstate Commerce Commission, the state or any subdivision thereof and
that such vehicle was being operated with the owners’ consent.
(2011 Code, § 15-801) (Ord. 09-12, passed 3- -2009)
TITLE 16: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND THE LIKE
      Chapter
         
1.   MISCELLANEOUS
         
2.   EXCAVATIONS AND CUTS
         
3.   SPECIAL EVENTS AND TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURES
CHAPTER 1: MISCELLANEOUS
Section
   
16-101   Obstructing streets, alleys or sidewalks prohibited
   
16-102   Trees projecting over streets and the like regulated
   
16-103   Trees and the like obstructing view at intersections prohibited
   
16-104   Projecting signs and awnings and the like restricted
   
16-105   Banners and signs across streets and alleys restricted
   
16-106   Gates or doors opening over streets, alleys or sidewalks prohibited
   
16-107   Littering streets, alleys or sidewalks prohibited
   
16-108   Obstruction of drainage ditches
   
16-109   Abutting occupants to keep sidewalks clean and the like
   
16-110   Parades and the like regulated
   
16-111   Operation of trains at crossings regulated
   
16-112   Animals and vehicles on sidewalks
   
16-113   Fires in streets and the like
   
16-114   Driveway and drainage tile
§ 16-101 OBSTRUCTING STREETS, ALLEYS OR SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall use or occupy any portion of any public street, alley,
sidewalk or right-of-way for the purpose of storing, selling or exhibiting any
goods, wares, merchandise or materials.
(2011 Code, § 16-101)
§ 16-102 TREES PROJECTING OVER STREETS AND THE LIKE REGULATED.
   It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant to allow any limbs
of trees on his or her property to project out over any street, alley or
sidewalk at a height of less than 14 feet.
(2011 Code, § 16-102)
§ 16-103 TREES AND THE LIKE OBSTRUCTING VIEW AT INTERSECTIONS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any property owner or occupant to have or maintain
on his or her property any tree, hedge, billboard or other obstruction which
prevents persons driving vehicles on public streets or alleys from obtaining a
clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection.
(2011 Code, § 16-103)
§ 16-104 PROJECTING SIGNS AND AWNINGS AND THE LIKE RESTRICTED.
   Signs, awnings or other structures which project over any street or other
public way shall be erected subject to the requirements of the Building Code.
(2011 Code, § 16-104)
§ 16-105 BANNERS AND SIGNS ACROSS STREETS AND ALLEYS RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or have placed any banner or
sign across any public street or alley, except when expressly authorized by the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
(2011 Code, § 16-105)
§ 16-106 GATES OR DOORS OPENING OVER STREETS, ALLEYS OR SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or occupying property to allow
any gate or door to swing open upon or over any street, alley or sidewalk,
except when required by law.
(2011 Code, § 16-106)
§ 16-107 LITTERING STREETS, ALLEYS OR SIDEWALKS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to litter, place, throw, track or allow
to fall on any street, alley or sidewalk any refuse, glass, tacks, mud or other
objects or materials which are unsightly or which obstruct or tend to limit or
interfere with the use of such public ways and places for their intended
purposes.
(2011 Code, § 16-107)
§ 16-108 OBSTRUCTION OF DRAINAGE DITCHES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or cause the obstruction of
any drainage ditch in any public right-of-way.
(2011 Code, § 16-108)
§ 16-109 ABUTTING OCCUPANTS TO KEEP SIDEWALKS CLEAN AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   The occupants of property abutting on a sidewalk are required to keep
the sidewalk clean.
   (B)   Also, immediately after a snow or sleet, such occupants are required
to remove all accumulated snow and ice from the abutting sidewalk.
(2011 Code, § 16-109)
§ 16-110 PARADES AND THE LIKE REGULATED.
   It shall be unlawful for any club, organization or similar group to hold any
meeting, parade, demonstration or exhibition on the public streets without some
responsible representative first securing a permit from the Recorder. No permit
shall be issued by the Recorder unless such activity will not unreasonably
interfere with traffic and unless such representative shall agree to see to the
immediate cleaning up of all litter which shall be left on the streets as a
result of the activity. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person
obtaining such a permit to fail to carry out his or her agreement to
immediately clean up the resulting litter.
(2011 Code, § 16-110)
§ 16-111 OPERATION OF TRAINS AT CROSSINGS REGULATED.
   (A)   No person shall operate any railroad train across any street or alley
without giving a warning of its approach as required by state law.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to stop a railroad train so as to block or
obstruct any street or alley for a period of more than five consecutive
minutes.
(2011 Code, § 16-111)
§ 16-112 ANIMALS AND VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, lead or tie any animal,
or ride, push, pull or place any vehicle across or upon any sidewalk in such
manner as to unreasonably interfere with or inconvenience pedestrians using the
sidewalk.
   (B)   It shall also be unlawful for any person knowingly to allow any minor
under his or her control to violate this section.
(2011 Code, § 16-112)
§ 16-113 FIRES IN STREETS AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to set or contribute to any fire in any
public street, alley or sidewalk.
(2011 Code, § 16-113)
§ 16-114 DRIVEWAY AND DRAINAGE TILE.
   No officer or employee of the city shall furnish drainage tile free of
charge to any person for driveway construction or any other purpose.
(2011 Code, § 16-114)
CHAPTER 2: EXCAVATIONS AND CUTS
Section
   
16-201   Permit required
   
16-202   Applications
   
16-203   Fees
   
16-204   Deposit or bond
   
16-205   Manner of excavating; barricades and lights; temporary sidewalks
   
16-206   Restoration of streets and the like
   
16-207   Insurance
   
16-208   Time limits
   
16-209   Supervision
   
16-210   Driveway curb cuts
   
16-211   Connection of public or private roads to the public streets
Statutory reference:
   This chapter was patterned substantially after the ordinance upheld by the
Tennessee Supreme Court in the case of City of Paris, Tennessee v. Paris-Henry
County Public Utility District, 207 Tenn. 388, 340 S.W.2d 885 (1960).
§ 16-201 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, association or
others to make any excavation in any right-of-way, street, alley or public
place, or to tunnel under any right-of-way, street, alley or public place
without having first obtained a permit as herein required, and without
complying with the provisions of this chapter; and, it shall also be unlawful
to violate, or vary from, the terms of any such permit. Any person maintaining
pipes, lines or other underground facilities in or under the surface of any
street may proceed with an opening without a permit when emergency
circumstances demand the work to be done immediately. The person shall
thereafter apply for a permit on the first regular business day on which the
office of the Building Official is open for business.
(2011 Code, § 16-201)
§ 16-202 APPLICATIONS.
   Applications for such permits shall be made to the Building Official, or
such person as he or she may designate to receive such applications, and shall
state thereon the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size
thereof, the purpose thereof, the person, firm, corporation, association or
others doing the actual excavating, the name of the person, firm, corporation,
association or others for whom the work is being done, and shall contain an
agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating
to the work to be done. The application shall be rejected or approved by the
Building Official within 24 hours of its filing.
(2011 Code, § 16-202)
§ 16-203 FEES.
   The fee for such permits shall be $25 for each excavation and tunnel
project. The fees must be paid on each permit at time of issuance.
(2011 Code, § 16-203)
§ 16-204 DEPOSIT OR BOND.
   (A)   No such permit shall be issued unless and until the applicant therefor
has deposited with the Building Official a cash depositor surety bond. The
deposit or surety bond shall be in the sum of $5,000 if no pavement is
involved, or $7,500 if the excavation is in a paved area and shall insure the
restoration of the ground and laying of the pavement, if any. Where the amount
of the deposit is clearly inadequate to cover the cost of restoration, the
Building Official may increase the amount of the deposit or bond to an amount
considered by him or her to be adequate to cover the cost.
   (B)   From this deposit shall be deducted the expense to the city of
relaying the surface of the ground or pavement, and of making the refill if
this is done by the city or at its expense. The balance shall be returned to
the applicant without interest after the tunnel or excavation is completely
refilled and the surface or pavement is restored.
(2011 Code, § 16-204)
§ 16-205 MANNER OF EXCAVATING; BARRICADES AND LIGHTS; TEMPORARY SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Any person, firm, corporation, association or others making any
excavation or tunnel shall do so according to the terms and conditions of the
application and permit authorizing the work to be done. Sufficient and proper
barricades and lights shall be maintained to protect persons and property from
injury by or because of the excavation being made.
   (B)   If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk
shall be constructed and provided which shall be safe for travel and convenient
for users.
(2011 Code, § 16-205)
§ 16-206 RESTORATION OF STREETS AND THE LIKE.
   Any person, firm, corporation, association or others making any excavation
or tunnel in or under any right-of-way, street, alley or public place in the
city shall restore said right-of-way, street, alley or public place to its
original condition, and shall be paid for by such person, firm, corporation,
association or others promptly upon the completion of the work for which the
excavation or tunnel was made. In case of unreasonable delay in restoring the
street, alley or public place, the Building Official shall give notice to the
person, firm, corporation, association or others that unless the excavation or
tunnel is refilled properly within a specified reasonable period of time, the
city will do the work and charge the expense of doing the same to such person,
firm, corporation, association or others. If, within the specified time, the
conditions of the above notice have not been complied with, the work shall be
done by the city, an accurate account of the expense involved shall be kept,
and the total cost shall be charged to the person, firm, corporation,
association or others who made the excavation or tunnel.
(2011 Code, § 16-206)
§ 16-207 INSURANCE.
   (A)   In addition to making the deposit or giving the bond hereinbefore
required to ensure that proper restoration is made, each person applying for an
excavation permit shall file a certificate of insurance indicating that he or
she is insured against claims for damages for personal injury as well as
against claims for property damage which may arise from or out of the
performance of the work, whether such performance be by himself or herself, his
or her subcontractor or anyone directly or indirectly employed by him or her.
Such insurance shall cover collapse, explosive hazards and underground work by
equipment on the street, and shall include protection against liability arising
from completed operations.
   (B)   The amount of the insurance shall be prescribed by the Building
Official in accordance with the nature of the risk involved, but the liability
insurance for bodily injury shall not be less than $100,000 for each person and
$300,000 for each accident; and, for property damages, not less than $100,000
for any one accident, and a $500,000 aggregate.
(2011 Code, § 16-207)
§ 16-208 TIME LIMITS.
   (A)   Each application for a permit shall state the length of time it is
estimated will elapse from the commencement of the work until the restoration
of the surface of the ground or pavement, or until the refill is made ready for
the pavement to be put on by the city if the city restores such surface
pavement.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to fail to comply with this time limitation
unless permission for an extension of time is granted by the Building Official.
(2011 Code, § 16-208)
§ 16-209 SUPERVISION.
   The Building Official shall from time to time inspect all excavations and
tunnels being made in or under any right-of-way, public street, alley or other
public place in the city and see to the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter. Notice shall be given to him or her at least ten hours before the work
of refilling any such excavation or tunnel commences.
(2011 Code, § 16-209)
§ 16-210 DRIVEWAY CURB CUTS.
   No one shall cut, build or maintain a driveway across a curb or sidewalk
without first obtaining a permit from the Building Official. Such a permit will
not be issued when the contemplated driveway is to be so located or constructed
as to create an unreasonable hazard to pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic. No
driveway shall exceed 35 feet in width at its outer or street edge, and when
two or more adjoining driveways are provided for the same property, a safety
island of not less than ten feet in width at its outer or street edge shall be
provided. Driveway aprons shall not extend out into the street.
(2011 Code, § 16-210)
§ 16-211 CONNECTION OF PUBLIC OR PRIVATE ROADS TO THE PUBLIC STREETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to connect any public or private street to the
public streets of the city without first obtaining the approval of the city’s
Planning Commission.
   (B)   The Building Inspector or any other officer, employee or agent of the
city may enforce the provisions of this section by any legal or equitable
remedy available.
   (C)   A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable
as prescribed by the laws of the state.
(2011 Code, § 16-211)
CHAPTER 3: SPECIAL EVENTS AND TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURES
Section
   
16-301   Definitions
   
16-302   Permit or notice required for special events
   
16-303   Application for a permit
   
16-304   Time of filing; application
   
16-305   Barricades, litter collection and sanitary facilities
   
16-306   Hold harmless; liability insurance
   
16-307   Personnel cost; permit fee
   
16-308   Compliance with laws
   
16-309   Conditions in permits
   
16-310   Standards for issuance of a permit
   
16-311   Issuance or denial
   
16-312   Appeals procedure
   
16-313   Revocation of a permit
§ 16-301 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AMUSEMENT RIDE or AMUSEMENT ATTRACTION. As in Tenn. Code Ann. § 56-38-102,
excluding wholly inflatable attractions.
   PRIVATE GATHERING. A special event that is held on private property and is
not open to the public. A PRIVATE GATHERING shall not be subject to the
requirements of this chapter unless:
      (1)   A temporary street closure is requested;
      (2)   Two hundred or more people gather in a residential area during the
course of the event; or
      (3)   Five hundred or more people gather during the course of the event.
   SPECIAL EVENT. Any public gathering such as a block party, local special
event, parade, festival, celebration, concert, carnival, fair, exhibits, trade
shows or any similar occurrence to be conducted on public or private property
within the city. SPECIAL EVENTS occurring entirely within structures that have
been approved by the city for occupancy by 500 or more people shall be exempt
from the requirements of this chapter.
   TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURE. A condition created by special event or private
gathering to be conducted within or on any street or intersection in the city
that requires all lanes of travel be closed for a public safety purpose. Any
request for a TEMPORARY STREET CLOSURE(S) is deemed a request for a special
event and requires a special event permit. Any temporary street closure
authorized in whole or in part by the city for municipal purposes, including,
but not limited to, conveyance of traffic or travel is exempt from this
chapter.
(2011 Code, § 16-301) (Ord. 06-79, passed 12- -2006)
§ 16-302 PERMIT OR NOTICE REQUIRED FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   Notice for private gatherings.
      (1)   No permit shall be required for a private gathering unless a
temporary street closure permit is requested; however, 72 hours notice to the
Police Department shall be required.
      (2)   Such notice may be oral and shall contain the date, time and place
of the gathering, as well as contact information.
   (B)   Permit required. No person, firm, corporation or organization shall
participate in, advertise for or in any way promote, organize, control, manage,
solicit or induce participation in a special event or a private gathering where
a temporary street closure is requested unless a special event permit has first
been obtained from the City Administrator.
   (C)   Violations. No person, firm, corporation or organization shall violate
any of the terms of a permit issued for a special event or this article, nor
join or participate in any permitted activity under this section over the
objection of the permit holder, nor in any manner interfere with the progress
or orderly conduct of a special event.
(2011 Code, § 16-302) (Ord. 06-79, passed 12- -2006)
§ 16-303 APPLICATION FOR A PERMIT.
   For special events, an application for a permit shall be made upon a form
provided by the City Administrator and shall contain all of the following
information:
   (A)   The name, residence and business address, and phone number of each
person and organization sponsoring the special event. If an organization, the
application shall indicate whether it is authorized to do business within the
state and contain the names, residences and business addresses, and phone
numbers of the president or chairperson thereof, and all other persons:
      (1)   Having an interest or position of management or control in such
organization;
      (2)   Who are or will be engaged in organizing, promoting, controlling,
managing or soliciting participation in such special event; and
      (3)   Who will be vending or soliciting at the event under the special
event permit.
   (B)   The date, or dates, and beginning and ending hours of such special
event;
   (C)   The location, including blocks, streets or intersections, in which
such special event will occur and a map of same, and indicate where a temporary
street closure is required, if any;
   (D)   The estimated number of persons who will participate;
   (E)   The purpose of the special event;
   (F)   Whether parking is requested to be restricted or prohibited during
such closure;
   (G)   Whether any sound amplification equipment is proposed to be used and,
if so, information describing such sound amplification, No sound amplification
equipment shall be used in anyway contrary to the applicable city ordinance on
sound amplification equipment, or contrary to the city ordinance on noise as
outlined in
Title 11, Ch. 4 of this code of ordinances;
   (H)   Whether or not charity, gratuity or offerings will be solicited or
accepted, or sales of food, beverages, including alcohol or beer, or other
merchandise will occur;
   (I)   Whether any temporary street closure will occupy all or only a portion
of the street or intersection involved;
   (J)   Whether the special event includes any amusement attraction or
amusement ride; and
   (K)   Such other information as the City Administrator deems reasonably
necessary in order to carry out his or her duties under this chapter,
including, but not limited to, the criminal record of the applicant.
(2011 Code, § 16-303) (Ord. 06-79, passed 12- -2006)
§ 16-304 TIME OF FILLING; APPLICATION.
   The application shall be filed not less than ten, nor more than 364, days
prior to the scheduled street date of such special event.
(2011 Code, § 16-304) (Ord. 06-79, passed 12- -2006)
§ 16-305 BARRICADES, LITTER COLLECTION AND SANITARY FACILITIES.
   (A)   When a special event permit is granted and includes a temporary street
closure, applicants shall provide and remove such barricades and warning
devices as are deemed necessary by and are acceptable to the City
Administrator.
   (B)   Applicants shall also provide for the collection and removal, at
applicant’s expense, of all trash, garbage and litter caused by or arising out
of such special event and for adequate sanitary facilities as are deemed
necessary by the City Administrator. Each applicant shall enter into a written
agreement, specifying the duties to be performed under this section and the
costs to be imposed.
   (C)   Such written agreement, shall be in a form approved by the City
Attorney and shall be binding after approval by the City Administrator.
(2011 Code, § 16-305) (Ord. 06-79, passed 12- -2006)
§ 16-306 HOLD HARMLESS; LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   Applicants shall agree in writing to assume the defense of and indemnify and
save harmless the city, its Aldermen, boards, commissions, officers, employees
and agents, from all suits, actions, damages or claims to which the city may be
subjected of any kind or nature whatsoever resulting from, caused by, arising
out of or as a consequence of special event and the activities permitted in
connection therewith. The City Administrator shall require the applicant to
submit a certificate of insurance from a state-licensed entity prior to the
event in an amount no less than $250,000 per occurrence insuring the owner or
operator against liability for personal injury arising from the use of an
amusement attraction or amusement ride, in addition to additional coverage up
to $1,000,000 per person and $3,000,000 per occurrence, but within the
discretion of the City Administrator, depending upon the nature, size and
duration of the event.
(2011 Code, § 16-306) (Ord. 06-79, passed 12- -2006)
§ 16-307 PERSONNEL COST; PERMIT FEE.
   (A)   In addition to a permit fee, applicants shall pay to the city the cost
of city personnel who are required by the city to work overtime hours or other
than regular shift or perform duties during or as a result of special event.
   (B)   An application for a special event permit shall be accompanied by a
permit review fee of $20; for special events requiring a beer permit, the total
fee for both the beer and special event permits shall be as set forth in
Title 8, Ch. 2 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   Governmental entities shall be exempt from permit fees.
(2011 Code, § 16-307) (Ord. 06-79, passed 12- -2006)
§ 16-308 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.
   Prior to issuance of a permit under this chapter, all applicable ordinances
and laws shall be complied with and all required permits and licenses shall be
secured in connection with such special event, or the proposed activities
associated therewith.
(2011 Code, § 16-308) (Ord. 06-79, passed 12- -2006)
§ 16-309 CONDITIONS IN PERMITS.
   (A)   Conditions. Any permit granted under this chapter may contain
conditions reasonably calculated to reduce or minimize the dangers and hazards
to vehicular or pedestrian traffic or to the public health, safety,
tranquility, morals or welfare, including, but not limited to, changes in time,
duration, numbers of participants or noise levels.
   (B)   Deposit or bond. The City Administrator may also require as a
condition of the permit a deposit or bond to cover clean-up, damage or other
costs. The amount of the deposit or bond shall be related to the size, nature
and duration of the event and shall be refundable, to the extent not exhausted
by clean-up, damage or and other costs.
(2011 Code, § 16-309) (Ord. 06-79, passed 12- -2006)
§ 16-310 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF A PERMIT.
   A permit shall be issued when, from a consideration of the application and
from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, all of the following
circumstances exists:
   (A)   The applicant has not knowingly and with intent to deceive, made any
false, misleading or fraudulent statements of material fact in the application
for a permit or in any other document required pursuant to this chapter;
   (B)   The applicant has met the standards in this chapter, and paid in
advance any fee required and agrees to such conditions as are imposed in the
permit;
   (C)   The time, duration and size of the special event will not
substantially disrupt the orderly and safe movement of other traffic or create
a public nuisance;
   (D)   The special event is of a size or nature such that it will not require
the diversion of so great a number of public safety officers of the city as to
prevent normal public safety protection to the city;
   (E)   The concentration of persons will not unduly interfere with proper
fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to
such special event;
   (F)   The special event will not unduly interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment on the way to a fire or 911 call;
   (G)   The special event will not unduly interfere with the orderly operation
of parks, hospitals, churches, schools or other public and quasi-public
institutions in the city; and
   (H)   The applicant has provided reasonable means for informing all persons
listed in §
16-303(A) of this chapter and all other persons participating in the special
event of the terms and conditions of such permit and all applicable laws.
(2011 Code, § 16-310) (Ord. 06-79, passed 12- -2006)
§ 16-311 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   (A)   Consideration.
      (1)   For all special events that include a street closure as defined by
§
16-301(C) of this chapter, the Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall consider
issuance or denial of the application. The City Administrator and his or her
staff, including the Chief of Police and the Chief of Fire, shall have
considered the application prior to the decision by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen and shall make recommendation for or against the approval of the
application. The applicant shall be present at all meetings where the
application is considered. Failure to appear shall constitute good cause for
denial of an application.
      (2)   For all special events that do not include a street closure as
defined by §
16-301(C) of this chapter, determination on the issuance or denial of the
application may occur by the City Administrator or his/her designate. An
applicant shall have the right to request final determination from the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen in lieu of consideration from the City Administrator. The
City Administrator shall have the right to request final determination from the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen in lieu of approval.
   (B)   Calculation. For the purposes of this section, the total number of
people shall include all special event participants, workers and attendees.
   (C)   Denial. Applicants must meet the standards for issuance of a permit in
order to receive a permit. Additional criteria for denial may include, but are
not limited to:
      (1)   Failure to submit a complete application with supporting
documentation;
      (2)   Previous revocation of a special event permit;
      (3)   Previous convictions by the persons listed in §
16-303(A) of this chapter for any crime involving moral turpitude within the
past ten years;
      (4)   A finding that the proposed activity or use will unreasonably
interfere with the general public's use and enjoyment of the area at the time
of the event or in the future due to repetitive use or damage to a public
facility;
      (5)   A finding that the proposed activity or use will unreasonably
interfere with or detract from the public health, safety or welfare, or involve
violence, crime or disorderly conduct, at least to the extent that can be
reasonably foreseen;
      (6)   A finding that the proposed activity or use will entail
extraordinary or burdensome expense or emergency operations by the city; or
      (7)   A finding that the proposed activity or use will constitute a
nuisance to adjoining property
owners.
   (D)   Notice. Written notice of the issuance or denial of a small or large
special event permit shall be provided to the applicant within five business
days of any final decision. If a permit is denied, said written notice shall
state the reasons for denial.
§ 16-312 APPEALS PROCEDURE.
   An appeal from denial of the permit shall be by writ of certiorari to the
chancery court.
(2011 Code, § 16-312) (Ord. 06-79, passed 12- -2006)
§ 16-313 REVOCATION OF A PERMIT.
   Any permit for a special event issued pursuant to this chapter may be
revoked by the City Administrator, Chief of Police, Fire Chief or Fire Marshal,
or their designees, at any time when, by reason of emergency, disaster,
calamity, disorder, riot, extreme traffic conditions, violation of this chapter
or of any permit conditions, or undue burden on public services, it is
determined that the health, safety, tranquility, morals or welfare of the
public or the safety of any person or property requires such revocation in
light of all the circumstances. Notice of revocation of a permit shall be
delivered in writing to at least one person named upon the permit by personal
service or by certified mail, or if the special event has commenced, orally or
in writing, by personal contact or service or by telephone. If the number of
people attending the event exceeds the number permitted in the application, it
shall constitute an undue burden on public services and the special event
permit may be orally revoked. Continuance of a special event after such notice
has been delivered is unlawful. Revocation of a permit, for any reason, shall
constitute a valid reason for denial of any future special event application by
the same persons, or any combination thereof, listed in §
16-303(A) of this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 16-313) (Ord. 06-79, passed 12- -2006)
TITLE 17: REFUSE AND TRASH DISPOSAL
      Chapter
         
1.   REFUSE
         
2.   GARBAGE COLLECTION (CONTRACTED OUT)
CHAPTER 1: REFUSE
Section
   
17-101   “Refuse” defined
   
17-102   Premises to be kept clean
   
17-103   Storage
   
17-104   Disturbing containers
   
17-105   Collection
   
17-106   Collection vehicles
   
17-107   Disposal
   
17-108   Garbage collection fee imposed
   
17-109   Amount of fee
   
17-110   Application for service
   
17-111   Due date and suspension of service on default
   
17-112   Report of increase in volume
   
17-113   Penalty
§ 17-101 “REFUSE” DEFINED.
   REFUSE shall mean and include garbage, rubbish, leaves, brush and refuse as
those terms are generally defined; except that, dead animals and fowls, body
wastes, hot ashes, rocks, concrete, bricks and similar materials are expressly
excluded therefrom and shall not be stored therewith.
(2011 Code, § 17-101)
§ 17-102 PREMISES TO BE KEPT CLEAN.
   All persons within the city are required to keep their premises in a clean
and sanitary condition, free from accumulations of refuse, except when stored
as provided in this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 17-102)
§ 17-103 STORAGE.
   Each owner, occupant or other responsible person using or occupying any
building or other premises within the city where refuse accumulates or is
likely to accumulate shall provide and keep covered an adequate number of
refuse containers. The refuse containers shall be strong, durable and rodent
and insect proof.
(2011 Code, § 17-103)
§ 17-104 DISTURBING CONTAINERS.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, rifle, pilfer, dig into, turn over or
in any other manner disturb or use any refuse container belonging to another.
This section shall not be construed to prohibit the use of public refuse
containers for their intended purpose.
(2011 Code, § 17-104)
§ 17-105 COLLECTION.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may contract for the collection of
residential refuse within the corporate limits. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen
may contract for the collection of commercial refuse within corporate limits.
In the event the Board of Mayor and Aldermen elect to not contract for the
collection of commercial refuse, it shall become the responsibility of the
commercial enterprise to secure refuse collection services in accordance with
all applicable city ordinances. Collections shall be made regularly in
accordance with an announced schedule.
(2011 Code, § 17-105) (Ord. 20-12, passed 8-17-2020)
§ 17-106 COLLECTION VEHICLES.
   The collection of refuse shall be by means of vehicles with beds constructed
of impervious materials which are easily cleanable and so constructed that
there will be no leakage of liquids draining from the refuse onto the streets
and alleys. Furthermore, all refuse collection vehicles shall utilize closed
beds or such coverings as will effectively prevent the scattering of refuse
over the streets or alleys.
(2011 Code, § 17-106)
§ 17-107 DISPOSAL.
   The disposal of refuse in any quantity by any person in any place, public or
private, other than at the site or sites designated for refuse disposal by the
Board of Mayor and Aldermen is expressly prohibited.
(2011 Code, § 17-107)
§ 17-108 GARBAGE COLLECTION FEE IMPOSED.
   There is hereby imposed a monthly fee for the collection of garbage within
the city at all commercial and industrial locations, including buildings
containing more than three residential apartments.
(2011 Code, § 17-108)
§ 17-109 AMOUNT OF FEE.
   The fee to be charged shall be in an amount established from time to time by
appropriate ordinance or resolution.
(2011 Code, § 17-109)
Editor’s note:
   The administrative ordinance and resolutions are of record in the Recorder’s
office.
§ 17-110 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   No garbage collection service shall be rendered to any property, except
residential property consisting of less than four family units and properties
devoted to religious or other charitable purposes, until the occupant of each
property makes application therefor at the City Hall and notifies the Recorder
of the volume and number of its garbage containers and the number of garbage
collections per week requested, and pays the charge for the first month in
advance.
(2011 Code, § 17-110)
§ 17-111 DUE DATE AND SUSPENSION OF SERVICE ON DEFAULT.
   The fee herein imposed shall be payable monthly in advance on the first day
of each month. Garbage collection service shall be suspended at any location
which becomes as many as 15 days in arrears in payment of this monthly fee.
(2011 Code, § 17-111)
§ 17-112 REPORT OF INCREASE IN VOLUME.
   Any increase in the size or number of garbage containers on any property
shall be immediately reported to the City Hall and the increase in the monthly
fee occasioned by the increase shall be determined and paid in advance on a pro
rata basis according to the number of days remaining in the month.
(2011 Code, § 17-112)
§ 17-113 PENALTY.
   Failure to make any report required under §
17-112 of this chapter is declared to be a misdemeanor.
(2011 Code, § 17-113)
CHAPTER 2: GARBAGE COLLECTION (CONTRACTED OUT)
Section
   
17-201   Definitions
   
17-202   Rules governing collection
   
17-203   Type of collection
   
17-204   Operation
   
17-205   Compliance with laws
   
17-206   Non-discrimination
   
17-207   Indemnity
   
17-208   Licenses and taxes
   
17-209   Insurance
   
17-210   Performance bond
   
17-211   Curbside collection
   
17-212   Collection fee imposed
   
17-213   Alternate methods of refuse disposal
   
17-214   Nuisance
§ 17-201 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BAGS. Plastic sacks designed to store refuse with sufficient wall strength
to maintain physical integrity when lifted by top. Total weight of a BAG and
its contents shall not exceed 35 pounds.
   BULKY WASTE. Stoves, refrigerators, water tanks, washing machines, furniture
and other waste materials other than construction debris, dead animals,
hazardous waste or stable matter with weights or volumes greater than those
allowed for containers.
   BUNDLE. Tree, shrub and brush trimmings or newspapers and magazines securely
tied together forming an easily handled package not exceeding three feet in
length or 35 pounds in weight.
   CITY. City of Spring Hill, Tennessee.
   CONTAINER. A receptacle with a capacity greater than 20 gallons, but less
than 35 gallons, constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass, having handles of
adequate strength for lifting with a tight- fitting lid capable of preventing
entrance by insects, the mouth of which shall have a diameter greater than or
equal to that of the base; or a bag or box of sufficient wall strength to
contain its contents, in place and when handled for disposal. The weight of any
CONTAINER and its contents shall not exceed 50 pounds.
   CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS. Waste building materials resulting from construction,
remodeling, repair or demolition operations.
   CONTRACTOR. The person, corporation or partnership performing refuse
collection and disposal under contract with the city.
   DEAD ANIMALS. Animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten
pounds in weight that have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered or
killed for human use.
   DISPOSAL SITE. A refuse depository including but not limited to sanitary
landfills, transfer stations, incinerators and waste proceeding/separation
centers licensed, permitted or approved to receive for processing or final
disposal of refuse and dead animals by all governmental bodies and agencies
having jurisdiction and requiring such licenses, permits or approvals.
   GARBAGE. Any and all dead animals of less than ten pounds in weight, except
those slaughtered for human consumption; every accumulation of waste (animal,
vegetable and/or other matter) that results from the preparation, processing,
consumption, dealing in, handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation,
decay or decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or other
animal or vegetable matter (including, but not by way of limitation, used tin
cans and other food containers; and all putrescible or easily decomposable
waste animal or vegetable matter which is likely to attract flies or rodents);
except (in all cases) any matter included in the definition of bulky waste,
construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste, rubbish or stable matter.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance or article which
is designated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or
appropriate agency of the state to be “hazardous”, as that term is defined by
or pursuant to federal or state law.
   PRODUCER. An occupant of a residential, commercial or industrial unit which
generates refuse.
   REFUSE. This term shall refer to refuse, refuse and bulky waste,
construction debris and stable matter generated by producer of garbage.
   RESIDENTIAL AND LIGHT COMMERCIAL REFUSE. All garbage and refuse generated by
a producer at a residential unit or a producer at a commercial unit generating
less than 70 gallons of refuse per week.
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT. A dwelling within the corporate limits of the city
occupied by a person or group of persons comprising not more than four
families. A RESIDENTIAL UNIT shall be deemed occupied when either water or
domestic light and power services are being supplied thereto. A condominium
dwelling, whether of single or multilevel construction, consisting of four or
less continuous or separate single-family dwelling units, shall be treated as a
residential unit; except that, each single-family dwelling within any such
residential unit shall be billed separately as a RESIDENTIAL UNIT.
   RUBBISH. All waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, grass cuttings, dead
plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees or branches thereof, chips, shavings,
sawdust, printed matter, paper, pasteboard, rags, straw, used and discarded
mattresses, used and discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots,
combustible waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging, or
wrapping crockery and glass, ashes, cinders, floor sweepings, glass, mineral or
metallic substances, and any and all other waste materials not included in the
definition of “bulky waste”, “construction debris”, “dead animals”, “garbage”,
“hazardous waste” or “stable matter”.
   STABLE MATTER. All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or
about a stable, or any animal, livestock or poultry enclosure, and resulting
from the keeping of animals, poultry or livestock.
(2011 Code, § 17-201)
§ 17-202 RULES GOVERNING COLLECTION.
   The city shall select a contractor to perform all residential garbage and
refuse collection. The city may decide to select a contractor to perform
commercial garbage and refuse collection. In the event the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen elect to not contract for the collection of commercial garbage and
refuse, it shall become the responsibility of the commercial enterprise to
secure garbage and refuse collection services in accordance with all applicable
city ordinances.
(2011 Code, § 17-202) (Ord. 20-12, passed 8-17-2020)
§ 17-203 TYPE OF COLLECTION.
   (A)   Service provided.
      (1)   The contractor shall provide curbside collection service for the
collection of residential refuse to each residential unit one time per week.
Carts shall be placed at curbside by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection
day.
      (2)   Each residential producer shall furnish a refuse container of no
more than 35 gallons capacity and weighing no more than 50 pounds for each
residential unit. Light commercial users shall furnish no more than two
containers each not to exceed 35 gallons and each to weigh no more than 50
pounds.
      (3)   The contractor shall provide for special collection from
residential units of bulky waste, construction debris and stable matter. Also,
the contractor may, at its selection, provide for the special collection of
dead animals in excess of ten pounds in weight at residential units. Such
collections shall be upon such terms as the contractor shall specify.
      (4)   The contractor may also provide for collection of commercial refuse
on a variable schedule and variable container sizes set forth in a “schedule of
fees for commercial customers” or equivalent list. The city may elect to not
select a contractor for commercial collection. In the event the city elects to
not contract for the collection of commercial garbage and refuse, it shall
become the responsibility of the commercial enterprise to secure garbage and
refuse collection services in accordance with all applicable city ordinances.
   (B)   Curbside collection. Each producer of refuse shall place such refuse
and garbage in a container, bag or bundle on each collection date as close as
possible to the paved portion of the street abutting the principal residence.
Except in cases of undue hardship, all collections of refuse shall be from the
street.
   (C)   Location of containers. Each container shall be placed at curbside for
collection. Curbside refers to that portion of right-of-way adjacent to paved
or traveled city roadways (including alleys). Containers shall be placed as
close to the roadway as practicable without interfering with or endangering the
movement of vehicles or pedestrians. When construction work is being performed
in the right-of-way, containers shall be placed as close as practicable to an
access point for the collection vehicle. The contractor will also pick up
additional bags or boxes placed at curbside in addition to the containers;
provided that, this service is not, in the opinion of the contractor, abused by
the resident.
(2011 Code, § 17-203) (Ord. 10-07, passed 3-15-2010; Ord. 20-12, passed 8-17-
2020)
§ 17-204 OPERATION.
   (A)   Hours of operation. Collection of refuse shall not start before 6:00
a.m. or continue after 6:00 p.m. on the same day. Exceptions to collection
hours shall be effected only upon the mutual agreement of the city and
contractor, or when contractor reasonably determines that an exception is
necessary in order to complete collection on an existing collection route due
to unusual circumstances.
   (B)   Routes of collection. Collection routes shall be established by the
contractor. The contractor shall submit a map designating the collection routes
to the city for its approval, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld. The map shall be of such size to clearly show all pertinent
information. The contractor may, from time to time, propose to city for
approval changes in routes or days of collection, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld. Upon city’s approval of the proposed changes, the city
shall promptly give written or published notice to the affected units.
   (C)   Holidays.
      (1)   The following shall be holidays for purposes of this contract:
         (a)   New Year’s Day;
         (b)   Memorial Day;
         (c)   Independence Day;
         (d)   Labor Day;
         (e)   Thanksgiving Day; and
         (f)   Christmas Day.
      (2)   The contractor may decide to observe any or all of the above
mentioned holidays by suspension of collection service on the holiday, but such
decision in no manner relieves contractor of his or her obligation to provide
collection service at least once per week.
   (D)   Complaints.
      (1)   All complaints shall be made directly to the contractor and shall
be given prompt and courteous attention. In the case of alleged missed
scheduled collections, the contractor shall investigate and, if such
allegations are verified, shall arrange for the collection of the refuse not
collected within 24 hours after the complaint is received.
      (2)   The contractor shall maintain a log of complaints including the
time received, nature of the complaint and the nature and time of disposition.
This log will be available for inspection by city officials.
   (E)   Collection equipment.
      (1)   The contractor shall provide an adequate number of vehicles for
regular collection services.
      (2)   All vehicles and other equipment shall be kept in good repair,
appearance and in a sanitary condition at all times.
      (3)   Each vehicle shall have clearly visible on each side the identity
and telephone number of the contractor.
   (F)   Office.
      (1)   The contractor shall maintain an office or such other facilities
through which he or she can be contacted.
      (2)   It shall be equipped with sufficient telephones and shall have a
responsible person in charge from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on regular collection
days.
   (G)   Hauling. All refuse hauled by the contractor shall be so contained,
tied or enclosed that leaking, spilling or blowing are prevented.
   (H)   Disposal.
      (1)   All refuse collected for disposal by the contractor shall be hauled
to a disposal site.
      (2)   The charge for disposal shall be included in the rate set forth in
the proposal for each unit serviced by the contractor.
   (I)   Notification. The city shall notify all producers about complaint
procedures, rates, regulations and day(s) for scheduled refuse collection.
   (J)   Point of contract. All dealings, contacts and the like between the
contractor and the city shall be directed by the contractor to the Recorder and
by the city to contractor’s district.
(2011 Code, § 17-204)
§ 17-205 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.
   The contractor shall conduct operations under this contract in compliance
with all applicable laws; provided, however, that, the general specifications
shall govern the obligations of the contractor where there exists conflicting
ordinances of the city on the subject.
(2011 Code, § 17-205)
§ 17-206 NON-DISCRIMINATION.
   The contractor shall not discriminate against any person because of race,
sex, age, creed, color, religion or national origin.
(2011 Code, § 17-206)
§ 17-207 INDEMNITY.
   The contractor will indemnify, save harmless and exempt the city, its
officers, agents, servants and employees from and against any and all suits,
actions, legal proceedings, claims, demands, damages, costs, expenses and
attorneys’ fees incident to any work done in the performance of this contract
arising out of willful or negligent act or omission of the contractor, its
officers, agents, servants and employees; provided, however, that, the
contractor shall not be liable for any suits, actions, legal proceedings,
claims, demands, damages, costs, expenses and attorneys’ fees arising out of a
willful or negligent act or omission of the city, its officers, agents,
servants and employees.
(2011 Code, § 17-207)
§ 17-208 LICENSES AND TAXES.
   The contractor shall obtain all licenses and permits (other than the license
and permit granted by the contract) and promptly pay all taxes required by the
city.
(2011 Code, § 17-208)
§ 17-209 INSURANCE.
   (A)   (1)   The contractor shall at all times during the contract maintain
in full force and effect employer’s liability, worker’s compensation, public
liability and property damage insurance, including contractual liability
coverage for the provisions of §
17-207 of this chapter.
      (2)   All insurance shall be by insurers and for policy limits acceptable
to the city and before commencement of work hereunder the contractor agrees to
furnish the city certificates of insurance or other evidence satisfactory to
the city to the effect that such insurance has been procured and is in force.
      (3)   The certificates shall contain the following express obligation:
“This is to certify that the policies of insurance described herein have been
issued to the insured for whom this certificate is executed and are in force at
this time. In the event of cancellation or material change in a policy
affecting the certificate holder, 30 days’ prior written notice will be given
the certificate holder.”
   (B)   (1)   For the purpose of this contract, the contractor shall carry the
following types of insurance in at least the limits specified below:
Coverages Limits of Liability
Coverages                            Limits of Liability
Automobile bodily injury liability   $500,000 each occurrence and $1,000,000
                                     aggregate
Automobile property damage liability $500,000 each occurrence
Bodily injury liability except       $500,000 each occurrence and $1,000,000
automobile                           aggregate
Employer’s liability               $500,000
Excess umbrella liability            $5,000,000 each occurrence
Property damage liability, except    $500,000 each occurrence and $500,000
automobile                           aggregate
Worker’s compensation              Statutory
 
      (2)   As an alternative to the above, contractor may insure the above
public liability and property coverages under a plan of self-insurance. Each
insurance policy with respect to public liability insurance may provide for a
self-insured retention of an amount of $250,000, with the result that the
contractor is its own insurer to that extent. The coverages may be provided by
the contractor’s parent corporation.
(2011 Code, § 17-209)
§ 17-210 PERFORMANCE BOND.
   (A)   The contractor will be required to furnish a corporate surety bond as
security for the performance of this contract.
   (B)   (1)   Premium for such bond shall be paid by the contractor.
      (2)   A certificate from the surety showing that the bond premiums are
paid in full shall accompany the bond.
   (C)   The surety on the bond shall be a duly authorized corporate surety
company authorized to do business in the state.
(2011 Code, § 17-210)
§ 17-211 CURBSIDE COLLECTION.
   All garbage to be collected by the contractor shall to placed within the
carts, bags or bundles as defined herein and shall be transported to the curb
of the street of the producer on the date of collection for that location.
After this date, the cart will be removed from the curb to the rear or side of
the principal building located at such property, until the next collection
date.
(2011 Code, § 17-211)
§ 17-212 COLLECTION FEE IMPOSED.
   A fee is hereby imposed on each producer for the refuse collection service
set forth herein. The fee for this service shall be billed monthly at the rate
or rates to be established by resolution of the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
The fee thus established shall be billed on a monthly basis and collected in
the same manner as the charge for water. Any default in payment may be enforced
by the suspension of service to the delinquent producer and also by terminating
water service following the procedure set forth in the municipal code. The city
shall be entitled to recover collection fees and attorney's fees incurred in
collecting delinquent refuse accounts.
(2011 Code, § 17-212) (Ord. 19-36, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 17-213 ALTERNATE METHODS OF REFUSE DISPOSAL.
   Any producer of refuse on property on which the principal building is
located more than 300 feet from the street or road may elect to handle its own
refuse disposal by giving notice to the City Recorder. In the event the method
of disposal by any such producer is determined to be insufficient by the
Building Inspector, the city may require such producer to make use of the
services afforded by the city.
(2011 Code, § 17-213)
§ 17-214 NUISANCE.
   Maintaining refuse in containers other than containers prescribed by this
chapter (except by those electing to provide their own disposal as provided in
§
17-213 of this chapter) or maintaining garbage or refuse which is allowed to
become offensive shall constitute a public nuisance and may be abated in the
same manner provided by law for the abatement of public nuisances.
(2011 Code, § 17-214)
TITLE 18: WATER AND SEWERS
      Chapter
         
1.   WATER AND SEWERS
         
2.   SEWAGE AND HUMAN EXCRETA DISPOSAL
         
3.   CROSS-CONNECTIONS, AUXILIARY INTAKES AND THE LIKE
         
4.   DISCHARGE REGULATIONS; FATS, OILS, GREASE AND THE LIKE
         
5.   STORM WATER UTILITY
CHAPTER 1: WATER AND SEWERS
Section
   
18-101   Definitions
   
18-102   Abbreviations
   
18-103   Service provided without discrimination
   
18-104   Penalties and remedies
   
18-105   Application for service
   
18-106   Denial of service for non-payment of prior accounts
   
18-107   Deposit
   
18-108   Water connection charge
   
18-109   Sewer connection charge
   
18-110   Territorial assessment charge
   
18-111   Rates
   
18-112   Minimum service charge
   
18-113   Access to premises
   
18-114   Meter reading and determination of charges
   
18-115   Bills
   
18-116   Meter testing and special readings
   
18-117   Calculation of bill where equipment fails
   
18-118   Prohibited activities
   
18-119   City property and maintenance thereof
   
18-120   City’s responsibility and liability
   
18-121   Customer’s responsibility
   
18-122   Termination or interruption of service by city
   
18-123   Notice of proposed termination of service and right of hearing
   
18-124   Hearing
   
18-125   Deposit required to stay termination
   
18-126   Lessee may take responsibility for payments
   
18-127   Procedure for service termination and reinstatement
   
18-128   Termination at customer’s request
   
18-129   Temporary discontinuance at customer’s request
   
18-130   Connection required
   
18-131   Permit for connection required
   
18-132   Application for connection permit
   
18-133   Rejection of permit application
   
18-134   Construction of connections
   
18-135   Separate connections required for each lot
   
18-136   Requirements for connection of service where multiple buildings are
located on one lot
   
18-137   Two or more meters on single premises
   
18-138   City inspection
   
18-139   Laterals to remain city property
   
18-140   Maintenance of private distribution and collection systems
   
18-141   General policy relative to extensions
   
18-142   Manner in which extensions are to be made
   
18-143   Inspection by city of work done by others
   
18-144   Dedication of water and sewer line extensions
   
18-145   Credits for installing oversized lines
   
18-146   Relationship of water system capacity to approvals for annexation,
zoning, planned development, special use, site plan, subdivision and building
regulations
   
18-147   Relationship of sanitary sewer system capacity to approvals for
annexation, zoning, planned development, special use, site plan, subdivision
and building regulations
   
18-148   Reservation of present capacity
   
18-149   Reservation of future sewer capacity
   
18-150   Reserved
   
18-151   Transfer of capacity reservations
   
18-152   Fire hydrants
   
18-153   Fire protection service lines
   
18-154   Metering of fire protection service lines
   
18-155   Purpose, objectives and applicability
   
18-156   Storm water prohibited in sanitary services
   
18-157   Prohibited uses of sanitary services
   
18-158   Federal categorical pretreatment standards
   
18-159   Waiver of discharge limitations
   
18-160   Dilution of discharge to meet standards prohibited
   
18-161   Accidental discharges
   
18-162   Preliminary treatment facilities
   
18-163   Inspection manhole
   
18-164   Determination of character and concentration of wastes
   
18-165   Authority for temporary exclusion
   
18-166   Permit required for discharge of industrial wastes by significant
users
   
18-167   Permit application
   
18-168   Public notice of applications
   
18-169   Response to notice of application
   
18-170   Notice of public meeting on permit applications
   
18-171   Action on applications
   
18-172   Appeals
   
18-173   Permit conditions
   
18-174   Permit modifications
   
18-175   Permit duration
   
18-176   Permit transfer
   
18-177   Reporting requirements for permittee
   
18-178   Pretreatment
   
18-179   Enforcement
   
18-180   Surcharges for industrial wastes
§ 18-101 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the
Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Water and Sewer Superintendent or any other person
designated by the Board to perform the functions and exercise the
responsibilities assigned by this chapter to the Administrator.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-
president, if the industrial user is a corporation;
      (2)   A general partner or proprietor, if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or
      (3)   A duly-authorized representative of the individual designated
above, if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
   BOD (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen (expressed in
milligrams per liter) required to satisfy the five-day oxygen demand of a
million pounds of domestic sewage or industrial wastes (or a combination of
both) when tested in accordance with the procedures given in the latest edition
of Standard Methods of the Examination of Water and Sewage, published by the
American Public Health Association. BOD is a measure of the pollutional
strength of wastes of any nature.
   CATEGORICAL STANDARDS. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
   CONNECTION. Refers to the act of tapping on to the city’s water or sewer
system where service is available (as defined in § 18-128(E) of this chapter),
but where previously there has been no service lateral running from a main line
within a public right-of-way or easement to the customer’s property. A
CONNECTION also refers to the lines and apparatus constituting the link between
a main line in the public right-of-way or easement and the customer’s property.
A CONNECTION is to be distinguished from an extension.
   CUSTOMER. The person in whose name any account for water or sewer service is
established.
   DH. Department of Health.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly
to the waters of the state.
   DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Liquid wastes from bathrooms, toilet rooms, kitchens and
home laundries.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
   EXTENSION. The act of adding additional lines or additional footage onto
existing lines within a public right-of-way or easement to reach or make
service available, as defined in §
18-128(E) of this chapter, to properties where service was not previously
available. The term also refers to the lines and apparatus constituting the
EXTENSION.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking, handling and dispensing
of food.
   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis
with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of
time.
   HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction of non-domestic
pollutants from any source regulated under § 307(b) or (c) of the Act, (33
U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the
system).
   INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge that does not constitute a
“discharge of pollutants” under regulations issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. Liquid wastes from institutional, commercial and
industrial processes and operations as distinct from domestic sewage.
   INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes
or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city’s
NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by
the POTW in accordance with § 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any
criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA) being 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq., the Clean Air Act being 42
U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq., the Toxic Substances Control Act being 15 U.S.C. §§
2601 et seq. or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any
state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable
to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.
   LIQUID WASTES. Waste products that are either dissolved in or suspended in a
liquid.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which applies to
a specific category of industrial users.
   NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD.
Any regulation developed under the authority of § 307(b) of the Act and 40
C.F.R. § 403.5.
   NATURAL OUTLET. The body of water, stream or watercourse receiving the
discharge waters from the sewage treatment plant or formed by the discharge of
the sewage treatment plant.
   NEW SOURCE. Any source, the construction of which is commenced after the
publication of proposed regulations prescribing a § 307(c) (33 U.S.C. § 1317)
categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source, if
such standard is thereafter promulgated within 120 days of proposal in the
Federal Register. Where the standard is promulgated later than 120 days after
proposal, a NEW SOURCE means any source, the construction of which is commenced
after the date of promulgation of the standard.
   NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR NPDES PERMIT. A permit
issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
   OVERSIZE LINE OR FACILITY. A line or other component of the water or sewage
system that exceeds the greater of:
      (1)   The minimum size line or facility normally required by the city to
serve more than a single customer; or
      (2)   The minimum size line or facility necessary to serve the
development for which the line or facility was installed.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the height of the hydrogen
ions in grams per liter of solution. It indicates the acidity and alkalinity of
a substance. A pH value of 7.0 is considered neutral. A STABILIZED pH is one
that does not change beyond the specified limits when the waste is subjected to
aeration. A pH value below 7.0 is acid and above 7.0 is alkaline.
   POLLUTION. The human-made or human-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
   POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into
water.
   PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction
or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or
other means, except as prohibited by 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(d).
   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement related
to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an
industrial user.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, shredded to such a degree that all particles will be
carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers,
with no particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works as defined by § 212
of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which in this case is the city’s sanitary sewer
system. This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW
treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not
connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this chapter,
POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from
persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users
of the city’s POTW. The term POTW, rather than “sanitary sewer system”, is used
primarily in certain parts of this chapter.
   POTW TREATMENT PLANT. The sewage treatment plant owned and operated by the
city.
   SANITARY SEWER. A pipe or conduit that carries sewage or polluted industrial
wastes and to which storm, surface and ground waters or unpolluted industrial
wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM. The sanitary sewer system owned and operated by the
city, including all sanitary sewer lines and pipes, the sewage treatment plant
and all other facilities used in connection with the collection, treatment and
disposal of sewage. The term SEWER SYSTEM is sometimes used interchangeably.
   SEWAGE. Liquid wastes.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. The facility owned by the city where sewage is
collected and treated.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM. Sanitary sewer system.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the city’s sewage
treatment system who:
      (1)   Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work
day;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than 5% of the flow in the city’s sewage
treatment system;
      (3)   Has in its wastes toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to § 307 of
the Act; or
      (4)   Is found by the city, DHE or EPA to have significant impact, either
singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater
treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system’s effluent quality or air
emissions generated by the system.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the
President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
   TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic
in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency under the provision of § 307(a) of the Clean Water Act being 3 U.S.C. §
1317, or other acts.
   USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the city’s POTW.
   WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions,
whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter
the POTW.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or under
ground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within,
flow through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
   WATER SYSTEM. The water utility system owned and operated by the city,
including all devices and facilities for the treatment, storage and
distribution of water.
(2011 Code, § 18-101)
§ 18-102 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings.
   BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand.
   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
   COD. Chemical oxygen demand.
   DHE. Department of Health.
   EPA. Environmental Protection Agency.
   l. Liter.
   mg. Milligrams.
   mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
   NPDES. National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
   POTW. Publicly owned treatment works.
   SIC. Standard Industrial Classification.
   SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.
   U.S.C. United States Code.
   TSS. Total suspended solids.
(2011 Code, § 18-102)
§ 18-103 SERVICE PROVIDED WITHOUT DISCRIMINATION.
   The city shall provide service under this chapter without discrimination
based on race, religion, creed, age, sex or national origin.
(2011 Code, § 18-103)
§ 18-104 PENALTIES AND REMEDIES.
   (A)   As provided in this chapter, termination of service is a remedy
available to the city to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   To the extent authorized by law, the city may seek to enforce any of
the provisions of this chapter through any appropriate equitable action.
   (C)   Each day that a violation continues after the offender has been
notified of the violation shall constitute a separate offense and a misdemeanor
punishable as provided in the general penalty clause for this code.
   (D)   If a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter results in a
danger to the public health or safety, the city may, to the extent authorized
by law, seek to have such violation treated as a nuisance and abated.
   (E)   The city may seek to enforce this chapter by using any one or any
combination of the foregoing remedies.
(2011 Code, § 18-104)
§ 18-105 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   Application for water or sewer service shall be made at the office of
the Recorder during normal business hours. Application shall be made on the
forms prescribed, shall be made in the name of the customer who will be
responsible for payment of bills, and shall be signed by the customer or by his
or her authorized agent.
   (B)   An applicant must, in writing or in person, notify the Recorder at
least three days in advance of the date requested for commencement of service.
   (C)   Except as provided in §
18-130(C) of this chapter, an application for service shall be accompanied by
payment of the service initiation fee specified in §
18-108 and §
18-109 of this chapter. Service shall be refused until this fee has been paid.
   (D)   Under the circumstance set forth in §§
18-144 and
18-145 of this chapter, an applicant for water or sewer service on lots
previously connected in the water or sewer systems may be requested to pay
availability fees.
(2011 Code, § 18-105) (Ord. 21-14, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 18-106 DENIAL OF SERVICE FOR NON-PAYMENT OF PRIOR ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   The city may reject an application for service when the applicant is
delinquent in the payment of any bill incurred for water or sewer service
supplied by the city at any location.
   (B)   A lessee making an initial application for service to his or her
leased dwelling shall not be refused service by the city solely because of an
outstanding amount owed the city by another customer for service previously
furnished to that same address.
(2011 Code, § 18-106)
§ 18-107 DEPOSIT.
   Every new applicant for service must pay a non-refundable new customer
connection fee to establish an account. Existing customers or those who have
had service in the past and are moving back to the area may qualify to have the
fee waived. Balances on previous accounts must be paid before a new account may
be activated.
(2011 Code, § 18-107) (Ord. 19-36, passed 11-18-2019)
§ 18-108 WATER CONNECTION CHARGE.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed the following charges for each connection made
to the water system maintained by the city for all non-irrigation water meter
based upon the size of water meter. Water meters installed to serve an
irrigation system will be charged the same system development charge as
provided for non-irrigation system meters.
Water System Development Charges
                 Proposed                                Tapping    Meter Fees
                 System    Phased         Phased         Fee        (Adopted
Meter Multiplier Developme Implementation Implementation (Adopted   by
Size             nt Charge - July 1, 2025 - July 1, 2026 by         Resolution
                 Fee                                     Resolution 19-78)
                                                         19-78)
Water System Development Charges
                      Proposed                                 Tapping    Meter Fees
                      System     Phased         Phased         Fee        (Adopted
Meter Size Multiplier Developme  Implementation Implementation (Adopted   by
                      nt Charge  - July 1, 2025 - July 1, 2026 by         Resolution
                      Fee                                      Resolution 19-78)
                                                               19-78)
Average Investment/   $1,554     $2,020         $2,230
ERU
5/8" M25   1.00       $1,554     $2,020         $2,230         $1,300     $185.65
3/4" M25   1.20       $1,864.80  $2,424         $2,676         $1,300     $185.65
1" M170    1.60       $2,486.40  $3,232         $3,568         $1,600     $306.80
1.5" M120  2.40       $3,729.60  $4,848         $5,352         $1,900     $489.32
2" Turbo   3.20       $4,972.80  $6,464         $7,136         $2,100     $826.80
Series
2"         3.20       $4,972.80  $6,464         $7,136         $2,100     $1,866.80
Compound
3" Turbo   4.80       $7,459.20  $9,696         $10,704        $2,800     $962.00
Series
3"         4.80       $7,459.20  $9,696         $10,704        $2,800     $2,210.00
Compound
4" Turbo   6.40       $9,945.60  $12,928        $14,272        $3,700     $1,591.20
Series
4"         6.40       $9,945.60  $12,928        $14,272        $3,700     $3,387.28
Compound
6" Turbo   9.60       $14,918.4  $19,392        $21,408        $4,700     $3,744.00
Series                0
6"         9.60       $14,918.4  $19,392        $21,408        $4,700     $4,758.00
Compound              0
8" Combo   12.80      $19,891.20 $25,856        $28,544        $8,700     $7,124.00
10" Turbo  16.00      $24,864    $32,320        $35,680        $10,700    $7,500.00
Series
12" Turbo  19.20      $29,836.80 $38,784        $42,816        $12,700    $8,200.00
Series
                      Same as    Same as above  Same as above  Same as    Same as
Irrigation            above      based upon     based upon     above plus above
System                based upon meter type and meter type and $25.00     based upon
Connection            meter type size           size           Backflow   meter type
                      and size                                 Permit     and size
Note: For any development proposing to use a master meter to serve a private system,
the water and sewer system development charges shall be assessed based on the number
of units proposed and charged the average investment per equivalent residential unit
amount noted in this section.
Note: The charges will increase annually starting on July 1, 2027 by the greater
percentage of either 3% or the percent increase in the Consumer Price Index.
 
   (B)   These charges shall be in addition to any and all other fees and
charges imposed by other ordinances or resolutions of the city.
(2011 Code, § 18-108) (Ord. 07-29, passed 7- -2007; Ord. 07-48, passed 12- -
2007; Ord. 12-20, passed 1-22-2013; Ord. 19-14, passed 5-20-2019; Ord. 19-32,
passed 10-21-2019; Ord. 22-07, passed 5-2-2022; Ord. 24-09, passed 6-3-2024)
§ 18-109 SEWER CONNECTION CHARGE.
   (A)   The following charges are hereby imposed for each connection made to
the sanitary sewer system of the city:
Sewer System Development Charges
                      Proposed    Phased       Phased
Meter Size Multiplier System      Implementati Implementati on Sewer
                      Development on - July 1, - July 1, 2026  Connection Fee
                      Charge Fee  2025
Sewer System Development Charges
                       Proposed    Phased       Phased
Meter Size Multiplier  System      Implementati Implementati on Sewer
                       Development on - July 1, - July 1, 2026  Connection Fee
                       Charge Fee  2025
Average Investment/ERU $2,115      $2,750       $3,035
5/8"       1.00        $2,115      $2,750       $3,035          4-inch Tap
3/4"       1.20        $2,538      $3,300       $3,642          (Residential -
1"         1.60        $3,384      $4,400       $4,856          Single- Family,
1.5"       2.40        $5,076      $6,600       $7,284          Duplex,
2"         3.20        $6,768      $8,800       $9,712          Townhome) =
3"         4.80        $10,152     $13,200      $14,568         $1,100;
4"         6.40        $13,536     $17,600      $19,424         Multifamily =
6"         9.60        $20,304     $26,400      $29,136         $600/dwelling
8"         12.80       $27,072     $35,200      $38,848         unit; 6-inch
10"        16.00       $33,840     $44,000      $48,560         Tap
                                                                (Residential or
                                                                Commercial) =
                                                                $1,300; 8- inch
                                                                Tap
                                                                (Residential or
12"        19.20       $40,608     $52,800      $58,272         Commercial) =
                                                                $1,600; 10-inch
                                                                or larger = To
                                                                be determined
                                                                by City
                                                                Engineer

Notes: (*) - Connection Charges as reflected in Title 18, Chapter 1, Sections
18-108 and 18-109 of Spring Hill Code of Ordinances; See also Resolution 02-17
(Reserve Fee increase from $0.28 to $0.35 times water tap fee)
      - For any development proposing to use a master meter to serve a private
system, the water and sewer system development charges shall be assessed based
on the number of units proposed and charged the average investment per
equivalent residential unit amount noted in this section.
      - The charges will increase annually starting on July 1, 2027 by the
greater percentage of either 3% or the percent increase in the Consumer Price
Index.
 
   (B)   The fees imposed hereby shall be collected before the issuance of any
permit for connection to the sewer system of the city. These fees shall be in
addition to any and all other fees and charges imposed by other ordinances or
resolutions of the city.
   (C)   All material and equipment for construction or maintenance of sanitary
sewer lines and connections must meet city specifications and approval. All
work must be inspected by an authorized representative of the city.
   (D)   All funds collected through these connection charges shall be placed
in an account to be known as the wastewater rehabilitation and extension
account. All funds in said account shall be used solely for extending sewer
lines, rehabilitating existing lines, replacing existing lines with larger
capacity lines or adding to the capacity of the wastewater treatment facilities
of the city.
(2011 Code, § 18-109) (Ord. 97-20, passed 12- -1997; Ord. 10-16, passed 6-21-
2010; Ord. 19-33, passed 10-21-2019; Ord. 22-07, passed 5-2-2022; Ord. 24-10,
passed 6-3-2024)
§ 18-110 TERRITORIAL ASSESSMENT CHARGE.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a territorial assessment charge of $750, for
each connection to the water system maintained by the city when the property to
be served is inside the boundaries of the H.B. & T.S. Utility District of
Williamson County, as those boundaries are defined by the order of creation of
the Utility District by the County Judge of Williamson County dated 5-16-1966,
as amended by order of the County Judge of Williamson County dated 4-26-1976.
The territorial assessment charge is in addition to the water connection charge
set forth in §
18-108 of this chapter or otherwise by ordinance duly adopted by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen of the city.
   (B)   The $750 territorial assessment charge is due and payable to the city
at the time the water connection or tap fee is payable to the city. The city
will remit the $750 territorial assessment payment to the H.B. & T.S. Utility
District.
   (C)   If a lot is located partially, but not fully, within the H.B. & T.S.
Utility District’s boundaries, the territorial assessment charge shall be due
and payable if more than 50% of the lot is within the H.B. & T.S. Utility
District’s boundaries.
   (D)   The following developments, as approved by the Spring Hill Regional
Planning Commission on or before 2-28-1996, are considered developments in
process such that they should not be, and are not, subject to the territorial
assessment charge imposed by this section: Fields of Maplelawn, Crowne Pointe,
Church Hill Downs, Spring Hill Estates and Cameron Farms west of Buckner Lane.
(2011 Code, § 18-110)
§ 18-111 RATES.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen has, by resolution, adopted a schedule of
rates and charges relating to the water and sewer services provided by the
city. This schedule may be amended from time to time by resolution of the
Board. A current copy of this schedule shall be maintained and shall be
available for public inspection during regular office hours in the office of
the Recorder.
(2011 Code, § 18-111) (Ord. 10-02, passed 2-16-2010; Ord. 10-09, passed 4-19-
2010; Ord. 11-07, passed 5-16-2011; Ord. 19-30, passed 9-16-2019; Ord. 19-31,
passed 9-16-2019; Ord. 24-07, passed 6-3-2024; Ord. 24-08, passed 6-3-2024)
Editor’s note:
   Water and sewer rates are available in the office of the Recorder. The
current present or future reserve capacity fees are provided by Ord. 96-11
(March 1996) which is also available in the office of the Recorder.
§ 18-112 MINIMUM SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   The minimum service charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be
made for each meter installed regardless of location.
   (B)   Subject to § 18-127 of this chapter, the minimum service charge per
meter shall apply whether all residential units are occupied or unoccupied.
   (C)   Charges for service commence when the meter is installed and
connection made, regardless of whether service is actually used at that time.
(2011 Code, § 18-112)
§ 18-113 ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   Duly-authorized agents of the city shall have access at all reasonable hours
to the premises of the customer for the purpose of installing or removing city
property, inspecting piping or apparatus, reading or testing meters or for any
other purpose in connection with the city’s service or facilities. Application
for service shall constitute consent by the customer to access to his or her
premises for these purposes.
(2011 Code, § 18-113)
§ 18-114 METER READING AND DETERMINATION OF CHARGES.
   (A)   Ordinarily, meters will be read once per month and bills rendered once
per month. However, the city reserves the right to vary this schedule if
necessary or desirable.
   (B)   (1)   Where the municipality allows more than one commercial or
residential dwelling or premises to be served through a single service line and
meter, the amount of water used by all the dwellings and premises served
through a single service line and meter shall be allocated to each such
dwelling or premises served. The water and sewer charges for each such dwelling
or premises thus served shall be computed just as if each such dwelling or
premises had received, through a separately metered service, such computation
to be made at the municipality’s applicable water and sewer rate schedule,
including the provisions as to minimum bills.
      (2)   The separate charges for each dwelling or premises served through a
single service line and meter shall then be added together, and the sum thereof
shall be billed to the name of record at the city’s Water Works.
   (C)   Readings from different meters will not be combined into one account
for billing, even if the meters are for the same premises, or for the same
consumer, or for the same type of service.
   (D)   Subject to §
18-115 of this chapter, a charge shall be made for all water passing through
the customer’s meter.
   (E)   Bills for water and sewer service shall be calculated in accordance
with the rate schedule in effect at the time of billing.
(2011 Code, § 18-110) (Ord. 09-27, passed 7- -2009)
§ 18-115 BILLS.
   (A)   Bills shall be mailed on the first of each month and become delinquent
if not paid by the close of business hours on the fifteenth of each month. A
late penalty charge may be added to all delinquent accounts.
   (B)   Bills shall notify customers of the provisions of subsection (A) above
and shall contain a phone number where a city employee can be contacted
concerning questions about the bill.
   (C)   The customer shall be unconditionally responsible for payment of all
bills incurred in connection with the service rendered. Failure to receive
bills shall not prevent such bills from becoming due and payable or delinquent
when the bill has been mailed to the last address given to the Recorder by the
customer.
(2011 Code, § 18-115)
§ 18-116 METER TESTING AND SPECIAL READINGS.
   (A)   The city will make special meter readings at the request of the
customer for a fee as provided in the schedule referenced in §
18-109 of this chapter; except that, no fee shall be charged if such special
reading discloses that an error prejudicial to the customer has been made by
the city.
   (B)   If the customer believes that a water meter on his or her premises is
not registering his or her water consumption accurately, he or she may request
a test of the meter by the city. The standard for meter accuracy is +10%.
Charges will be made for this service pursuant to §
18-109 of this chapter; except that, no charge will be made if the test
discloses that the meter is operating inaccurately in a manner prejudicial to
the customer.
(2011 Code, § 18-116)
§ 18-117 CALCULATION OF BILL WHERE EQUIPMENT FAILS.
   (A)   If the seal of the meter is broken by other than the city’s
representatives or in the event that the meter fails to register the use of
water, the customer shall be charged the amount computed using the appropriate
following formula for the period in which the meter failed to register.
      (1)   If the customer has been an occupant at the same location for three
years or more, he or she shall be charged the current rate based upon the
average consumption of the same month during the previous years of occupancy.
      (2)   If the customer has been an occupant at the same location for less
than three years, he or she shall be charged the current rate based upon the
average amount of water consumed monthly by that customer.
   (B)   If the customer demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the
city that a break in the water line on the customer’s side of the meter has
resulted in extraordinary charges for a billing period, the city may recompute
the customer’s bill using the procedures set forth in subsection (A) above.
(2011 Code, § 18-117)
§ 18-118 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   No unauthorized person may:
   (A)   Supply or sell water from the city system to other persons or carry
away water from any hydrant, public water fountain or other such public outlet
without specific authorization from the city;
   (B)   Manipulate, tamper with or harm in any manner whatsoever any
waterline, sewerline, main or appurtenance or any other part of the water or
sewer system, including, but not limited to, any testing or inspection device
used to measure the character or concentration of wastes discharged into the
sanitary sewer system;
   (C)   Tamper with the water meter so as to alter the true reading for the
amount of water consumed;
   (D)   Attach or cause to be attached any connection to the waterline before
the water meter; and/or
   (E)   Knowingly make any false statement, representation or certification in
any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be
maintained under this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 18-118)
§ 18-119 CITY PROPERTY AND MAINTENANCE THEREOF.
   All meters and cut-off boxes located before the meters shall remain the
property of the city and shall be kept in good repair and working order by the
city.
(2011 Code, § 18-119)
§ 18-120 CITY’S RESPONSIBILITY AND LIABILITY.
   The city shall:
   (A)   Maintain the water and sewer lines within the city’s rights-of-way and
easements;
   (B)   Reserve the right to refuse or terminate service if there is a cross
connection to a private water supply, no backlog prevention, or no sewer
cleanout;
   (C)   Assume liability for damage only if the damage results directly from
the city’s negligence;
   (D)   Assume no liability for damage done by or resulting from any defects
in the piping, fixtures or appliances on the customers premises; and
   (E)   Assume no liability for the negligence of third persons.
(2011 Code, § 18-120)
§ 18-121 CUSTOMER’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   The customer shall:
   (A)   Maintain the piping system on his or her property at his or her
expense in a safe and efficient manner in accordance with the applicable
regulations of the state’s Department of Health. The city shall not undertake
to repair the customer’s connections to the water or sewer line until it has
been determined that the disrepair, stoppage or other cause or impediment to
the proper functioning of such line exists within the portion of the lateral
between the main line and the property line. If the property owner or his or
her representative claims that the cause of such disturbance or stoppage exists
on that portion of the lateral lying between the main line and the property
line and an investigation discloses that the cause of the disturbance actually
exists in that portion of the line lying between the property line and the
structure which is served by the line, the property owner shall pay to the city
the actual cost to the city of making the investigation. If, however, upon
investigation it is found that the cause of the disturbance or disrepair is in
that portion of the line lying between the property line and the main line, the
city shall make the repair without additional cost to the property owner;
   (B)   Guarantee protection for city facilities or installed non-mobile
equipment located on the customer’s property;
   (C)   Pay the cost of relocating city owned facilities and equipment if done
at the customer’s request;
   (D)   Not make or cause to be made any cross-connection with a private water
supply;
   (E)   Install proper and adequate backflow prevention devices;
   (F)   Install a pressure reducing valve if deemed necessary by the
Administrator;
   (G)   Install a sewer cleanout to city specifications if deemed necessary by
the Administrator;
   (H)   Be responsible to the city for damage to city property that is the
fault of the customer. The cost of repairing or replacing such property will be
added to the customer’s bill;
   (I)   Secure and record any easements or encroachment agreement required to
extend service lines outside the city; and
   (J)   Convey to the city at no cost to the city a perpetual easement and
right-of-way across any property owned by the customer that is necessary to
allow maintenance of lines providing service requested by the customer.
(2011 Code, § 18-121)
§ 18-122 TERMINATION OR INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE BY CITY.
   (A)   The city may terminate service for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Refusal by the customer to pay in full an account that remains
delinquent in excess of ten days;
      (2)   To prevent fraud or abuse by a customer; and/or
      (3)   Failure of the customer to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter.
   (B)   Before service is terminated, the customer shall be notified of the
proposed termination and given an opportunity to be heard on the matter as
provided in this chapter.
   (C)   The city reserves the right to discontinue or interrupt service
temporarily for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Emergency repairs;
      (2)   Insufficient supply or treatment capacity; and/or
      (3)   Strike, riot, flood, accident, act of God or any other unavoidable
cause.
   (D)   The city shall make a good faith effort to notify affected customers
before service is discontinued or interrupted as provided in subsection (C)
above. However, the customer, by making application for service, agrees to hold
the city harmless from liability for any damages that may occur due to
discontinuance or interruption of service for the above mentioned causes.
(2011 Code, § 18-122)
§ 18-123 NOTICE OF PROPOSED TERMINATION OF SERVICE AND RIGHT OF HEARING.
   (A)   On the day after an account becomes delinquent (the sixteenth of the
month, see §
18-115 of this chapter), or as soon thereafter as possible, the city shall mail
to the customer a notice informing the customer of the amount owed and stating
that:
      (1)   The customer’s account is delinquent and, if applicable, is subject
to a penalty charge identified in the notice;
      (2)   The customer is entitled to be heard before service termination by
a designated employee at a specified address or telephone number during stated
business hours if there is any dispute over the amount of the bill; and
      (3)   Unless the bill is paid in full or otherwise resolved by the
twenty-fifth of the month, the city may terminate service without further
notice.
   (B)   If the city proposes to terminate service for any reason other than
non-payment, the city shall first mail to the customer a notice informing the
customer:
      (1)   The city proposes to terminate service without further notice on a
specified date, which shall be not earlier than the tenth day after the notice
is mailed;
      (2)   What the reasons for the proposed termination are and what, if
anything, the customer may or must do to avoid termination of service; and
      (3)   The customer is entitled to be heard by a designated employee (at
any time prior to termination of service) at a specified address or telephone
number during stated business hours if there is any question about the accuracy
or legitimacy of the reasons stated for the proposed termination.
(2011 Code, § 18-123)
§ 18-124 HEARING.
   (A)   The hearing provided for in §
18-122 of this chapter may be held by phone or, at the request of the customer,
the customer may meet in person with the employee at the office of the employee
(as specified in the notice described in §
18-121 of this chapter).
   (B)   The hearing shall be conducted informally. The customer shall be given
every reasonable opportunity to bring to the attention of the designated
employee information that bears upon the reasons for the proposed termination.
   (C)   If the customer is dissatisfied with the result of the hearing, the
customer may inform the Recorder of the customer’s desire to appeal the matter
to the Board, and the Recorder shall, thereupon, place the matter on the agenda
of the next regular Board meeting.
(2011 Code, § 18-124)
§ 18-125 DEPOSIT REQUIRED TO STAY TERMINATION.
   Termination of service for non-payment of bills shall not be stayed pending
the outcome of the hearing procedures set forth in §
18-124 of this chapter unless the customer pays to the city a deposit equal to
the amount of the disputed bill. Depending on the outcome of the hearing
process, this deposit shall be applied toward payment of the bill, or refunded,
as appropriate.
(2011 Code, § 18-125)
§ 18-126 LESSEE MAY TAKE RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENTS.
   (A)   Whenever:
      (1)   A water meter serves a single dwelling unit or, in the case of non-
residential structures, a single tenant;
      (2)   The city is aware that the occupant of the dwelling unit or the
tenant is not the person responsible for water or sewer payments (i.e., is not
the “customer”); and
      (3)   The customer becomes delinquent in his or her payments, then a copy
of the notice of proposed termination required by §
18-122 of this chapter shall be sent to the occupant of the dwelling unit or
the tenant of the non-residential structure if the identify of the occupant or
tenant is known to the city. The city shall endeavor to perform the same
courtesy where there are multiple occupants or tenants. The notice shall
include or be accompanied by a statement setting forth the rights of the
occupant or tenant (the lessee) as provided in subsection (B) below.
   (B)   When a lessor becomes delinquent in his or her water or sewer
payments, a lessee may take responsibility for such payments and may thereby
become the “customer” in accordance with the provisions of the chapter. The
lessee shall not be responsible for the debts of the lessor.
(2011 Code, § 18-126)
§ 18-127 PROCEDURE FOR SERVICE TERMINATION AND REINSTATEMENT.
   If a portion of the bill remains outstanding, the city may proceed to
collect the balance in the usual way provided by law for the collection of
debts. The city shall be entitled to recover collection fees and attorney's
fees incurred in collecting delinquent water and sewer accounts.
   (A)   Before service will be reinstated, the customer shall be required to
make full payment of any charges still outstanding on his or her account.
   (B)   Re-instatement of service after business hours will cost the customer
$50. Water distribution employees are prohibited from collecting delinquent
utility bills after business hours.
(2011 Code, § 18-127) (Ord. 10-05, passed 3- -2010; Ord. 19-36, passed 11-18-
2019)
§ 18-128 TERMINATION AT CUSTOMER’S REQUEST.
   (A)   A request that service be terminated (for a change in occupancy or
other reason) shall be submitted to the City Clerk (in writing or in person) at
least three days before the customer desires the termination to become
effective.
   (B)   The customer shall be responsible for all water consumed and for pro-
rated service up to the time service is terminated, or until three days
following receipt of the request for termination, whichever occurs sooner.
   (C)   When all charges for service are paid in full the customer’s deposit
shall be refunded. The deposit will be refunded pursuant to §
18-107 of this chapter.
   (D)   The customer shall be entitled to be heard by a designated employee
concerning any dispute about the amount of the deposit refund. The employee
shall inform the customer in writing of his or her decision and the reasons
therefor as soon as reasonably possible.
(2011 Code, § 18-128)
§ 18-129 TEMPORARY DISCONTINUANCE AT CUSTOMER’S REQUEST.
   (A)   Upon request of a customer, the city will temporally disconnect that
customer’s service for a minimum period of three months. Such a request shall
be submitted to the Recorder (in writing or in person) at least three days
before the customer desires the discontinuance to begin. The customer shall be
responsible for all water consumed and for pro-rated service up to the time
service is discontinued, or until three days following receipt of a request for
discontinuance, whichever occurs sooner.
   (B)   (1)   During the period of discontinuance, the customer shall not be
liable for the minimum service charge prescribed in §
18-110 of this chapter.
      (2)   However, when service is resumed, the customer shall be charged the
service initiation fee established in §
18-109 of this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 18-129)
§ 18-130 CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every person who owns unimproved property within the corporate limits
of the city shall be required, at the time the property is improved, to connect
the improved property to the public water and sewer systems unless service is
not available (as defined in subsection (E) below).
   (B)   Every person who owns property within the city that is improved on the
effective date of this chapter, but that is not connected to the city’s sewer
system shall connect to this system within 30 days after being notified by the
city to connect the improved property. The Administrator shall send such notice
only if he or she determines, after consulting with the Maury County Health
Department, that the property in question is not being served by an adequately
functioning ground absorption sewage disposal system.
   (C)   If both water and sewer service are available to a lot within the
city, then a customer on that lot who receives water service must also pay for
sewer service, even if the customer chooses not to connect to the sewer system.
   (D)   If both water and sewer service are available to a lot, then no new
connection may be made onto the sewer system unless a connection is also made
onto the water system.
   (E)   For purposes of this chapter, water or sewer service (respectively) is
“not available” if the building or stricture to be served on the property is
located more than 300 feet from an existing public water or sewer line that
reasonably could serve such property. In addition, no property owner shall be
required to connect to the public water or sewer system if he or she must first
purchase an easement in which to install water or sewer lines.
   (F)   As used in this section, the term IMPROVED PROPERTY means property
that has been developed for any use that requires a supply of water or the
availability of sewage treatment or disposal facilities.
(2011 Code, § 18-130)
§ 18-131 PERMIT FOR CONNECTION REQUIRED.
   No person may connect or be connected to the water or sewer system of the
city until a permit for such a connection has been issued pursuant to § 18-132
of this chapter. After connection in accordance with this chapter, service may
be initiated in accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 18-131) (Ord. 21-14, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 18-132 APPLICATION FOR CONNECTION PERMIT.
   (A)   Every application for a water or sewer connection shall state the name
of the owner of the lot, the name of the street on which the lot is situated,
the number of the building if there is one on the lot or, if not, a description
of the location of the lot, the number and kind of the connections desired, the
character of the surface of the abutting street and any other additional
information required by the Administrator. Every application shall be signed by
the person making the application.
   (B)   Every application for connection shall be accompanied by the following
fees pursuant to §
18-108 of this chapter unless such fees have previously been paid or are
otherwise inapplicable:
      (1)   Lateral and meter installation charges. When these charges are
assessed on an actual cost basis, the applicant shall deposit with the city an
amount equal to the estimated cost of lateral and meter installation charges.
If the cost of connections is less than the installation deposit, the
difference between the deposit and the connection cost shall be refunded to the
applicant. If the cost of the connection is greater than the installation
deposit, the applicant shall pay to the city an amount equal to the difference
between the cost of connection and the installation deposit; and
      (2)   Service application (see §
18-105).
   (C)   When lateral and meter installation charges are collected the service
initiation fee provided for in §
18-109 of this chapter is waived.
   (D)   No permit shall be issued for water or sewer connection until a
determination is made by the City Engineer that water and sewer service is
sufficient including approval of public utility infrastructure improvements are
necessary to ensure adequate water and sewer service is available to serve the
subject property and required performance bonds or other form of acceptable
financial surety has been received by the city and all associated fees have
been paid in full by the applicant.
(2011 Code, § 18-132) (Ord. 21-14, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 18-133 REJECTION OF PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Upon application for a connection permit, the city may reject the
application and decline to provide service for the following reasons:
   (A)   Service is not available under the standard rate;
   (B)   The cost of service is excessive;
   (C)   The provision of service to the applicant will adversely effect the
supply of water to other customers or will adversely affect the city’s sewage
treatment capabilities;
   (D)   The applicant does not satisfy the requirement set forth in §
18-130(B) of this chapter; and/or
   (E)   Other good and sufficient reasons.
(2011 Code, § 18-133)
§ 18-134 CONSTRUCTION OF CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Water and sewer connections shall be constructed simultaneously
whenever connections are to be made to both systems.
   (B)   Subject to §
18-135 of this chapter, when a permit has been issued by the city for a
connection to existing water or sewer line, the city, either with the use of
city forces or by contract, shall do the excavating, lay the pipe, install a
meter, make the connections (tap-on) to the main, fill the excavation and
replace the surface of the street. Every effort shall be made to make the
connection within three days after a permit to connect has been issued under §
18-131 of this chapter.
   (C)   The customer may request that the water meter or sewer tap be placed
on his or her premises; however, the final decision for water meter and sewer
tap placement lies with the city.
   (D)   When the meter is placed on the customer’s premises:
      (1)   The city shall provide a cut-off valve directly before the meter;
      (2)   The customer shall furnish and maintain a private cut-off valve on
his or her side of the meter; and/or
      (3)   The customer shall provide a suitable location for placing the
meter, unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader.
   (E)   The customer’s piping and apparatus shall be installed by a licensed
plumber at the customer’s expense in accordance with all applicable Building
and Plumbing Codes and the city’s regulations and in full compliance with the
sanitary regulations of the state’s Department of Heath.
   (F)   Piping on the customer’s premises shall be so arranged that the
connections are conveniently located with respect to the city’s mains.
   (G)   Whenever it is necessary to cut a city street to make a connection to
a water or sewer line, the customer will be charged for the necessary repair of
the street damage involved.
   (H)   Residential customers shall have at least a three-fourths foot water
line between the meter and the dwelling unit. Commercial and industrial line
systems will vary with the type of business and meter size.
(2011 Code, § 18-134)
§ 18-135 SEPARATE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED FOR EACH LOT.
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, LOT shall mean a parcel of land
whose boundaries have been established by some legal instrument such as a
recorded deed, deed of trust or a recorded map and which is recognized as a
separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title.
   (B)   There shall be for every lot to which water or sever service is
available:
      (1)   A separate connection with the water main of the city and a
separate service pipe, tap and meter; and
      (2)   A separate connection with the sewer main of the city.
(2011 Code, § 18-135)
§ 18-136 REQUIREMENTS FOR CONNECTION OF SERVICE WHERE MULTIPLE BUILDINGS ARE
LOCATED ON ONE LOT.
   Where there are multiple buildings or structures situated on one lot and
where the lot owner desires to have a common water connection (including a
private water distribution system), and a common sewer connection (including a
private sewage collection system), he or she must meet the following
requirements.
   (A)   The building or buildings to be served shall be in compliance with all
applicable zoning regulations.
   (B)   The building permit and plot shall show a single owner and shall
indicate the complex of buildings to be constructed on a single lot.
   (C)   The applicant shall be required to submit to the city a site plan
showing the proposed water and sewer systems. Such plans shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer who shall also provide satisfactory inspection
of the work. Such plans shall include:
      (1)   Size of water lines, materials to be used for construction, valve
locations and hydrant locations. All construction from the property line to the
water meter shall be in accordance with city standards and specifications.
Construction beyond the water meter may be with materials permitted in the
Plumbing Code. All construction shall be performed by either a licensed master
plumber or a licensed utility contractor; and
      (2)   Size of sewers and materials to be used for construction. All sewer
lines eight inches or larger in size shall be constructed in accordance with
city specifications and standards. All sewer lines smaller than eight inches
shall be constructed in accordance with the Plumbing Code. All construction
shall be performed by either a licensed master plumber or a licensed utility
contractor.
   (D)   No connection to the city’s system shall be allowed unless the lines
to be connected have been installed in accordance with all applicable state and
city regulations and requirements. Lines connected in violation of this
provision without city permission may be summarily disconnected by the city.
   (E)   Should a building served by a common connection be conveyed to a new
owner, the city shall require a separate water and sewer connection from that
building to the mains in the street, except in the case of condominium or
townhouse developments.
(2011 Code, § 18-136)
§ 18-137 TWO OR MORE METERS ON SINGLE PREMISES.
   When two or more meters are to be installed on the same premises for
different customers, the city may direct that such meters be closely grouped
and clearly labeled as to which customer is served by each.
(2011 Code, § 18-137)
§ 18-138 CITY INSPECTION.
   (A)   By making application for service the customer agrees that the city
has the right to inspect the private water distribution systems, water
connections, sewage collection system and sewer connections before they are
connected to the city water and sewer systems.
   (B)   The city shall be given notice to inspect before the pipes are covered
and the systems are connected.
(2011 Code, § 18-138)
§ 18-139 LATERALS TO REMAIN CITY PROPERTY.
   All meters, meter boxes, pipes and other equipment furnished and used by the
city or its contractors in installing any water or sewer connections shall be
and remain the property of the city.
(2011 Code, § 18-139)
§ 18-140 MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE DISTRIBUTION AND COLLECTION SYSTEMS.
   In addition to the requirements of §
18-136 of this chapter, all owners of lots on which private water distribution
and sewer collection systems are situated shall maintain such systems properly.
Failure to maintain the systems shall constitute a nuisance which may be abated
by the city.
(2011 Code, § 18-140)
§ 18-141 GENERAL POLICY RELATIVE TO EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   The city may extend or allow the extension of its water and sewer
mains, either within or outside the city, whenever it determines that it is in
the city’s best interest to do so.
   (B)   When a water or sewer line is extended at the city’s initiative, the
cost of such extension shall initially be borne by the city. However, the city
may recoup its costs, in whole or in part, by charging front footage fees at
the time of connection to the water or sewer system or by levying special
assessments on benefitted property.
   (C)   Extensions made at the city’s initiative may be done by city forces or
under a contract let by the city.
   (D)   The responsibility for and the entire cost of extending a water or
sewer line in response to a request for service by a property owner shall be
borne by that property owner, subject to the city’s reimbursement policy set
forth in §
18-145 of this chapter. This applies both to extensions made to reach property
previously unserved and extensions within new subdivisions or developments.
   (E)   The city shall normally require that, when a water or sewer line is
extended to serve previously unserved property, it must be extended completely
through that property or (if the line is extended along the street frontage) to
the far side of the property. The purpose of this requirement is to facilitate
future extensions of such utility lines to serve other properties.
(2011 Code, § 18-141)
§ 18-142 MANNER IN WHICH EXTENSIONS ARE TO BE MADE.
   (A)   All additions to the city’s water or sewer system, whether inside or
outside the city, shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter as well as other city specifications and requirements. Among other
matters, such specifications shall govern the size of all lines, their
location, grade, materials used, manner of installation and provision for
future extensions.
   (B)   No construction on any addition to the city’s water or sewer system
shall commence until detailed plans have been reviewed and approved by the
Administrator. Such plans shall include whatever information the Administrator
deems reasonably necessary to determine whether the proposed extension complies
with all applicable city specifications and requirements.
   (C)   Water lines intended for addition to the publicly owned water system
will be allowed to connect to the system only if installed within the right-of-
way of a publicly dedicated and opened street, except that the city may accept
an offer of dedication of lines installed within unsubdivided commercial or
industrial developments if necessary easements are provided. Sewer lines shall
also be installed within public street rights-of-way wherever practicable, but
the city may accept sewer lines constructed on private property (where the
topography makes this necessary) if adequate permanent easements are provided.
   (D)   To protect street surfaces, the city may require that whenever
extensions of water or sewer lines are made to properties or within new
subdivisions, laterals be extended to all properties expected to tap on to such
water or sewer lines.
   (E)   By making application for extension to the city’s water or sewer
system, the person responsible for the extension agrees to indemnify and holds
the city harmless from all loss, cost, damage, liability or expense resulting
from injury to any person or property arising out of the extension of such
service lines.
(2011 Code, § 18-142)
§ 18-143 INSPECTION BY CITY OF WORK DONE BY OTHERS.
   (A)   All work on the extension of water or sewer lines not performed by
city forces (whether inside or outside the city) shall be subject to inspection
by the city and no new service line may be covered up until such inspection has
occurred. If, in the judgment of the Administrator, there is a demonstrated
lack of competent supervision by a contractor, the Administrator may (at his or
her option) provide constant inspection by city personnel at the expense of the
applicant.
   (B)   Inspection of a project by the city does not consist of or imply
supervision. The person requesting the extension is solely responsible for
ensuring that the projects completed according to city specifications (if the
work is not done by city forces) and may be required to rearrange or do over
any work to bring it into conformity with such specifications and requirements.
(2011 Code, § 18-143)
§ 18-144 DEDICATION OF WATER AND SEWER LINE EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   All water and sewer mains constructed and connected with the
facilities of the city pursuant to this chapter shall be conveyed to and become
the property of the city upon completion and acceptance by the city. Connection
to the system and acceptance by the city shall constitute dedication of water
or sewer main extension by the person responsible for the extension. However,
connection to the system shall not be permitted unless and until the lines have
been constructed and connected in compliance with all applicable state and city
regulations and requirements.
   (B)   Following dedication as provided in subsection (A) above, the city
shall have exclusive control of all water or sewer lines and shall be
responsible for their maintenance, repair and operation. However, the conveyor
of additions to the system shall guarantee the entire project against defective
material and workmanship for a period of 12 months from the date of completion
and acceptance of the project, including such incidental damages as may arise
from such claims.
(2011 Code, § 18-144)
§ 18-145 CREDITS FOR INSTALLING OVERSIZED LINES.
   (A)   A developer who installs or causes to be installed water or sewer
infrastructure and is required by the city to install an oversized line shall
be entitled to receive a credit against the payment of availability fees in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
      (1)   For purposes of this section, an OVERSIZED LINE means any line,
tank, pump or any other element, appurtenance or facility of the city's water
or sewer system that:
         (a)   Is larger than the minimum size line, tank, pump, element,
appurtenance or facility that the city normally requires to be installed; and
         (b)   Is larger than that necessary to serve the needs of the
development installing or causing to be installed the line, tank, pump,
element, appurtenance or facility.
      (2)   The availability fees against which a credit may be taken are those
fees that are required to be paid for the development of the property to which
or in which the lines are installed. An installation of an oversized water line
entitles the developer to credits only against water availability fees, and an
installation of an oversized sewer line entitles the developer to credits only
against sewer availability fees.
   (B)   (1)   The maximum amount of credit to which a developer shall be
entitled for the installation of oversized lines shall be an amount determined
by the city that reasonably approximates the difference between the actual cost
of installing the oversized line and the cost that the developer would have
incurred had he or she been allowed to install a line that was not oversized.
      (2)   In making this determination, the city may, among other
alternatives, establish a schedule of customary and reasonable costs for
installing lines of different sizes and calculate the maximum creditable amount
by multiplying the length of the line installed times the per foot cost
differential for the oversized line.
   (C)   Credits may be taken under this section at the time availability fees
are paid. In applying credits, a determination shall first be made of the
amount of availability fees that would be required in the absence of any
credits, and then the developer may use credits for up to 50% of payment
otherwise required (subject to the maximum creditable amount determined under
subsection (B) above).
(2011 Code, § 18-145) (Ord. 21-24, passed 10-18-2021)
§ 18-146 RELATIONSHIP OF WATER SYSTEM CAPACITY TO APPROVALS FOR ANNEXATION,
ZONING, PLANNED DEVELOPMENT, SPECIAL USE, SITE PLAN, SUBDIVISION AND BUILDING
REGULATIONS.
   (A)   An application for annexation, zoning map amendment, planned
development, special use, site plan and/or subdivision, shall as part of the
application requirements perform a water system capacity analysis to be
completed by the city or its consultant engineer, to confirm sufficient water
system capacity is available to serve the domestic, fire protection, and
irrigation needs of subject property. The cost for preparing the water system
capacity analysis shall be the responsibility of the applicant. The Board of
Mayor and Aldermen may adopt by resolution and amend from time to time a fee
structure for preparing a water system capacity analysis.
   (B)   All required permits must be secured and associated fees paid in full
by applicant before the commencement of site construction work, the issuance of
building permits, or the sale of subdivision lots. Occupancy permits shall not
be issued unless all required public infrastructure has been installed
including water system improvements or a performance bond or other form of
acceptable financial surety is received by the city and authorization for the
issuance of occupancy permits is granted by the authority having jurisdiction.
   (C)   Whenever a change in use takes place on property that has previously
been connected to the city's water system and under the new use a greater
demand will be placed on the water system than was placed on this system by the
previous user (as determined by City Engineer according to
Appendix C of this code of ordinances), then no occupancy permit may be issued
for the lot or building until such time as the City Engineer has confirmed the
extent of additional capacity required including, but not limited to, an
increase in the size of the domestic service line and/or the addition or
increase in size of the fire protection or irrigation system service line and
payment in full by the applicant of all associated fees for the additional
capacity needed.
   (D)   Applicants for annexation, zoning map amendment, planned development,
site plan, subdivision and special use shall pay or cause to be paid in full
the following Water Capacity Analysis Fee for the preparation of a Water System
Capacity Analysis.
WATER CAPACITY ANALYSIS FEE SCHEDULE
TYPE OF APPLICATION WATER CAPACITY ANALYSIS FEE
WATER CAPACITY ANALYSIS FEE SCHEDULE
TYPE OF APPLICATION                             WATER CAPACITY ANALYSIS FEE
Annexation                                       
   < 50 acres                                $250
   51 - 150 acres                            $500
   > 150 acres                               $750
Zoning Map Amendment                             
   Residential                               $250
   Non-Residential                           $400
                                                
Subdivision - Conceptual or Preliminary Plat     
   < 10 acres                                $250
   10 - 50 acres                             $500
   50-100 acres                              $750
   > 100 acres                               $1,000
                                                
Planned Development - Conceptual or Preliminary  
Development Plan
   < 10 acres                                $250
   10 - 50 acres                             $500
   50-100 acres                              $750
   > 100 acres                               $1,000
Site Plan                                        
   < 10 acres                                $250
   10 - 50 acres                             $500
   50-100 acres                              $750
   > 100 acres                               $1,000
Special Use (All Types)                         $250
 
(2011 Code, § 18-146) (Ord. 21-14, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 18-147 RELATIONSHIP OF SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM CAPACITY TO APPROVALS FOR
ANNEXATION, ZONING, PLANNED DEVELOPMENT, SPECIAL USE, SITE PLAN, SUBDIVISION
AND BUILDING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   An application for annexation, zoning map amendment, planned
development, special use, site plan and/or subdivision, shall as part of the
application requirements perform a sanitary sewer system capacity analysis to
be completed by the city or its consultant engineer, to confirm sufficient
sewer system capacity is available to serve the sanitary sewer needs of subject
property. The cost for preparing the sewer system capacity analysis shall be
the responsibility of the applicant. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may adopt
by resolution and amend from time to time a fee structure for preparing a water
system capacity analysis. However, with respect to any development (or phase
thereof), building or lot that is proposed, intended or required to be served
by the city’s sanitary sewer system, the remaining requirements of this section
shall be applicable.
   (B)   Applicants for annexation, zoning map amendment, planned development,
site plan, subdivision and special use shall pay or cause to be paid in full
the following sewer capacity analysis fee for the preparation of a sewer system
capacity analysis.
SEWER CAPACITY ANALYSIS FEE SCHEDULE
TYPE OF APPLICATION SEWER CAPACITY ANALYSIS FEE
SEWER CAPACITY ANALYSIS FEE SCHEDULE
TYPE OF APPLICATION                             SEWER CAPACITY ANALYSIS FEE
Annexation
   < 50 acres                                $250
   51 - 150 acres                            $500
   > 150 acres                               $750
 
Zoning Map Amendment
   Residential                               $250
   Non-Residential                           $400
 
Subdivision - Conceptual or Preliminary Plat
   < 10 acres                                $250
   10 - 50 acres                             $500
   50-100 acres                              $750
   > 100 acres                               $1,000
 
Planned Development - Conceptual or Preliminary
Development Plan
   < 10 acres                                $250
   10 - 50 acres                             $500
Planned Development - Conceptual or Preliminary
Development Plan
   50-100 acres                              $750
   > 100 acres                               $1,000
Site Plan
   < 10 acres                                $250
   10 - 50 acres                             $500
   50-100 acres                              $750
   > 100 acres                               $1,000
Special Use (All Types)                         $250
 
   (C)   No clearing, excavation, construction or other site disturbing work
may be undertaken on any lot or tract where one or more new sewer connections
will be required or where the proposed use of the lot or tract will result in
an increased demand on the sewer system (as determined in accordance with
Appendix C of this code of ordinances) unless the developer has secured written
approval from the City Engineer authorizing connection to the sewer system
including payment of all associated fees by applicant that is sufficient to
accommodate the proposed development.
   (D)   Subdivision final plat approval may not be granted unless the
applicant has received written approval from the City Engineer authorizing
connection to the city’s sewer system for every lot that is sufficient to
accommodate the development proposed or anticipated land use for that lot.
   (E)   No building permit may be issued for any lot where the construction
work authorized under the permit will result in the need for a new connection
to the city’s sanitary sewer system or an increased demand on the sewer system
(as determined by the City Engineer in accordance with
Appendix C of this code of ordinances).
   (F)   If a building permit is sought for a lot not previously connected to
the city’s sewer system but with respect to which sewer capacity has been
previously reserved and availability fees paid, and the use proposed at the
time the building permit is sought will place more or less demand on the sewer
system (as determined by City Engineer according to
Appendix C of this code of ordinances) than the capacity paid for at the time
capacity was reserved, then:
      (1)   If the demand of the proposed use exceeds the capacity reserved,
the building permit will not be issued until such time as a properly sized
connection is determined by the City Engineer and all associated fees paid in
full by the applicant; and
      (2)   If the demand of the proposed use is less than the capacity
reserved, a refund for excess capacity may be sought under §
18-149 of this chapter.
   (G)   Whenever:
      (1)   A change in use is made with respect to property that has
previously been connected to the city’s sanitary sewer system;
      (2)   No building permit is required to accomplish the change in use; and
      (3)   Under the new use a greater demand will be placed on the sanitary
system than was placed on this system by the previous user (as determined by
City Engineer according to
Appendix C of this code of ordinances), then no occupancy permit may be issued
for such use until the applicant has purchased required permits as determined
by City Engineer in accordance with §§
18-105 and
18-109 of this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 18-147) (Ord. 21-14, passed 11-15-2021)
Editor’s note:
   
Appendix C may be found at the end of this municipal code of ordinances.
§ 18-148 RESERVATION OF PRESENT CAPACITY.
   No person may reserve unutilized existing capacity within the sanitary sewer
system by paying to the city an availability fee.
(Ord. 21-14, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 18-149 RESERVATION OF FUTURE SEWER CAPACITY.
   (A)   As the city begins to approach exhaustion of the unutilized capacity
within its sanitary sewer system, the city shall undertake to expand the
capacity of the system. No person may reserve future capacity in the system by
paying an availability fee for a specified amount of capacity reserved.
   (B)   When there is sufficient expanded system capacity that becomes
operational, any prior active capacity reservation issued by the City may be
permitted to connect to the City sanitary sewer system unless otherwise
determined by the City Engineer.
(2011 Code, § 18-149) (Ord. 21-14, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 18-150 RESERVED.
§ 18-151 TRANSFER OF CAPACITY RESERVATIONS.
   Reservations of present or future capacity are not transferable from the
property with respect to which the reservations were obtained to other
property. However, the city may provide a refund of the amount paid for this
capacity reservation to a person relinquishing a capacity reservation.
(2011 Code, § 18-151) (Ord. 21-14, passed 11-15-2021)
§ 18-152 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   The developers of subdivisions and unsubdivided developments, whether
inside or outside the city, may be required as a condition of connecting to the
city’s water system to install fire hydrants in accordance with city
requirements and specifications. Among other matters, such requirements and
specifications may govern the number, locations and type of hydrants required.
   (B)   The city may contract with a developer to install fire hydrants
required pursuant to subsection (A) above, but in all cases the full cost of
providing for such hydrants shall be borne by the developer.
   (C)   Connection to the city’s water system of any hydrant constructed
pursuant to subsection (A) above shall constitute dedication to the city of
such hydrant.
   (D)   All hydrants located within the right-of-way of a dedicated street or
on other city property shall be maintained by the city without charge; except
that, the city may include a hydrant maintenance charge in the fire protection
service fees charged to the county for any area served by the city outside its
corporate limits.
   (E)   Hydrants located on private property shall be maintained by the city
and a charge therefor shall be added to the customer’s bill, as specified in §
18-109 of this chapter.
   (F)   No person, other than an authorized representative of the city, may
draw water from or otherwise tamper with any hydrant.
(2011 Code, § 18-152)
§ 18-153 FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE LINES.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the city may allow fire
protection service connections to be made to the city’s water lines.
   (B)   All fire protection service connections shall be made in accordance
with city requirements and specifications and only after the city has reviewed
and approved detailed planning for such fire protection service lines and
facilities. Final connection to the city system shall not be made until the
Administrator has inspected and approved the installed fire protection system.
   (C)   Private fire protection systems, including standpipes, sprinkler
systems and private reservoir systems, shall be constructed and installed only
by persons properly licensed to do the work. Lateral extensions and taps shall
be made by the city, and fees shall be charged therefor as provided in §
18-109 of this chapter.
   (D)   Backflow prevention conforming to city specifications shall be
installed at such points in the fire protection system’s necessary to assure
protection of the water supply.
(2011 Code, § 18-153)
§ 18-154 METERING OF FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE LINES.
   (A)   The city may require the owner of any fire protection line to install,
at his or her expense, either a detection check valve with bypass meter or a
full flow fire line meter. Such a valve or meter may be required upon the
initial connection of the fire line to the city’s system and shall be required
if the city subsequently has reason to believe that unmetered water is being
lost or used for other than fire protection purposes from any such line.
   (B)   (1)   When a detector check meter indicates usage of water for other
than fire protection, the owner shall be required, at his or her expense, to
furnish and install a full flow meter of approved design.
      (2)   Such meter shall be arranged to meter all water supplied to the
premises for all purposes, including fire protection.
(2011 Code, § 18-154)
§ 18-155 PURPOSE, OBJECTIVES AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The remainder of this chapter is designed to enable the city to comply
with all applicable requirements and mandates of the federal and state water
pollution control programs.
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction into the city’s wastewater system of
pollutants that will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate
the resulting sludge;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction into the city’s wastewater system of
pollutants that will pass through the system inadequately treated into
receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the
system;
      (3)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system; and
      (4)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the city’s
wastewater system.
   (C)   (1)   Many of the provisions of the remainder of this chapter
explicitly apply only to industrial wastes.
      (2)   The remaining provisions apply to wastes of all types, but, as a
practical matter, only industrial wastes are likely to be affected by them in
most instances.
(2011 Code, § 18-155)
§ 18-156 STORM WATER PROHIBITED IN SANITARY SERVICES.
   No person may discharge or cause to be discharged into any sanitary sewer
any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof run-off, subsurface
drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial or commercial process water.
(2011 Code, § 18-156)
§ 18-157 PROHIBITED USES OF SANITARY SERVICES.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this section, no person may discharge or
cause to be discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any
part of the city’s sanitary sewer system:
      (1)   Any clothing, rags, textile remnants and the like, except scraps or
fibers that will pass through a one-quarter inch mesh screen or its equivalent
in screening ability;
      (2)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 104°F;
      (3)   Any water or waste containing more than 100 milligrams per liter
(mg/l) of fats, oils or grease;
      (4)   Any liquids, solids or gases that may cause fire or explosion or be
in any way injurious to persons, any portion of the city’s sewage treatment
system or the operation of this system;
      (5)   Any liquid wastes in which total suspended solids exceed 600
milligrams per liter;
      (6)   Any liquid wastes having a BOD of more than 350 milligrams per
liter;
      (7)   Any waters or wastes having a stabilized pH lower than 5.0 or
higher than 9.0 or having other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage treatment system;
      (8)   Any waters or wastes containing any toxic or poisonous substances
or any other materials (including, but not limited to, heavy metals or
chemicals) in sufficient quantities to interfere with the biological processes
used in the sewage treatment works or that will pass through the sewage
treatment works and harm persons, livestock or aquatic life utilizing the
natural outlet;
      (9)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character
and quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such
materials at the sewage treatment plant;
      (10)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance;
      (11)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
      (12)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass,
bones, feathers, tar, plastic, wood, paunch manure, butcher’s offal or any
other solid or viscous substances capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage collection
system or the sewage treatment works;
      (13)   Any materials that form excessive amounts of scum that may
interfere with the operation of the sewage treatment works or cause undue
additional labor in connection with its operation;
      (14)   Any liquid wastes containing dyes or other colors that cannot be
removed by biological processes or that require special chemical treatment;
      (15)   Any waters or wastes that require excessive quantities of chlorine
for stabilization in addition to biological treatment. The amount of excess
demand will be determined by comparing the chlorine demand of the waste in
question with the average chlorine demand of all other wastes entering the
plant;
      (16)   Any waters or wastes containing radioactive waters or wastes in
quantities that may prove injurious to the treatment process or any portion of
the sewage treatment system or to persons, animals or plant life;
      (17)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/
or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards;
      (18)   Any waters or wastes containing in excess of 30 milligrams per
liter NH3; and/or
      (19)   Any wastewater containing in excess of the following limitations:
            Maximum Concentration for Average Average of Daily Value of 30
Constituent Day (mg/l)                        Consecutive Days Shall not Exceed
                                              (mg/l)
            Maximum Concentration for Average Average of Daily Value of 30
Constituent Day (mg/l)                        Consecutive Days Shall not Exceed
                                              (mg/l)
Antimony    1.0                               0.50
Arsenic     0.10                              0.10
Barium      10.00                             10.00
Boron       0.50                              0.50
Cadmium     1.20                              0.50
Chloroform  1.00                              1.00
Chromium    7.00                              2.50
Copper      2.00                              0.80
Cyanide     0.80                              0.23
Lead        0.50                              0.25
Mercury     0.0005                            0.0005
Nickel      4.0                               1.80
Phenol      10.0                              10.0
Selenium    0.1                               0.005
Silver      1.20                              0.50
Vanadium    0.50                              0.50
Zinc        0.50                              0.20
 
   (B)   When the Administrator determines that a user is violating any of the
foregoing standards, he or she shall, in addition to other remedies available
under §
18-104 of this chapter:
      (1)   Advise the user of the violation; and
      (2)   Develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the
violation.
(2011 Code, § 18-157)
§ 18-158 FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   (1)   Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment
standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if
more stringent that limitations imposed under this chapter for sources in that
subcategory shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this
chapter.
      (2)   The Administrator shall notify all affected users of the applicable
reporting requirements under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12.
   (B)   (1)   If the city’s wastewater treatment system achieves consistent
removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may
apply to DHE for modification of specific limits in the federal pretreatment
standards.
      (2)   CONSISTENT REMOVAL shall mean reduction in the amount of a
pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater
treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is
achieved by the system in 95% of the samples taken when measured according to
the procedures set forth in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7(c)(2), General Pretreatment
Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution, promulgated pursuant to
the Act.
(2011 Code, § 18-158)
§ 18-159 WAIVER OF DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS.
   With the approval of DHE, a recipient of a significant industrial user’s
discharge permit may be allowed to discharge into the POTW wastes that exceed
some of the limitations set forth above if the Administrator determines that it
is in the city’s best interest to allow the deviation and the POTW will not be
adversely affected. Any waiver granted in accordance with this section shall be
considered a temporary measure, shall not ripen into a vested right, and may be
revoked by the city at any time.
(2011 Code, § 18-159)
§ 18-160 DILUTION OF DISCHARGE TO MEET STANDARDS PROHIBITED.
   No user may increase the use of process water or in any way attempt to
dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment
to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical
pretreatment standards or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed
by the city or state. However, dilution may be an acceptable means of complying
with some of the limitations set forth in §
18-157 of this chapter, the pH limitation and the like.
(2011 Code, § 18-160)
§ 18-161 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Each significant industrial user shall provide protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by
this chapter. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited
materials shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user’s own cost and
expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide
this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be
approved by the city before construction of the facility. All existing users
shall complete such a plan by 1-1-1987. No user who commences contribution to
the POTW after the effective date of this chapter shall be permitted to
introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have
been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating
procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to
modify the user’s facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this
chapter. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of
the user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The
notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration
and volume, and corrective actions.
   (B)   Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall
submit to the Administrator a detailed written report describing the cause of
the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other
liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.
   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or
suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
(2011 Code, § 18-161)
§ 18-162 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT FACILITIES.
   (A)   To equalize flows and to avoid temporary overloads, any person who
discharges into the city’s sanitary sewer system waste having a volume in
excess of 50,000 gallons in any 24-hour period may be required by the city to
construct suitable storage tanks or equivalent devices according to city
specifications relating to type of construction, storage capacity and similar
matters. The control of the volume of discharges of waste shall be by a
waterworks type rate controller or equivalent device, the setting and
operations of which shall be subject to the reasonable direction of the
Administrator.
   (B)   Whenever the total volume of wastes to be discharged by any person in
any one day has considerable variation in pollutional value, such person may be
required to construct holding or storage tanks in order to control the
discharge of wastes over a 24-hour period. Such tanks shall be in duplicate and
be so equipped as to mix the waste so thoroughly that its quality will be
uniform when discharged into the sanitary sewer system.
   (C)   Grease, oil and sand or mud interceptors shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the Administrator, they are necessary for the proper handling
and control of liquid wastes containing grease, oil, sand or mud in excessive
amounts. Such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling units, but may be required for industrial or commercial
establishments, public eating places, hotels, hospitals, automobile service
stations, car washes or other institutions. Such interceptors shall be located
as to be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection and shall be maintained
by the owner at his or her expense in continuously efficient operation at all
times.
   (D)   Plans, specifications and other pertinent information relating to
proposed preliminary treatment or handling facilities, including the
construction of storage tanks, inspection or control manholes, and controlling
devices as required under this section, shall be submitted to the Administrator
for approval, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until
such approval is obtained in writing.
   (E)   Where preliminary treatment or handling facilities are provided for
any purpose, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his or her own expense.
(2011 Code, § 18-162)
§ 18-163 INSPECTION MANHOLE.
   (A)   Any person discharging industrial wastes into the city’s sanitary
sewer system may be required to construct and maintain a suitable inspection or
control manhole either downstream from any treatment or storage facility or, if
such facilities are not required, at or before the point where the wastes enter
the sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Such manhole shall be located and constructed in a manner approved by
the Administrator and shall contain the equipment determined by the
Administrator to be necessary for proper sampling and control of waste
discharges.
(2011 Code, § 18-163)
§ 18-164 DETERMINATION OF CHARACTER AND CONCENTRATION OF WASTES.
   (A)   Industrial waste discharged into the city’s sanitary sewer system
shall be subject to periodic inspection to determine the character and
concentration of such waste, and the Administrator shall conduct such
inspections as often as deemed reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   By making application of sanitary sewer service the industrial waste
customer agrees that duly-authorized and identified city employees shall be
permitted to enter the premises under the customer’s control to carry out the
inspections required in subsection (A) above. Whenever feasible, the city shall
notify the customer before carrying out such inspections.
   (C)   Inspections made pursuant to subsection (A) above do not relieve the
person discharging wastes into the sanitary sewer system of responsibility for
any loss, damage or penalty resulting from the discharge of such wastes into
the sanitary sewer system.
   (D)   Samples taken as part of the inspections authorized by this section
shall be collected in such manner as to be representative of the actual quality
of the waste. Laboratory methods used in the examination of such waste shall be
those set forth in Standard Methods, as hereinbefore described, a copy of which
is on file at the office of the Administrator for inspection by interested
parties.
(2011 Code, § 18-164)
§ 18-165 AUTHORITY FOR TEMPORARY EXCLUSION.
   Authority is hereby given to the Administrator to exclude temporarily any
industrial waste, whether pretreated or not, from the sanitary sewers whenever,
in his or her opinion, such action is necessary for the purpose of determining
the effects of such wastes upon any part of the sewage treatment system.
(2011 Code, § 18-165)
§ 18-166 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR DISCHARGE OF INDUSTRIAL WASTES BY SIGNIFICANT
USERS.
   (A)   Subject to subsection (B) below, no significant industrial user may
discharge industrial wastes into the city’s sewage treatment system without a
significant industrial user’s discharge permit issued by the Administrator or
after such permit has been revoked pursuant to §
18-179 of this chapter.
   (B)   Significant users discharging industrial wastes into the city’s sewage
treatment system on the effective date of this section shall have a grace
period of three months to comply with the provisions of subsection (A) above,
and shall thereafter be bound by its requirements.
   (C)   The permit requirement set forth in this section for industrial waste
discharge is in addition to any other provisions of this chapter relating to
applications for service, connections or extensions to the city’s sewer system.
(2011 Code, § 18-166)
§ 18-167 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Users required to obtain a significant industrial users discharge
permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the form
prescribed by the city, and accompanied by the fee specified in §
18-109 of this chapter. Existing users shall apply for a permit within 30 days
after the effective date of this chapter and proposed new users shall apply at
least 90 days prior to contacting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of
the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for
evaluation, the following information:
      (1)   Name, address and location (if different from the address);
      (2)   SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;
      (3)   Wastewater constituents and characteristics including but not
limited to those mentioned by §
18-157 of this chapter as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory;
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to § 304(g) of the Act being 33 U.S.C. § 1314
(g) and contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136, as amended;
      (4)   Time and duration of contribution;
      (5)   Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including
daily, monthly and seasonal variations if any;
      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details
to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size, location
and elevation;
      (7)   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises including all materials which are or could be discharged;
      (8)   Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal pretreatment
standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation
and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user
to meet applicable pretreatment standards;
      (9)   If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide
such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
         (a)   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for
major components, commencing construction, completing construction and the
like);
         (b)   No increment referred to in subsection (A)(9)(a) above shall
exceed nine months; and
         (c)   Not later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
Administrator including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and
the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule
established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Administrator.
      (10)   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production;
      (11)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day);
      (12)   Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and
proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;
      (13)   Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and
proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; and
      (14)   Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the city to
evaluate the permit application.
   (B)   (1)   The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information.
      (2)   After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city
shall consider and act on the application as provided below.
(2011 Code, § 18-167)
§ 18-168 PUBLIC NOTICE OF APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   At least 45 days prior to any proposed final action on an application
for a permit under §
18-146 of this chapter, the Administrator shall notify interested persons and
agencies and the general public that such an application has been received:
      (1)   By publishing the notice one time in a newspaper having general
circulation in the city area; and
      (2)   By mailing a copy of the notice to those persons specified in
subsection (C) below.
   (B)   The notice required by this section shall contain at least the
following information:
      (1)   Name, address, phone number of agency issuing the public notice;
      (2)   Name and address of each applicant;
      (3)   Brief description of each applicant’s activities or operations
which result in the discharge described in the application indicating whether
the discharger is new or existing;
      (4)   Name of the WWTP into which each discharge is made and a short
description of the waterway into which the WWTP discharges;
      (5)   A statement of the tentative determination to issue or deny the
permit for the discharge described in the application;
      (6)   A brief description of the procedures for the formulation of final
determinations, including a 30-day comment period and any other means by which
interested persons may influence or comment upon the determinations; and
      (7)   Address and phone number of premises at which interested persons
may obtain further information, request a copy of the draft permit, request a
copy of the fact sheet and inspect and copy application forms and related
documents. Copies of the fact sheet shall be made available free upon request.
Copies of the information on file, other than fact sheets, will be made
available upon request and payment of the cost of reproduction.
   (C)   Any person may request to receive copies of all notices required under
this section or §
18-170 of this chapter, and the Administrator shall mail such notice to any
such person. The Administrator shall also give notice to the following:
      (1)   The state’s Department of Health; and
      (2)   Any other federal, state or local agency upon request.
(2011 Code, § 18-168)
§ 18-169 RESPONSE TO NOTICE OF APPLICATION.
   (A)   All comments received within 30 days following the publication date of
the notice of application shall be made part of the application file and shall
be considered by the Administrator prior to taking final action on the
application.
   (B)   Any person who desires a public meeting on any permit application
shall so request in writing to the Administrator within 30 days following the
publication date of the notice of application. The Administrator shall hold a
meeting if there is a significant public interest (including the filing of
requests of petitions for such meeting) in holding such a meeting. Instances of
doubt shall be resolved in favor of holding the meeting. Any meeting brought
pursuant to this subsection (B) shall be held in the geographical area of the
proposed discharge or other appropriate area, in the discretion of the
Administrator, and may, as appropriate, consider related groups of permit
applications.
(2011 Code, § 18-169)
§ 18-170 NOTICE OF PUBLIC MEETING ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   If the Administrator determines, pursuant to §
18-169(B) of this chapter that a public meeting should be held on a permit
application, he or she shall, at least 30 days prior to the date of the
meeting, notify interested persons and agencies and the general public:
      (1)   By publishing the notice one time in a newspaper having general
circulation in the city area;
      (2)   By mailing to all persons and government agencies which received a
copy of the notice or the fact sheet for the application; and
      (3)   By mailing to any person or group upon request.
   (B)   The notice required under subsection (A) above shall include at least
the following:
      (1)   Name, address and phone number of agency holding the public
meeting;
      (2)   Name and address of each applicant whose application will be
considered at the meeting; name of the WWTP to which each discharge is made and
a short description of the waterway into which the WWTP discharges;
      (3)   A brief reference to the public notice issued for each application
including identification number and date of issuance;
      (4)   Information regarding the time and location for the meeting;
      (5)   The purpose of the meeting;
      (6)   A concise statement of the issues raised by the persons requesting
the meeting;
      (7)   Address and phone number of premises at which interested persons
may obtain further information, request a copy of each draft permit, request a
copy of each fact sheet and inspect and copy forms and related documents; and
      (8)   A brief description of the nature of the meeting including the
rules and procedures to be followed; the notice shall also state additional
information is on file at the City Hall complex and may be inspected at any
time during normal working hours. Copies of the information on file will be
made available upon request and payment of cost of reproduction.
(2011 Code, § 18-170)
§ 18-171 ACTION ON APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   The Administrator shall make final action on all applications not
later than 60 days following notice of application or, if a public hearing is
held, within 90 days following the closing of the record of that hearing.
   (B)   The Administrator is authorized to:
      (1)   Issue a permit containing such conditions as are necessary to
effectuate the purposes of this chapter;
      (2)   Issue a permit containing time schedules for achieving compliance
with applicable effluent standards and limitations and other legally applicable
requirements;
      (3)   Modify or revoke any permit upon giving 30 days’ notice to the
person affected pursuant to §
18-179 of this chapter;
      (4)   Suspend a permit pursuant to §
18-179 of this chapter; and
      (5)   Deny a permit application:
         (a)   Where necessary to effectuate the purposes of §
18-157 of this chapter; and
         (b)   For a discharge to which the Department of Health has objected.
   (C)   Permits shall be issued or renewed for a period of time deemed
reasonable by the Administrator, except in no case shall permits be issued for
a period to exceed five years.
   (D)   (1)   The Administrator shall notify an applicant by certified or
registered mail of the final decision of the applicant’s permit application.
      (2)   Notifications of denial shall specify the reasons therefor and the
proposed changes which, in the opinion of the Administrator, will be required
to obtain the permit.
(2011 Code, § 18-171)
§ 18-172 APPEALS.
   (A)   An applicant whose permit is denied, or is granted subject to
conditions he or she deems unacceptable, shall have the right to a hearing
before a hearing officer designated by the Administrator upon making written
demand, (identifying the basis for the appeal and the issues involved) to the
Administrator within 30 days following notice of final decision to deny or
grant the permit. Unless such demand is made, the decision on the application
shall be final and binding.
   (B)   Any decision of a hearing officer made as a result of a hearing held
under such subsection (A) above may be appealed by any party to the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen upon filing a written demand within ten days of receipt of
notice of the decision. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall hear the matter
de novo.
(2011 Code, § 18-172)
§ 18-173 PERMIT CONDITIONS.
   (A)   A significant industrial user’s discharge permit shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable regulations,
user charges and fee established by the city.
   (B)   Permits may contain the following:
      (1)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged;
      (2)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
      (3)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
      (4)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
      (5)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, type and standards for tests and
reporting schedule;
      (6)   Compliance schedules;
      (7)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports;
      (8)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording city access
thereto;
      (9)   Requirements for notification to the city of any new introduction
of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character
of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment
system;
      (10)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per §
18-161 of this chapter; and
      (11)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure
compliance with this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 18-173)
§ 18-174 PERMIT MODIFICATIONS.
   Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical
pretreatment standard, the discharge permit of users subject to such standards
shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the time frame
prescribed by such standard. Where a user subject to a national categorical
pretreatment standard has not previously submitted an application for a
discharge permit as required by §
18-165 of this chapter, the user shall apply for such permit within 180 days
after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment
standard. In addition, the user with an existing discharge permit shall submit
to the Administrator within 180 days after the promulgation of an applicable
federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by §
18-167(A)(8) and (A)(9) of this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 18-174)
§ 18-175 PERMIT DURATION.
   Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five
years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to
expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum
of 180 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing permit. The terms
and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during
the term of the permit if necessary to respond to changes in regulations, the
user’s operations, or the capacity of the city’s treatment plant, or if other
just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his
permit at least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or
new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance.
(2011 Code, § 18-175)
§ 18-176 PERMIT TRANSFER.
   Significant industrial users’ discharge permits are issued to a specific
user for a specific operation. A discharge permit shall not be assigned or
transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or
changed operation without the approval of the city. Any succeeding owner or
user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit.
(2011 Code, § 18-176)
§ 18-177 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEE.
   (A)   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement
of the introduction of wastewater in the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment
standards and requirements shall submit to the Administrator a report
indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from
the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and
requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these process units in
the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or
requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment
standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into
compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This
statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial
user, and certified to by a qualified professional.
   (B)   (1)   Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the
compliance date of such pretreatment standard or, in the case of a new source,
after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the
Administrator during the months of June and December, unless required more
frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the Administrator, a report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are
limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include
a record of all daily flows which, during the reporting period, exceeded the
average daily flow reported in subsection (A) above.
      (2)   At the discretion of the Administrator and in consideration of such
factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles and the like,
the Administrator may agree to alter the months during which the above reports
are to be submitted.
   (C)   The Administrator may impose mass limitations on users which are using
dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other
cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases,
the report required by subsection (B) above shall indicate the mass of
pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user.
These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the
discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production
and mass where requested by the Administrator, of pollutants contained therein
which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of
monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All
analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established pursuant
to § 304(g) of the Act being 33 U.S.C. § 1314(g) and contained in 40 C.F.R.
part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by
the Administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques approved by the Administrator.
(2011 Code, § 18-177)
§ 18-178 PRETREATMENT.
   Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply
with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical
pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal
pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a
level acceptable to the city shall be provided operated, and maintained at the
user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and
operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be
acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such
plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the
responsibility for modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent
acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent
changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported
to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user’s initiation of the changes.
(2011 Code, § 18-178)
§ 18-179 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The enforcement remedies specified in this section are in addition to
those set forth in §
18-104 of this chapter.
   (B)   The city may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a
significant industrial user’s discharge permit when such suspension is
necessary, in the opinion of the Administrator, to stop an actual or threatened
discharge that:
      (1)   Presents or may present an imminent or substantial danger to the
health or welfare of persons or the environment;
      (2)   Causes interference to the POTW; or
      (3)   Causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
   (C)   Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily
with the suspension order, the city shall take such steps as deemed necessary,
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The city shall
reinstate the permit and/or the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the
elimination of the non-complying discharge. A detailed written statement
submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the city
within 15 days of the date of the occurrence.
   (D)   A significant industrial user’s discharge permit may be revoked by the
Administrator if he or she finds that the user has violated any of the
provisions of this chapter or any condition included in a permit issued under
this chapter. Before revocation, the user shall be given 30 days’ written
notice of the intent to revoke the permit and an opportunity to appear before
the Administrator to show cause why the permit should not be revoked. A
decision to revoke the permit may be appealed in the manner set forth in §
18-172 of this chapter.
   (E)   The city shall annually publish in a newspaper having general
circulation in the city a list of the users that were not in compliance with
any pretreatment requirement or standards at least once during the 12 previous
months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken
against the user(s) during the same 12 months.
(2011 Code, § 18-179)
§ 18-180 SURCHARGES FOR INDUSTRIAL WASTES.
   (A)   Customers discharging industrial wastes into the city’s sanitary sewer
system may be subject to surcharges that reflect the additional treatment
demands of industrial wastes. Therefore, the amount of an industrial waste
customer’s bill may depend upon the character and concentration of the wastes
discharged as well as the quantity. Charges will be in accordance with the
schedule of rates set forth in §
18-111 of this chapter.
   (B)   The volume of flow used in determining the total discharge of
industrial wastes shall be based upon metered water consumption as shown in the
records of meter readings maintained by the Administrator.
   (C)   In the event that a person discharging wastes into the sanitary sewers
produces evidence satisfactory to the Administrator that more than 10% of the
total volume of water used for all purposes does not reach the sanitary sewers,
then the Administrator and the customer may agree to use an estimated
percentage of total water consumption as a basis for calculation of sewer use
charges. Alternatively, the city may agree to authorize on such premises an
additional water meter through which water passes that is not returned to the
city’s sewer system and to charge only a water service fee for this water (and
not a sewer service fee).
   (D)   Where a person discharging industrial wastes into the public sewers
procures all or any part of his or her water supply from sources other than the
city, the person so discharging such waste shall install and maintain, at his
or her own expense, water meters of a type approved by the Administrator for
the purpose of determining the proper volume of industrial waste discharged to
such sewers.
(2011 Code, § 18-180)
CHAPTER 2: SEWAGE AND HUMAN EXCRETA DISPOSAL
Section
   
18-201   Definitions
   
18-202   Places required to have sanitary disposal methods
   
18-203   When a connection to the public sewer is required
   
18-204   When a septic tank shall be used
   
18-205   Registration and records of septic tank cleaners and the like
   
18-206   Use of pit privy or other method of disposal
   
18-207   Approval and permit required for septic tanks, privies and the like
   
18-208   Owner to provide disposal facilities
   
18-209   Occupant to maintain disposal facilities
   
18-210   Only specified methods of disposal to be used
   
18-211   Discharge into watercourses restricted
   
18-212   Pollution of ground water prohibited
   
18-213   Enforcement of chapter
   
18-214   Carnivals, circuses and the like
   
18-215   Violations
§ 18-201 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSIBLE SEWER. A public sanitary sewer located in a street or alley
abutting on the property in question or otherwise within 300 feet of any
boundary of said property measured along the shortest available right-of-way.
   APPROVED SEPTIC TANK SYSTEM.
      (1)   A water-tight covered receptacle of monolithic concrete, either
precast or cast in place, constructed according to plans approved by the Health
Officer. Such tanks shall have a capacity of not less than 750 gallons and in
the case of homes with more than two bedrooms the capacity of the tank shall be
in accordance with the recommendations of the state’s Department of Health, as
provided for in its 1967 bulletin entitled, Recommended Guide for Location,
Design and Construction of Septic Tanks and Disposal Fields. A minimum liquid
depth of four feet should be provided with a minimum depth of air space above
the liquid of one foot.
      (2)   The septic tank dimensions should be such that the length from
inlet to outlet is at least twice but not more than three times the width.
      (3)   The liquid depth should not exceed five feet. The discharge from
the septic tank shall be disposed of in such a manner that it may not create a
nuisance on the surface of the ground or pollute the underground water supply,
and such disposal shall be in accordance with recommendations of the Health
Officer as determined by acceptable soil percolation data.
   HEALTH OFFICER. The person duly appointed to such position having
jurisdiction, or any person or persons authorized to act as his or her agent.
   HUMAN EXCRETA. The bowel and kidney discharges of human beings.
   OTHER APPROVED METHOD OF SEWAGE DISPOSAL. Any privy, chemical toilet or
other toilet device (other than a sanitary sewer, septic tank or sanitary pit
privy as described above) the type, location and construction of which have
been approved by the Health Officer.
   SANITARY PIT PRIVY. A privy having a fly-tight floor and seat over an
excavation in earth, located and constructed in such a manner that flies and
animals will be excluded, surface water may not enter the pit and danger of
pollution of the surface of the ground or the underground water supply will be
prevented.
   SEWAGE. All water-carried human and household wastes from residences,
buildings or industrial establishments.
   WATERCOURSE. Any natural or artificial drain which conveys water either
continuously or intermittently.
(2011 Code, § 18-201)
§ 18-202 PLACES REQUIRED TO HAVE SANITARY DISPOSAL METHODS.
   Every residence, building or place where human beings reside, assemble or
are employed within the corporate limits shall be required to have a sanitary
method for disposal of sewage and human excreta.
(2011 Code, § 18-202)
§ 18-203 WHEN A CONNECTION TO THE PUBLIC SEWER IS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Wherever an accessible sewer exists and water under pressure is
available, approved plumbing facilities shall be provided and the wastes from
such facilities shall be discharged through a connection to said sewer made in
compliance with the requirements of the official responsible for the public
sewerage system.
   (B)   On any lot or premises accessible to the sewer, no other method of
sewage disposal shall be employed.
(2011 Code, § 18-203)
§ 18-204 WHEN A SEPTIC TANK SHALL BE USED.
   (A)   Wherever water carried sewage facilities are installed and their use
is permitted by the Health Officer, and an accessible sewer does not exist, the
wastes from such facilities shall be discharged into an approved septic tank
system.
   (B)   (1)   No septic tank or other water-carried sewage disposal system,
except a connection to a public sewer shall be installed without the approval
of the Health Officer or his or her duly appointed representative.
      (2)   The design, layout and construction of such systems shall be in
accordance with specifications approved by the Health Officer and the
installation shall be under the general supervision of the Department of
Health.
(2011 Code, § 18-204)
§ 18-205 REGISTRATION AND RECORDS OF SEPTIC TANK CLEANERS AND THE LIKE.
   Every person, firm or corporation who operates equipment for the purpose of
removing digested sludge from septic tanks, cesspools, privies and other sewage
disposal installations on private or public property must register with the
Health Officer and furnish such records of work done within the corporate
limits as may be deemed necessary by the Health Officer.
(2011 Code, § 18-205)
§ 18-206 USE OF PIT PRIVY OR OTHER METHOD OF DISPOSAL.
   Wherever a sanitary method of human excreta disposal is required under §
18-202 of this chapter and water-carried sewage facilities are not used, a
sanitary pit privy or other approved method of disposal shall be provided.
(2011 Code, § 18-206)
§ 18-207 APPROVAL AND PERMIT REQUIRED FOR SEPTIC TANKS, PRIVIES AND THE LIKE.
   Any person, firm or corporation proposing to construct a septic tank system,
privy or other sewage disposal facility, requiring the approval of the Health
Officer under this chapter, shall, before the initiation of construction,
obtain the approval of the Health Officer for the design and location of the
system and secure a permit from the Health Officer for such system.
(2011 Code, § 18-207)
§ 18-208 OWNER TO PROVIDE DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
   It shall be the duty of the owner of any property upon which facilities for
sanitary sewage or human excreta disposal are required by § 18-202 of this
chapter, or the agent of the owner to provide such facilities.
(2011 Code, § 18-208)
§ 18-209 OCCUPANT TO MAINTAIN DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
   It shall be the duty of the occupant, tenant, lessee or other person in
charge to maintain the facilities for sewage disposal in a clean and sanitary
condition at all times, and no refuse or other material which may unduly fill
up, clog or otherwise interfere with the operation of such facilities shall be
deposited therein.
(2011 Code, § 18-209)
§ 18-210 ONLY SPECIFIED METHODS OF DISPOSAL TO BE USED.
   No sewage or human excreta shall be thrown out, deposited, buried or
otherwise disposed of, except by a sanitary method of disposal as specified in
this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 18-210)
§ 18-211 DISCHARGE INTO WATERCOURSES RESTRICTED.
   No sewage or excreta shall be discharged or deposited into any lake or
watercourse, except under conditions specified by the Health Officer and
specifically authorized by the state’s Stream Pollution Control Board.
(2011 Code, § 18-211)
§ 18-212 POLLUTION OF GROUND WATER PROHIBITED.
   No sewage effluent from a septic tank, sewage treatment plant or discharges
from any plumbing facility shall empty into any well, either abandoned or
constructed for this purpose, cistern, sinkhole, crevice, ditch or other
opening either natural or artificial in any formation which may permit the
pollution of ground water.
(2011 Code, § 18-212)
§ 18-213 ENFORCEMENT OF CHAPTER.
   It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to make an inspection of the
methods of disposal of sewage and human excreta as often as is considered
necessary to ensure full compliance with the terms of this chapter. Written
notification of any violation shall be given by the Health Officer to the
person or persons responsible for the correction of the condition, and
correction shall be made within 45 days after notification. If the Health
Officer advises any person that the method by which human excreta and sewage is
being disposed of constitutes an immediate and serious menace to health such
person shall, at once, take steps to remove the menace, and failure to remove
such menace immediately shall be punishable under the general penalty clause
for this code; but such person shall be allowed the number of days herein
provided within which to make permanent correction.
(2011 Code, § 18-213)
§ 18-214 CARNIVALS, CIRCUSES AND THE LIKE.
   Whenever carnivals, circuses or other transient groups of persons come
within the corporate limits, such groups of transients shall provide a sanitary
method for disposal of sewage and human excreta. Failure of a carnival, circus
or other transient group to provide such sanitary method of disposal and to
make all reasonable changes and corrections proposed by the Health Officer
shall constitute a violation of this section. In these cases, the violator
shall not be entitled to the notice of 45 days provided for in §
18-213 of this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 18-214)
§ 18-215 VIOLATIONS.
   Any person, persons, firm, association or corporation or agent thereof, who
fails, neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable under the general
penalty clause for this code.
(2011 Code, § 18-215)
CHAPTER 3: CROSS-CONNECTIONS, AUXILIARY INTAKES AND THE LIKE
Section
   
18-301   Definitions
   
18-302   Water system operation
   
18-303   Responsibility for water system
   
18-304   Applicability
   
18-305   Backflow prevention and cross-connections
   
18-306   Inspection, testing and repair of customer’s system
   
18-307   Corrections of violations
   
18-308   Statement of non-existence of unapproved connections
   
18-309   Determination of need for backflow prevention
   
18-310   Approved backflow prevention devices
   
18-311   Installation requirements
   
18-312   Inspection and testing of devices
   
18-313   Safety standards-duplicate equipment in parallel required
   
18-314   Existing protection devices
   
18-315   Inspection and testing fees
   
18-316   Relief valves
   
18-317   Thermal expansion control
   
18-318   Non-potable supplies
   
18-319   Conflicting provisions
   
18-320   Penalties
§ 18-301 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR GAP. A physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a
potable water supply line and an open or non-pressurized receiving vessel. An
APPROVED AIR GAP shall be a distance at least double the diameter of the supply
pipe when measured vertically above the overflow rim of the vessel, but in no
case less than one inch.
   APPROVED DEVICE OR METHOD. A backflow prevention device or method accepted
by the state’s Department of Environment and Conservation, Water Supply, and
the city’s Water and Sewerage System.
   AUXILIARY INTAKE. Any piping connection or other device whereby water may be
secured from any sources other than from the public water system.
   AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY. Any water supply on or available to the premises
other than water supplied by the public water system.
   BACKFLOW. The reversal of the intended direction of flow of water or
mixtures of water and other liquids, gases or other substances into the
distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source.
   BACK PRESSURE. A pressure in downstream piping, higher than the supply
pressure.
   BACK SIPHONAGE. Negative or sub-atmospheric pressure in the supply piping.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY. A device designed to prevent backflow.
   BYPASS. Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby water may be
diverted around a backflow prevention assembly, meter or any other city
controlled device.
   CONTAMINATION. The introduction or admission of any foreign substance that
degrades the quality of a potable water supply or creates a health hazard.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical arrangement whereby public water supply is
connected, directly or indirectly, either inside or outside of a building, with
any other water supply whether public or private, sewer, drain, conduit, pool,
storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which contains or may
contain contaminated water, sewage or other waste, liquid, gas or solid, of
unknown or unsafe quality which may be capable of contaminating the public
water supply as a result of backflow caused by the manipulation of valves,
because of ineffective check valves or back pressure valves, or because of any
other arrangement.
   CROSS-CONNECTION COORDINATOR. That person who is vested with the authority
and responsibility for the implementation of the cross-connection control
program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
   CUSTOMER. Any natural or artificial person, business, industry or
governmental entity that obtains water, by purchase or without charge, from the
city’s Water System.
   DOUBLE CHECK DETECTOR ASSEMBLY. A specially designed assembly composed of a
line size approved double check valve assembly, with a bypass containing a
water meter and approved double check valve assembly specifically designed for
such application. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of
flow up to three gallons per minute and shall show a registration for all rates
of flow. This ASSEMBLY shall only be used to protect against non-health hazards
and is designed primarily for use on fire sprinkler systems.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY.
      (1)   An assembly of two internally loaded check valves, either spring
loaded or internally weighted, installed as a unit between two tightly-closing
resilient seated shutoff valves and fitted with properly located resilient
seated test cocks.
      (2)   This type of device shall only be used to protect against non-
health hazard pollutants.
   FIRE SYSTEM CLASSIFICATIONS PROTECTION. The classes of fire protection
systems, as designated by the American Water Works Association Manual M14 for
cross-connection control purposes based on water supply source and the
arrangement of supplies, are as follows.
      (1)   CLASS 1. Direct connection to the public water main only; no pumps,
tanks or reservoirs; no physical connection from other water supplies; no
antifreeze or other additives of any kind; all sprinkler drains discharging to
the atmosphere, dry well or other safe outlets.
      (2)   CLASS 2. Same as Class 1, except booster pumps may be installed in
connection from the street mains.
      (3)   CLASS 3. Direct connection to public water supply mains in addition
to any one or more of the following: elevated storage tanks; fire pumps taking
suction from above ground covered reservoirs or tanks; and pressure tanks.
      (4)   CLASS 4. Directly supplied from public water supply mains, similar
to Class 1 and Class 2, with an auxiliary water supply dedicated to Fire
Department use and available to the premises, such as an auxiliary supply
located within 1,700 feet of the pumper connection.
      (5)   CLASS 5. Directly supplied from public water supply mains and
interconnection with auxiliary supplies such as pumps taking suction from
reservoirs exposed to contamination, or from rivers, ponds, wells or industrial
water systems; where antifreeze or other additives are used.
      (6)   CLASS 6. Combined industrial and fire protection systems supplied
from the public water mains only, with or without gravity storage or pump
suction tanks.
   GENERAL MANAGER. General manager of the city’s Water and Sewerage System.
   HAZARD, DEGREE OF. A term derived from evaluation of the potential risk to
public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the public water
system.
   HAZARD, HEALTH. A cross-connection or potential cross-connection involving
any substance that could, if introduced in the public water supply, cause
death, illness or spread disease.
   HAZARD, NON-HEALTH. A cross-connection or potential cross-connection
involving any substance that would not be a health hazard, but would constitute
a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable if introduced into the public
water supply.
   HAZARD, PLUMBING. A cross-connection in a customer’s potable water system
plumbing that is not properly protected by an approved air gap or backflow
prevention assembly.
   INDUSTRIAL FLUID. Any fluid or solution that may be chemically, biologically
or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration that could
constitute a health, system, pollution or plumbing hazard if introduced into
the public water supply. This shall include, but is not limited to: polluted or
contaminated water; all types of process water or used water originating from
the public water system and that may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
chemicals; plating acids and alkalis; circulating cooling water connected to an
open cooling tower; cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated
or stabilized with toxic substance; contaminated natural water systems; oil,
gases, glycerin, paraffin, caustic and acid solutions, and other liquids or
gases used in industrial processes, or for fire purposes.
   INTER-CONNECTION. Any system of piping or other arrangement whereby a public
water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit or other device
which does, or may, carry sewage or other liquid or waste which would be
capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply.
   POLLUTION. The presence of a foreign substance in water that degrades its
quality so as to constitute a health or non-health hazard or impair the
usefulness of water.
   POTABLE WATER. Water that is safe for human consumption as prescribed by the
state’s Department of Environment and Conservation.
   PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER. An assembly consisting of one or two independently
operating spring loaded check valve(s) and an independently operating spring
loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve(s),
with tightly closing shutoff valve(s) on each side of the check valves and
properly located test cocks for testing the check valves.
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. The city’s Water System, which furnishes potable water
to the city for general use and which is recognized as the public water supply
by the state’s Department of Environment and Conservation, Water Supply.
   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. A water system furnishing water to the public for
general use which is recognized as a public water supply by the state.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE ASSEMBLY. An assembly consisting of two
independently acting approved check valves together with hydraulically
operating, mechanically independent, pressure differential relief valve located
between the check valves and below the first check valve. These units shall be
located between two tightly-closing resilient seated shutoff valves as an
assembly and equipped with properly located resilient seated test cocks.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE DETECTOR ASSEMBLY. A specially designed assembly
composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly with a bypass containing a water meter and approved reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly specifically designed for such
application. The meter shall register accurately for very low rates of flow up
to three gallons per minute and shall show registration for all rates of flow.
This ASSEMBLY shall only be used to protect against non-health hazard or a
health hazard.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The point of delivery to the customer’s water system;
the terminal end of a service connection from the public water system where the
water department loses jurisdiction and control over the water. SERVICE
CONNECTION shall include connections to fire hydrants and all other temporary
or emergency water service connections made to the public water system.
   STATE. The State of Tennessee or the state’s Department of Environment and
Conservation, Bureau of Environment, Division of Water Supply.
   WATER SYSTEM. The water system operated by the city, whether located inside
or outside the corporate limits thereof, shall be considered as made up of two
parts, the utility system and the customers system:
      (1)   The utility system shall consist of the facilities for the
production, treatment, storage and distribution of water, and shall include all
those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the Water
Department, up to the point where the customer’s system begins (i.e., the water
meter); and
      (2)   The customer system shall include those parts of the facilities
beyond the termination of the Water Department distribution system that are
utilized in conveying water to point of use.
(2011 Code, § 18-301) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-302 WATER SYSTEM OPERATION.
   (A)   The city’s Water System shall be operated at all times in compliance
with Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 68-221-101 et seq., and Regulations for Public Systems
and Drinking Water Quality, State Department of Environment and Conservation,
as amended from time to time.
   (B)   (1)   Prior to executing any work order for a new customer, or for any
change in service to an existing customer, notification shall be given to the
office of cross-connection control.
      (2)   Said inspectors, from the cross-connection office, shall make an
immediate determination in writing to the customer, of the type of backflow
prevention device(s) the customer needs to have installed.
      (3)   Water service shall not be established or maintained until all
necessary backflow devices are installed.
(2011 Code, § 18-302) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-303 RESPONSIBILITY FOR WATER SYSTEM.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provisions of a Plumbing Code adopted by the city,
the general manager shall be responsible for protecting the system from
contamination or pollution due to backflow through service connections and is
hereby granted authority for implementation and enforcement of this chapter.
Such authority shall extend beyond the service connection to whatever extent is
necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The authority to terminate water service for violation of any
provision of this chapter shall rest solely with the general manager of the
city’s Water and Sewerage System. In the absence or incapacity of the general
manager, the systems office manager or his or her designee shall have authority
to take action to protect the public health and safety.
   (C)   This section shall not be construed to prevent other officers or
employees of the city from terminating water service for failure to pay for
water service, or for violating any other provision of the city code.
(2011 Code, § 18-303) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-304 APPLICABILITY.
   The requirements contained herein shall apply to all customers of the city’s
Water and Sewerage System, whether located inside or outside the corporate
limits of the city, and are hereby made a part of the conditions required to be
met, before water service is provided to any customer. This chapter shall be
strictly enforced since it is essential for the protection of the public water
supply against contamination.
(2011 Code, § 18-304) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-305 BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a cross-connection,
auxiliary intake, bypass or inter-connection to be made, or allow one to exist
for any purpose unless the construction and operation of same has been approved
by the general manager and the state, and the operation of such cross-
connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or inter-connection is at all times under
the direction of the general manager.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to install or allow any unprotected takeoffs from
the water service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located
directly after the service connection, to a customer’s water system.
   (C)   Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued if an approved
backflow prevention assembly required by this chapter is not installed, tested
and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been
removed, bypassed, altered or not kept in proper working condition or, if an
unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. Service will not be
restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. Disconnection of water
service may be in addition to any other civil or criminal penalties imposed by
law or this chapter.
   (D)   If, in the judgment of the general manager or his or her designated
representative, a backflow prevention assembly is required at a customer’s
service connection, or within the customer’s water system, for the safety of
the public water supply, the general manager or his or her designated
representative shall give notice in writing to said customer to install a
backflow prevention assembly at specific location(s) on his or her premises.
   (E)   For existing installations, the Cross-Connection Coordinator may cause
water service to be discontinued until such time as the customer complies with
all requirements of state law and this chapter.
   (F)   For new commercial or industrial construction or renovation of a
commercial or industrial property, the Cross-Connection Coordinator or
inspector shall inspect the site and review plans in order to determine the
type(s) of backflow prevention device, and notify the owner(s) in writing of
the type of required device(s). Such device(s) shall be tested immediately upon
connection to the public water system.
   (G)   The customer shall immediately install approved assembly(s) at his or
her own expense. Failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to
install, and maintain such an assembly shall be cause for discontinuance of, or
refusal of, water service to the premises until such requirements are
satisfactorily met.
   (H)   For all existing customers, the Cross-Connection Coordinator or
inspector from the cross- connection office shall perform evaluations and
inspections and shall require correction of violations in accordance with this
chapter.
   (I)   No installation, alteration or change(s) shall be made to any backflow
prevention device connected to the public water supply without first securing
permission from the Cross-Connection Coordinator.
(2011 Code, § 18-305) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-306 INSPECTION, TESTING AND REPAIR OF CUSTOMER’S SYSTEM.
   (A)   The general manager or his or her designated representative shall have
the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by the public
water system for the purpose of inspecting the piping system therein for cross-
connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses or inter-connections or for the
testing of backflow prevention device(s). Upon request, the owner, lessee or
occupant of any property so served shall furnish any pertinent information
regarding the piping system on such property. Refusal of such information or
refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of
cross-connections.
   (B)   When cross-connections, other structural or sanitary hazards or any
violation of this chapter becomes known, the general manager or his or her
designated representative, shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the
premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the
customer has corrected the conditions in conformance with this chapter.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the Cross-Connection Coordinator that at any
premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed on internal
pipelines carrying potable water, waste water, process water or any other
liquid, gas or undesirable substance, to have certified inspections and
operational tests made at least once per year. In those instances where the
Cross-Connection Coordinator deems the hazard to be great enough, inspections
may be required at more frequent intervals.
   (D)   All inspections, tests and repairs shall be at the expense of the
customer and shall be performed by a person certified by the state and has the
authority from the water purveyor. It shall be the duty of the general manager
or his or her designated representative to see that these tests, or repairs are
made in a timely manner. Assemblies found to be defective shall be repaired,
overhauled or replaced at the expense of the customer. Copies of all records of
tests, repairs and overhaul shall be supplied to the cross-connection control
office for retention.
   (E)   Failure to maintain a backflow prevention device in proper working
order shall be grounds for discontinuance of water service. The removal,
bypassing or altering of a protective device or the installation thereof so as
to render a device ineffective shall constitute grounds for discontinuance of
water service. Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
customer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects to the
satisfaction of the general manager or his or her designated representative.
(2011 Code, § 18-306) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-307 CORRECTIONS OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any customer having cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses or
inter-connection(s) in violation of this chapter shall, after a thorough
investigation of existing conditions and an appraisal of the time required,
complete the work within the time designated by the Cross-Connection
Coordinator, but in no case shall the time for correction exceed 90 days.
   (B)   Failure to comply with any order of the general manager or his or her
designated representative within the time set out therein shall result in the
termination of water service.
   (C)   Where cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses or inter-
connections are found to constitute an extreme hazard of immediate concern of
contaminating the public water system, the general manager or his or her
designated representative shall require immediate corrective action be taken to
eliminate the threat. Expeditious steps shall be taken to disconnect the public
water system from the customer’s piping systems unless the extreme hazard is
corrected immediately.
   (D)   Upon written request by the customer, the general manager shall
provide a hearing regarding any order of termination or refusal of water
service; provided, however, that, when an order is issued pursuant to
subsection (C) above, such hearing may be held after such termination or
refusal, but not later than five working days after receipt of the request. Any
customer aggrieved by such an order may appear in person, or by legal counsel,
and show cause why an order to terminate water service, or to refuse water
service, should be rescinded.
   (E)   Failure to correct conditions threatening the safety of the public
water system as prohibited by this chapter or Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-221-711
within the time limits set by the general manager or this chapter, shall be
cause for denial or termination of water service. If proper protection is not
provided after a reasonable time, the general manager or his or her designated
representative shall give the customer written notification that water service
is to be discontinued, and thereafter physically separate the public water
system from the customer’s system in such manner that the two systems cannot
again be connected by an unauthorized person.
(2011 Code, § 18-307) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-308 STATEMENT OF NON-EXISTENCE OF UNAPPROVED CONNECTIONS.
   Any customer who has on the same premises a well or other auxiliary water
supply, or who stores water in an uncovered or unsanitary storage reservoir
from which the water is circulated through a piping system, shall file with the
Cross-Connection Coordinator a statement of the non-existence of unapproved or
unauthorized cross-connections, auxiliary intakes, bypassed or
interconnections. Such statement shall also contain an agreement that no cross-
connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or inter-connection will be permitted upon
the premises until the construction and operation of same has been approved by
the state, and operation and maintenance of same has been placed under direct
supervision of the general manager of the city’s Water and Sewerage Systems.
Such statement shall also include the location of all additional water, sources
utilized on premises and how they are used. Maximum backflow protection shall
be required on all public water sources supplied to the premises.
(2011 Code, § 18-308) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-309 DETERMINATION OF NEED FOR BACKFLOW PREVENTION.
   An approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each service
line to a customer’s premises at or near the property line or immediately
inside the building being served, but in all cases, before the first branch
line leading off the service line, if it is impractical to provide effective
air-gap separation, when any of the following conditions exist:
   (A)   Premises where industrial fluids or any other non-potable substances
are handled in such a manner as to create actual or potential hazard to the
public water system;
   (B)   Premises having internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently
corrected and controlled, intricate plumbing and piping arrangements, or where
entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection
purposes making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not
cross-connections exist;
   (C)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, including, but not limited
to, a well, cistern, spring or pond, rivers or creeks that is not, or may not
be, of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and that is not acceptable as
an additional source by the general manager or his or her designated
representative;
   (D)   The plumbing from a private well or other water supply enters the
building served by the public water supply, or is connected, directly or
indirectly, to the public water supply;
   (E)   The owner of occupant of the premises cannot, or is not willing, to
demonstrate that the water use and protective features of the plumbing are such
as to pose no threat to the safety or portability of the water;
   (F)   The nature and mode of operation within the premises is such that
frequent alterations are made to the plumbing;
   (G)   The nature of the premises is such that the use of the structure may
change to a use wherein backflow prevention is required;
   (H)   There is a likelihood that protective measures may be subverted,
altered or disconnected;
   (I)   Any premises having service and fire flow connections, most commercial
and educational buildings, construction sites, all industrial, institutional
and medical facilities, lawn irrigation systems, public or private swimming
pools, private fire hydrant connections used by any fire department in
combating fires, photographic laboratories, standing ponds or other bodies of
water, or auxiliary water supplies;
   (J)   Any premises having fountains, water softeners or other point of use
treatment systems, hot tubs or spas, or other type(s) of water using equipment;
or
   (K)   Premises otherwise determined by the general manager or his or her
designated representative to create an actual or potential hazard to the public
water supply.
(2011 Code, § 18-309) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-310 APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
   (A)   All backflow prevention devices shall be fully approved by the
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, and listed as
acceptable by the state as to manufacture, model, size and application. The
method of installation of backflow prevention devices shall be approved by the
cross-connection control office prior to installation and shall comply with
installation criteria set forth by the state’s Cross-Connection Control Manual.
Installation shall be at the sole expense of the owner or occupant of the
premises.
   (B)   The type of protective assembly required by this chapter shall depend
upon the degree of hazard that exists as follows:
      (1)   A backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on each fire
service line at or near the property line or immediately inside the building
being served, but in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the
service line wherever any of the following conditions exist:
         (a)   Class 1 fire protection systems generally shall require a double
check detector assembly; provided, however, that, a reduced pressure principle
detector assembly shall be required where:
            1.   Underground fire sprinkler pipelines are parallel to and
within ten feet horizontally of pipelines carrying waste water or significantly
toxic wastes;
            2.   Premises have unusually complex piping systems;
            3.   Pumpers connecting to the system have corrosion inhibitors or
other chemicals added to the tanks of the fire trucks;
            4.   The piping system(s) has corrosion inhibitors or other
chemicals added to prevent freezing; or
            5.   An auxiliary water supply exists within 1,700 feet of any
likely pumper connection.
         (b)   Class 2, Class 3, Class 4, Class 5 and Class 6 fire protection
systems shall require an air gap or a reduced pressure principle detector
assembly, as determined by the Cross-Connection Coordinator.
         (c)   Where a fire sprinkler system is installed on the premises, a
minimum of a double check detector assembly shall be required.
         (d)   Where a fire sprinkler system uses chemicals, such as liquid
foam, to enhance fire suppression a reduced pressure principle detector
assembly shall be required.
         (e)   The Cross-Connection Coordinator may require internal or
additional backflow prevention devices where it is deemed necessary to protect
potable water supplies within the premises.
      (2)   In the case of any premises with an auxiliary water supply as set
out in §
18-309(C) of this chapter, and not subject to any of the following rules, the
public water system shall be protected by an air gap separation or a reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.
      (3)   In the case of any premises where there is water or substances that
would be objectionable but not hazardous to health if introduced into the
public water system, a double check valve assembly shall protect the public
water system.
      (4)   In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous
to health that is handled in such a fashion as may create an actual or
potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be
protected by an air gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly. Premises where such conditions may exist include, but is
not limited to, sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical
manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants.
      (5)   In the case of any premises where there are uncontrolled cross-
connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be
protected by an air gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow
prevention assembly at the service connection.
      (6)   In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements
or other prohibitions or restrictions it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be protected
against backflow from the premises by either an air gap separation or a reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly on each service line to the
premises.
      (7)   In the case of any premises where toxic substances are present that
could pose an undue health hazard, the general manager or his or her designated
representative may require an air gap at the service connection to protect the
public water system. In making this determination, the general manager or his
or her designated representative shall consider the degree of hazard.
(2011 Code, § 18-310) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-311 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Minimum acceptable criteria for installation of backflow prevention
assemblies, or other devices requiring regular inspection and testing by this
chapter, shall include the following.
   (A)   All backflow prevention devices shall be installed in a horizontal run
of pipe. No vertical installation of backflow prevention devices shall be
allowed unless such device is approved for such installation by the University
of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic
Research and the state’s Department of Environment and Conservation, Division
of Water Supply, approved list.
   (B)   Installation of backflow prevention devices shall be performed only by
persons certified by the state and has the authority from the water purveyor.
For all backflow prevention devices installed on a fire protection system, the
installers must have a state contractor’s license. Evidence of current
certification/license must be on file, with the cross-connection control office
before any installation or testing of the device can be done.
   (C)   All devices shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s
installation instructions and by the state installation guide; from the state’s
Manual on Cross-Connection, unless such instructions are in conflict with this
chapter. If conflicting instructions, this chapter adds that all devices
possess test cocks and fittings required for testing the device. All test cocks
will be fitted with caps and all fittings shall permit direct connection to
test devices used by the Department.
   (D)   The entire assembly including test cocks and valves shall be easily
accessible for testing and repair, and shall meet all confined space
requirements of OSHA/TOSHA.
   (E)   Reduced pressure backflow prevention devices shall be located so that
the relief valve discharge port is a minimum of 12 inches, plus the nominal
diameter of the supply line, above the ground floor surface. Maximum height
above the floor surface shall not exceed 60 inches.
   (F)   Clearance of devices from wall surfaces or other obstructions shall be
a minimum of six inches; or, if a person must enter the enclosure for repair or
testing, the minimum distance shall be 24 inches.
   (G)   Devices shall be protected from freezing, vandalism, mechanical abuse
and from any corrosive, sticky, greasy, abrasive or other damaging substance.
   (H)   Devices shall be positioned where discharge from a relief port will
not create undesirable conditions. An approved air-gap shall separate the
relief port from any drainage system. Such air-gap shall not be altered without
the specific approval of the Department.
   (I)   Devices shall be located in an area free from submergence or flood
potential.
   (J)   All devices shall be adequately supported to prevent sagging.
   (K)   An approved strainer, fitted with a test cock, shall be installed
immediately upstream of all backflow devices or shut-off valves, except on fire
lines, using only non-corrosive fittings (e.g., brass or bronze) in the device
assembly.
   (L)   Gravity drainage is required on all installations. Below ground
installations shall not be permitted.
   (M)   Fire hydrant drains shall not be connected to the sanitary sewer, and
fire hydrants shall not be installed in such manner that back-siphonage or
backflow through the drain may occur.
   (N)   Where jockey (low volume-high pressure) pumps are utilized to maintain
elevated pressure, as in a fire protection system, the discharge of the pump
shall be on the downstream side of any check valve or backflow prevention
device. Where the supply for the jockey pump is taken from the upstream supply
side of the check valve or backflow prevention device, a backflow prevention
device of the same type(s) required on the main line shall be installed on the
supply line.
   (O)   Fixed position, high volume fire pumps shall be equipped with a
suction limiting control to modulate the pump if the residual line pressure
reaches 20 psi. If line pressure drops below 20 psi, the pump will shut off to
protect the distribution system. This shut off system must be tested annually
for proper operation and a report of the test must be sent to the Office of
Cross-Connection Control.
(2011 Code, § 18-311) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-312 INSPECTION AND TESTING OF DEVICES.
   (A)   Backflow prevention device(s) shall be tested at least annually by a
person(s) possessing valid certification from the state for the testing of such
devices. The cross-connection office shall maintain records of all tests and
state certification.
   (B)   Any company that has a state license from the state’s Fire Marshal
Office and a certificate from the state’s Department of Environment and
Conservation, Division of Water Supply, will test backflow devices that are
installed on fire protection systems. Each company will have a copy of its
license/ certificate on file at the cross-connection office.
   (C)   The general manager or his or her designated representative shall have
the right to inspect and test any device(s) whenever he or she deems necessary.
Water service shall not be disrupted to test the device without the knowledge
of the occupant of the premises.
(2011 Code, § 18-312) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-313 SAFETY STANDARDS; DUPLICATE EQUIPMENT IN PARALLEL REQUIRED.
   Where the use of water is critical to the continuation of normal operations
or protection of life, property or equipment, duplicate units shall be provided
to avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair a
backflow prevention device. Until such time as a parallel unit has been
installed where the continuance of service is critical, the general manager or
his or her designated representative shall notify the occupant of the premises,
in writing, of plans to interrupt water service and arrange for a mutually
acceptable time to test or repair the device.
(2011 Code, § 18-313) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-314 EXISTING PROTECTION DEVICES.
   (A)   All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which were
previously acceptable by the state, that complies with the installation,
testing and maintenance requirements of this chapter, and in the sole
discretion of the general manager or his or her designated representative,
adequately protect the public water system from backflow, and that were
approved assemblies for the purpose described herein at the time of
installation may be retained in service.
   (B)   Location or space requirements shall not be cause for relocation or
replacement unless such location or space limitations constitute a safety
hazard, in the opinion of the general manager or his or her designated
representative.
   (C)   Any backflow prevention device that is presently installed in a
vertical run of pipe shall be replaced, or reinstalled, in an approved manner
in a horizontal run of pipe.
   (D)   Wherever an existing assembly is moved from the present location, or
when the inspector finds that the condition of the assembly constitutes a
health hazard, the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention assembly
meeting the requirements of this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 18-314) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-315 INSPECTION AND TESTING FEES.
   (A)   Fees for initial or annual tests of a backflow prevention device shall
be established by the Water Board based on the recommendations of the general
manager to reflect the cost of conducting such test.
   (B)   In the event that a backflow prevention device fails the initial or
annual test, or there are deficiencies in the installation either from failure
to conform to the installation criteria specified in this chapter, or from
deterioration, then the general manager or his or her designated representative
shall issue a written notice of failure or deficiency. There shall be no fee
for re-inspection by the city; provided, the failure or deficiency is corrected
within 30 days of the written notice.
   (C)   Whenever a failure or deficiency mentioned in subsection (B) above is
not corrected within 30 days of written notification, a fee of $50 shall be
charged for retesting.
   (D)   The fee shall be assessed each time a device is retested by the city
subsequent to failure or deficiency after the initial 30-day period set out in
subsection (B) above. Where a second re-inspection or re-testing is required to
correct violations or deficiencies, the fee shall be $150. If a third or more
re-inspection or re-testing is required, a re-inspection or re-testing fee of
$300 for each successive re-inspection or re-testing shall be charged to the
customer in addition to other enforcement actions if all of the deficiencies
have still not been corrected.
   (E)   The general manager may waive any fees and/or any cost that should be
appropriately relieved.
(2011 Code, § 18-315) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-316 RELIEF VALVES.
   (A)   (1)   All storage water heaters operating above atmospheric pressure
shall be provided with an approved, self-closing (levered) pressure relief and
temperature valve or combination thereof, except for non-storage instantaneous
heaters.
      (2)   Such valves shall be installed in the shell of the water heater
tank or may be installed in the hot water outlet; provided, the thermo-bulb
extends into the shell of the tank.
      (3)   Temperature relief valves shall be so located in the tank as to be
actuated by the water in the top one-eighth of the tank served.
   (B)   For installations with separate storage tank, said valve shall be
installed on the tank and there shall not be any type of valve installed
between the water heater and the storage tank. There shall not be a check valve
or shut off valve between a relief valve and the heater or tank which it
serves. The relief valve shall not be used as a means of controlling thermal
expansion.
(2011 Code, § 18-316) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-317 THERMAL EXPANSION CONTROL.
   A device for the control of thermal expansion shall be installed on the
customers water system where the thermal expansion of the water in the system
will cause the water pressure to exceed the pressure setting of the pressure
relief valve of the water heater. The thermal expansion device shall control
the water pressure to less than the pressure setting of the pressure relief
valve on the water heater.
(2011 Code, § 18-317) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-318 NON-POTABLE SUPPLIES.
   (A)   Any water outlet connected to auxiliary water sources, industrial
fluid systems or other piping containing non-potable liquids or gases, which
could be used for potable or domestic purposes, shall be labeled in a
conspicuous manner as: “WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING”.
   (B)   The minimum acceptable sign shall have black letters at least one inch
high on a red background.
   (C)   Color coding of piping in accordance with Occupational Safety and
Health Act guidelines may be required in locations where, in the judgment of
the inspector, such color coding is necessary to identify and protect the
potable water supply.
(2011 Code, § 18-318) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-319 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If any provision of this chapter is found to conflict with any provision of
any other ordinance or city code, then the provision of this chapter shall
control. Should any part, or parts of this chapter be declared invalid for any
reason, no other part, or parts, of this chapter shall be affected thereby.
(2011 Code, § 18-319) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
§ 18-320 PENALTIES.
   Any person responsible for a violation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction in the city court, may be subject to a civil penalty of not less
than $50, nor more than $500. Each day a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense. In addition to the foregoing fines and penalties, the general
manager of the city’s Water and Sewerage System shall discontinue the public
water supply service at any premises upon which there is found to be a cross-
connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass or inter-connection and service shall not
be restored until such cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass or inter-
connection has been discontinued.
(2011 Code, § 18-320) (Ord. 06-45, passed 9- -2006)
CHAPTER 4: DISCHARGE REGULATIONS; FATS, OILS, GREASE AND THE LIKE
Section
   
18-401   Purpose
   
18-402   Definitions
   
18-403   Control plan for FOG and food waste
   
18-404   General criteria
   
18-405   Design criteria
   
18-406   Grease trap maintenance
   
18-407   Additives
   
18-408   Chemical treatment
   
18-409   Sand, soil and oil interceptors
   
18-410   Laundries
   
18-411   Control equipment
   
18-412   Alteration of control methods
   
18-413   Enforcement and penalties
§ 18-401 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to control discharges into the public
sewerage collection system and wastewater treatment plant that interfere with
the operations of the system, cause blockage and plugging of pipelines,
interfere with normal operation of pumps and their controls and contribute
waste of a strength or form that either causes treatment difficulties or is
beyond the treatment capability of the wastewater treatment plant.
(2011 Code, § 18-401) (Ord. 06-05, passed 3- -2006)
§ 18-402 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FOOD SERVICE FACILITIES. Those establishments primarily engaged in
activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption
foodstuffs and that use one or more of the following preparation activities:
cooking by frying (all methods); baking (all methods); grilling; sauteing;
rotisserie cooking; broiling (all methods); boiling; blanching; roasting;
toasting; or poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing
and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot, non-drinkable food
product in or on a receptacle that requires washing. These facilities include
restaurants, cafeterias, hotels, motels, hospitals, nursing homes, schools,
grocery stores, prisons, jails, churches, camps, caterers, manufacturing plants
or any other sewer users as determined by the city’s Wastewater Collection
System Superintendent (WCSS) who discharge applicable waste.
   GREASE. Material composed primarily of fats, oil and grease (FOG) from
animal or vegetable sources. The terms fats, oil and grease shall be deemed as
grease by definition. GREASE does not include petroleum based products.
   GREASE TRAP. A device for separating and retaining waterborne greases and
grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the
sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. These devices also serve to
collect settlable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities,
prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection
and treatment system.
   OIL/WATER SEPARATOR. An approved and industry standard system that is
specifically designed and manufactured to separate oil from water. The system
shall allow the oil to be collected and removed on a regular basis as to
prevent it from being discharged into the wastewater collection system. Only
OIL/WATER SEPARATORS manufactured for that specific operation will be approved.
Adequate support literature from the manufacturer will be required so as to
allow a proper review by the WCSS.
   USER. Any person or establishment including those located outside the
jurisdictional limits of the city who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution or discharge of wastewater into the city’s wastewater collection
or treatment system, including persons who contribute such wastewater from
mobile sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater.
(2011 Code, § 18-402) (Ord. 06-05, passed 3- -2006)
§ 18-403 CONTROL PLAN FOR FOG AND FOOD WASTE.
   (A)   Any new construction, renovation or expansion of food service
facilities shall be required to submit to the city a FOG and food waste control
plan that will effectively control the discharge of undesirable materials into
the wastewater collection system.
   (B)   (1)   Any existing food service facilities shall also be required to
submit a FOG and food waste control plan that will effectively control the
discharge of undesirable materials into the wastewater collection system.
      (2)   Existing facilities shall not be exempt from the requirements of
this chapter.
      (3)   There will be no “grandfathering”.
(2011 Code, § 18-403) (Ord. 06-05, passed 3- -2006)
§ 18-404 GENERAL CRITERIA.
   (A)   Installation requirements. All existing, proposed or newly remodeled
food service facilities inside the city’s wastewater service area shall be
required to install, at the user’s expense an approved, properly operated and
maintained grease trap.
   (B)   Sanitary sewer flows. Sanitary sewer flows from toilets, urinals,
lavatories and the like shall not be discharged into the grease trap. These
flows shall be conveyed separately to the sanitary sewer service lateral.
   (C)   Floor drains. Only floor drains which discharge or have the potential
to discharge grease shall be connected to a grease trap.
   (D)   Garbage grinders/disposers. It is recommended that solid food waste
products be disposed of through normal solid waste/garbage disposal means. If a
grinder/disposal is used, it must be connected to the grease trap. The use of
grinders is discouraged since it decreases the operational capacity of the
grease trap and will require an increased pumping frequency to ensure
continuous and effective operation.
   (E)   Dishwashers. Commercial dishwashers must be connected to the grease
trap. Dishwashers discharge soap and hot water, which can melt grease and allow
it to pass through an undersized grease trap. Traps must be sized accordingly
to allow enough detention time to allow water to cool and grease to solidify
and float to the top of the trap.
   (F)   Location. Grease trap shall be installed outside the building upstream
from the sanitary sewer service lateral connection. This will allow easy access
for inspection, cleaning and removal of the intercepted grease at any time. A
grease trap may not be installed inside any part of a building without written
approval by the WCSS.
   (G)   Pass through limits. No user shall allow wastewater discharge
concentration from grease trap to exceed 100 MgPL (milligrams per liter) as
identified by EPA Method 1664.
(2011 Code, § 18-404) (Ord. 06-05, passed 3- -2006)
§ 18-405 DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   Construction. Grease traps shall be constructed in accordance with the
city’s standards and shall have a minimum of two compartments with fittings
designed for grease retention. All grease removal devises or technologies shall
be subject to the written approval of the WCSS. Such approval shall be based on
demonstrated removal efficiencies of the proposed technology.
   (B)   Access. Access to grease traps shall be available at all times, to
allow for their maintenance and inspection. Access to trap shall be provided by
two manholes (one on each compartment) terminating at finished grade with cast
iron frame and cover.
   (C)   Load-bearing capacity. In areas where additional weight loads may
exist, the grease trap shall be designed to have adequate load-bearing
capacity. (Example: vehicular traffic in driving or parking areas.)
   (D)   Inlet and outlet piping. Wastewater discharging to a grease trap shall
enter only through the inlet pipe of the trap. Each grease trap shall have only
one inlet and one outlet pipe.
   (E)   Grease trap sizing. The required size of the grease trap shall be
calculated using EPA-2 model. All grease traps shall have a capacity of not
less than 1,000 gallons, nor exceed a capacity of 3,000 gallons. If the
calculated capacity exceeds 3,000 gallons, multiple units plumbed in series
shall be installed.
(2011 Code, § 18-405) (Ord. 06-05, passed 3- -2006)
§ 18-406 GREASE TRAP MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Cleaning/pumping.
      (1)   The user, at the user’s expense, shall maintain all grease traps to
assure proper operation and efficiency and maintain compliance with the city’s
pass through limits. Maintenance of grease trap shall include the complete
removal of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater and bottom
sludge and solids. This work shall be performed by a qualified and licensed
hauler. Decanting or discharging of removed waste back into the trap from which
it was removed or any other grease trap, for the purpose of reducing the volume
to be disposed, is prohibited.
      (2)   This service shall also include a thorough inspection of the trap
and its components. Any needed repairs shall be noted. Repairs shall be made at
user’s expense.
   (B)   Cleaning/pumping frequency. The grease trap must be pumped out
completely a minimum of once every four months, or more frequently, as
determined by the WCSS, as needed to prevent carry over of grease into the
sanitary sewer system.
   (C)   Disposal.
      (1)   All waste removed from each grease trap must be disposed of at a
facility approved to receive such waste in accordance with the provisions of
this program. In no way shall the pumpage be returned to any private or public
portion of the city’s sanitary sewer collection system.
      (2)   All pumpage from grease traps must be tracked by a manifest, which
confirms pumping, hauling and disposal of waste. The customer must obtain and
retain a copy of the original manifest from the hauler.
   (D)   Maintenance log. A grease trap cleaning/maintenance log indicating
each pumping for the previous 24 months shall be maintained by each food
service facility. This log shall include the date, time, amount pumped, hauler
and disposal site and shall be kept in a conspicuous location for inspection.
Said log shall be made available to the WCSS or his or her representative upon
request.
   (E)   Submittal of records.
      (1)   Each user shall submit all cleaning and maintenance records to the
WCSS. The maintenance records shall include the following information:
         (a)   Facility name, address, contact person and phone number;
         (b)   Company name, address, phone number and contact name of person
responsible for performing the maintenance, cleaning, pumping or repair of
grease trap;
         (c)   Types of maintenance performed;
         (d)   Dates maintenance was performed;
         (e)   Date of next scheduled maintenance; and
         (f)   Copies of manifests.
      (2)   The user shall be required to submit maintenance records to the
WCSS on a biannual basis (twice per year). Records shall be submitted by March
1 and September 1 of each year. The records shall be submitted to:
            Attn. Wastewater Collection System Superintendent
            199 Town Center Parkway
            Spring Hill, Tennessee 37174
      (3)   The WCSS will perform periodic inspections of these facilities and
shall notify the user of any additional required maintenance or repairs. Upon
written notification by the WCSS, the user shall be required to perform the
maintenance and records of said maintenance within 14 calendar days. Upon
inspection by the WCSS the user may be required to install, at his or her
expense, additional controls to provide a complete system which prevents
discharges of undesirable materials into the wastewater collection system.
(2011 Code, § 18-406) (Ord. 06-05, passed 3- -2006)
§ 18-407 ADDITIVES.
   Any biological additive(s) placed into the grease trap or building discharge
line including, but not limited to, enzymes, commercially available bacteria or
other additives designed to absorb, purge, consume, treat or otherwise
eliminate fats, oils and grease shall require written approval by the WCSS
prior to use. The use of such additives shall in no way be considered as a
substitution to the maintenance procedures required herein.
(2011 Code, § 18-407) (Ord. 06-05, passed 3- -2006)
§ 18-408 CHEMICAL TREATMENT.
   Chemical treatments such as drain cleaners, acid or other chemical solvents
designed to dissolve or remove grease shall not be allowed to enter the grease
trap.
(2011 Code, § 18-408) (Ord. 06-05, passed 3- -2006)
§ 18-409 SAND, SOIL AND OIL INTERCEPTORS.
   All car washes, truck washes, garages, service stations, car and truck
maintenance facilities, fabricators, utility equipment shops and other
facilities (as determined by the WCSS) that have sources of sand, soil and oil
shall install effective sand, soil and oil traps, interceptors and/or oil/water
separators. These systems shall be sized to effectively remove sand, soil and
oil at the expected flow rates. These systems shall be, at the user’s expense,
cleaned or pumped on a regular basis to prevent impact upon the wastewater
collection and treatment systems. Users whose systems are deemed to be
ineffective by the WCSS shall be asked to change the cleaning frequency, or to
increase the size of the system. Owners or operators of washing facilities will
be required to prevent the inflow of detergents and rainwater into the
wastewater collection system. Oil/water separator installations shall be
required at facilities that accumulate petroleum oils and greases and at
facilities deemed necessary by the WCSS.
(2011 Code, § 18-409) (Ord. 06-05, passed 3- -2006)
§ 18-410 LAUNDRIES.
   Commercial laundries shall be equipped with an interceptor with a wire
basket or similar device, removable for cleaning, that prevents passage (into
the wastewater collection system) of solids one-half inch or larger in size
such as rags, strings, buttons or other solids detrimental to the system.
(2011 Code, § 18-410) (Ord. 06-05, passed 3- -2006)
§ 18-411 CONTROL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   The equipment or facilities installed to control FOG, food waste,
sand, soil, oil and lint must be designed in accordance with the International
Plumbing Code, the state’s Department of Environment and Conservation
guidelines, most current engineering standards or other applicable guidelines
approved by the WCSS. Underground equipment shall be tightly sealed to prevent
inflow of rainwater and shall be easily accessible to allow regular maintenance
and inspection.
   (B)   Control equipment shall be maintained by the owner and/or operator of
the facility as to prevent a stoppage of the wastewater collection system, and
the accumulation of FOG, food waste, sand, soil and lint in the collection
lines, pump stations and wastewater treatment plant.
   (C)   If the city is required to clean out the wastewater collection lines,
as a result of a stoppage resulting from poorly maintained control equipment
(or lack thereof) the owner or operator shall be required to refund the labor,
equipment, materials and any overhead costs to the city including any fines
incurred due to any sanitary sewer overflow due directly to the stoppage.
   (D)   The city retains the right to inspect and approve any and all
installations of control equipment.
(2011 Code, § 18-411) (Ord. 06-05, passed 3- -2006)
§ 18-412 ALTERATION OF CONTROL METHODS.
   The city, through the WCSS, reserves the right to request additional control
measures if existing control equipment is shown to be insufficient to protect
the wastewater collection system and wastewater treatment plant from
interference due to the discharge of FOG, sand, soil, lint or any other
undesirable materials.
(2011 Code, § 18-412) (Ord. 06-05, passed 3- -2006)
§ 18-413 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates this chapter, in part or whole, shall be guilty of a
civil violation punishable under and according to the general penalty provision
of the city’s code of ordinances. Each day’s violation of this chapter shall be
considered a separate offense.
(2011 Code, § 18-413) (Ord. 06-05, passed 3- -2006)
CHAPTER 5: STORM WATER UTILITY
Section
   
18-501   Title and purpose
   
18-502   Jurisdiction
   
18-503   Definitions
   
18-504   Funding of Storm Water Utility
   
18-505   Storm Water Utility Management Fund
   
18-506   Operating budget
   
18-507   Storm water user fee established
   
18-508   Equivalent residential unit (ERU)
   
18-509   Property classification for storm water user fees
   
18-510   Base rate
   
18-511   Property owners to pay charges
   
18-512   Billing procedures and penalties for late payment
   
18-513   Appeals of fees
   
18-514   Storm water user fee credit and adjustment policy
§ 18-501 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   Title. This chapter shall be known as the “Storm Water Utility
Ordinance for the City of Spring Hill, Tennessee”.
   (B)   Introduction. The city finds, determines and declares that the storm
water system, which provides for the collection, treatment, storage and
disposal of storm water, provides benefits and services to all property within
the incorporated city limits. Such benefits include, but are not limited to,
the provision of adequate systems of collection, conveyance, detention,
retention, treatment and release of storm water, the reductions of hazards to
property and life resulting from storm water runoff, improvements in general
health and welfare through reduction of undesirable storm water conditions and
improvements to water quality in the storm water and surface water system and
its receiving waters of the state all of which are managed by the Storm Water
Coordinator as part of the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) Program.
   (C)   Purpose. In accordance with Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 68-221-1101 et seq.,
the city desires to develop a Storm Water Utility in order to provide a funding
mechanism to operate and maintain the city’s storm water management program and
finance the necessary storm water repairs, replacements, improvements and
extensions necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public.
The Storm Water Utility purpose is to:
      (1)   Administer and enforce this chapter;
      (2)   Administer, plan and implement storm water projects to protect,
maintain and enhance the environment of the city;
      (3)   Implement activities necessary to maintain compliance with the
city’s MS4 National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit and
applicable regulations, 40 C.F.R. § 122.26 for storm water discharges;
      (4)   Annually analyze the cost of services and benefits provided, and
the system and structure of fees, charges, civil penalties and other revenues
of the utility; and
      (5)   Advise the Board of Mayor and Aldermen and other city departments
on matters relating to the utility.
   (D)   Administering entity. The Storm Water Utility shall be part of the
city’s Storm Water Department. The Storm Water Utility, under the direction and
supervision of the Storm Water Coordinator or his or her designee, shall
administer the provisions of this chapter as approved by the City
Administrator.
(2011 Code, § 18-501) (Ord. 09-39, passed 12- -2009)
§ 18-502 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall govern all properties within the corporate limits of the
city.
(2011 Code, § 18-502) (Ord. 09-39, passed 12- -2009)
§ 18-503 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AGRICULTURAL PROPERTY. Property which is zoned agricultural and/or
property which yields an annual minimum, or in which the annual minimum has
been met in two of the last five years, of $1,000 of agricultural products
produced and/or sold from the operation of the property. Agricultural
production shall include agricultural, forest and/or livestock production as
defined by the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service, Environmental Quality Incentive Program. Proof of
agricultural producer status may include IRS form 1040 Schedule F or other
accounting records certified by a tax preparer.
      BASE RATE. The storm water user fee for a detached single-family
residential property in the city.
      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES or BMPs. The physical, structural and/or
managerial practices that, when used singly or in combination, prevent or
reduce pollution of water, that have been approved by the city, and that have
been incorporated by reference into this chapter as if fully set out therein.
      CONSTRUCTION. The erection, building, acquisition, alteration,
reconstruction, improvement or extension of storm water facilities; preliminary
planning to determine the economic and engineering feasibility of storm water
facilities; the engineering, architectural, legal, fiscal and economic
investigations and studies, surveys, designs, plans, working drawings,
specifications, procedures and other action necessary in the construction of
storm water facilities; and the inspection and supervision of the construction
of storm water facilities.
      DEFICIENT PROPERTY. Real property that does not have adequate storm water
facilities as required in the latest edition of the city’s Subdivision
Regulations and Storm Water Management Ordinance.
      DEVELOPED PROPERTY. Real property which has been altered from its natural
state by the creation or addition of impervious areas, by the addition of any
buildings, structures, pavement, drives or other improvements.
      EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT or ERU. The average of the total square
footage of the impervious surface areas of developed single-family residential
property within the city as approved by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
      EXEMPT PROPERTY. All public rights-of-way, public streets and public
roads, public alleys, public sidewalks and public greenways, public “park and
ride” facilities and bus stops and railroad right-of-way properties within the
city. For purposes of this definition, “public” shall mean that which is
maintained by or is or is to be dedicated to the city and/or the state or the
government of the United States.
      FISCAL YEAR. July 1 of a calendar year to June 30 of the next calendar
year, both inclusive.
      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface which is compacted or covered with material
that is resistant to infiltration by water, including, but not limited to, most
conventionally surfaced streets, roofs, sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking
lots and any other oiled, graveled, graded, compacted or any other surface
which impedes the natural infiltration of surface water.
      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE AREA. The number of square feet of horizontal surface
covered by buildings and other impervious surfaces. All building measurements
shall be made between exterior limits of the structure, foundations, columns or
other means of support or enclosure.
      OTHER DEVELOPED PROPERTY. Developed property other than single-family
residential property. Such property shall include, but not be limited to,
commercial properties, industrial properties, parking lots, hospitals, schools,
recreational and cultural facilities, hotels, offices and churches. Such
property shall also include single-family dwellings which are attached to or
otherwise a part of a building housing a commercial enterprise. Any single-
family residential structure which contains more than two attached dwelling
units is specifically included in this definition.
      PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any
individual, firm or association, and any municipal or private corporation
organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country.
      PROPERTY OWNER. The property owner of record as listed in the county’s
tax assessment roll. A PROPERTY OWNER includes any individual, corporation,
firm, partnership or group of individuals acting as a unit, and any trustee,
receiver or personal representative.
      SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. A developed property which serves the
primary purpose of providing a permanent dwelling unit to a single family. A
single-family detached dwelling, a townhouse, an accessory apartment or second
dwelling unit, a duplex, a condominium, a villa or a garden home is included in
this definition. A single-family dwelling which is attached to, or otherwise a
part of, a building housing a commercial enterprise is not included in this
definition.
      STORM WATER. Storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, surface runoff,
infiltration and drainage.
      STORM WATER MANAGEMENT. The programs to manage quality and quantity of
storm water runoff.
      STORM WATER SYSTEM. The natural or human-made system that collects,
conveys, stores or otherwise treats or affects storm water or surface water.
      STORM WATER USER FEE or FEE. The utility service fee established under
this chapter and levied on owners or users of parcels or pieces of real
property to fund the costs of storm water management and of operating,
maintaining and improving the storm water system in the city. The STORM WATER
USER FEE is in addition to other fees that the city has the right to charge
under any other rule or regulation of the city.
      STORM WATER UTILITY. A management structure that is responsible solely
and specifically for the storm water management program and system.
      STORM WATER UTILITY MANAGEMENT FUND or FUND. The fund created by this
chapter to operate, maintain and improve the city’s storm water system.
      SURFACE WATER. Waters upon the surface of the earth in bounds created
naturally or artificially including, but not limited to, streams, other
watercourses, lakes, ponds, wetlands, marshes and sinkholes.
      USER. The owner or customer of record of property subject to the storm
water user fee imposed by this chapter.
      VACANT/UNDEVELOPED PROPERTY. Property on which there is no structure for
which a certificate of occupancy has been issued.
   (B)   (1)   Words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the
plural shall include the singular; words used in the present tense shall
include the future tense. The word “shall” is mandatory and not discretionary.
The word “may” is permissive.
      (2)   Words not defined in this section shall be construed to have the
meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of
Webster’s Dictionary.
(2011 Code, § 18-503) (Ord. 09-39, passed 12- -2009)
§ 18-504 FUNDING OF STORM WATER UTILITY.
   (A)   Funding for the Storm Water Utility’s activities may include, but not
be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Storm water user fees;
      (2)   Civil penalties and damage assessments imposed for or arising from
the violation of the city’s Storm Water Management Ordinance and this chapter;
      (3)   Storm water permit and inspection fees; and
      (4)   Other funds or income obtained from federal, state, local and
private grants, or revolving funds, and from the Local Government Public
Obligations Act of 1986 (Tenn. Code Ann. Title 9, Ch. 21).
   (B)   To the extent that the storm water user fees collected are
insufficient to construct needed storm water drainage facilities, the cost of
the same may be paid from such city funds as may be determined by the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen.
(2011 Code, § 18-504) (Ord. 09-39, passed 12- -2009)
§ 18-505 STORM WATER UTILITY MANAGEMENT FUND.
   All revenues generated by or on behalf of the Storm Water Utility shall be
deposited in a Storm Water Utility Management Fund and used to fulfill the
purposes of the Storm Water Utility.
(2011 Code, § 18-505) (Ord. 09-39, passed 12- -2009)
§ 18-506 OPERATING BUDGET.
   The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall adopt, based on a recommendation from
the City Administrator and Storm Water Coordinator, an operating budget for the
Storm Water Utility Management Fund each fiscal year. The operating budget
shall set forth for such fiscal year the estimated revenues and the estimated
costs for operations and maintenance, extension and replacement and debt
service.
(2011 Code, § 18-506) (Ord. 09-39, passed 12- -2009)
§ 18-507 STORM WATER USER FEE ESTABLISHED.
   There shall be imposed on each and every developed property in the city,
except exempt property, a storm water user fee, which shall be set from time to
time by ordinance in the fee schedule as adopted by the city, and in the manner
and amount prescribed by this chapter. Prior to establishing or amending the
storm water user fee, the city shall advertise its intent to do so by
publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least 30
days in advance of the meeting of the Board meeting which shall consider the
adoption of the fee or its amendment.
(2011 Code, § 18-507) (Ord. 09-39, passed 12- -2009)
§ 18-508 EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU).
   (A)   Establishment. There is established for purposes of calculating the
storm water user fees the equivalent residential unit (ERU) as a method of
measurement. The equivalent residential unit is hereby established to be 3,412
square feet of impervious area.
   (B)   Definition. The ERU is the average of the total square footage of the
impervious surface areas of developed single-family residential property within
the city as approved by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen.
   (C)   Setting the ERU. The ERU shall be set by the Board of Mayor and
Aldermen in the storm water user fee schedule as adopted by the Board of Mayor
and Aldermen.
   (D)   Source of ERU. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen shall have the
discretion to determine the source of the data from which the ERU is
established, taking into consideration the general acceptance and use of such
source on the part of other storm water systems, and the reliability and
general accuracy of the source including, but not limited to, property tax
assessor’s rolls, site examination, mapping information, aerial photographs and
other reliable information.
   (E)   Evaluation of ERU. The ERU shall be evaluated by the Storm Water
Utility as necessary, but the ERU shall be evaluated at least every five years.
   (F)   ERU rate established.
      (1)   The ERU rate to be charged for storm water management utility fees
for each ERU is hereby established as follows:
 
Rates as of July 1, 2023 $5.25 for Residential
                         $5.00 for Commercial
Rates as of July 1, 2024 $6.75 for Residential
                         $6.50 for Commercial
Rates as of July 1, 2025 $7.75 for Residential
                         $7.75 for Commercial
 
      (2)   Beginning July 1, 2026 an escalation of $0.25 or an amount
equivalent to the consumer price index, all urban consumers parent of
inflation, whichever is greater shall be added annually to both residential and
commercial customers.
(2011 Code, § 18-508) (Ord. 09-39, passed 12- -2009; Ord. 09-42, passed - -
2009; Ord. 23-04, passed 5-1-2023)
§ 18-509 PROPERTY CLASSIFICATION FOR STORM WATER USER FEES.
   (A)   Property classifications. For purposes of determining the storm water
user fee, all properties in the city are classified into one of the following
categories:
      (1)   Single-family residential property;
      (2)   Other developed property;
      (3)   Vacant/undeveloped property;
      (4)   Agricultural property; or
      (5)   Exempt property.
   (B)   Single-family residential fee. The Board finds that the intensity of
development of most parcels of real property in the city classified as single-
family residential is similar and that it would be excessively and
unnecessarily expensive to determine precisely the square footage of the
impervious surface on each such parcel. Therefore, all single-family
residential properties in the city shall be charged a flat storm water user
fee, equal to the ERU base rate, regardless of the size of the parcel or the
impervious surface area of the improvements, except as provided herein. Single-
family residential property in which the impervious surface exceeds 10,000
square feet, including any detached accessory structures, shall be charged the
same as the fee for other developed property.
   (C)   Other developed property fee. The fee for other developed property
(i.e., non-single- family residential property) in the city shall be the base
rate multiplied by the numerical factor obtained by dividing the total
impervious area (square feet) of the property by one ERU. The minimum storm
water user fee for other developed property shall equal the base rate for a
single-family residential property.
   (D)   Vacant/undeveloped property fee. The fee for vacant/undeveloped
property in the city shall be as follows:
      (1)   If the property contains less than 1,800 square feet of impervious
surface, then no storm water user fee shall be charged; and
      (2)   If the property contains 1,800 square feet or more of impervious
surface, then property shall be charged based on the amount of impervious
surface as other developed property, with the minimum charge being the single-
family residential fee.
   (E)   Agricultural property. The fee for agricultural property in the city
shall be as follows.
      (1)   If the property contains impervious surface in an amount equal to
or less than the average ERU, then the minimum storm water user fee for such
property shall equal the base rate for a single-family residential property.
      (2)   If the property contains impervious surface in an amount greater
than the average ERU, then the property shall be charged in the same manner as
other developed property.
   (F)   Exempt property. There shall be no storm water user fee for exempt
property or as otherwise provided by state law.
(2011 Code, § 18-509) (Ord. 09-39, passed 12- -2009)
Editor’s note:
   Storm water user fees are on file in the office of the City Recorder.
§ 18-510 BASE RATE.
   The Board shall, by ordinance in the fee schedule as adopted by the Board,
establish the base rate for the ERU. The base rate shall be calculated to
ensure adequate revenues to fund the costs of storm water management and to
provide for the operation, maintenance and capital improvements of the storm
water system in the city.
(2011 Code, § 18-510) (Ord. 09-39, passed 12- -2009)
§ 18-511 PROPERTY OWNERS TO PAY CHARGES.
   (A)   The owner of each property shall be obligated to pay the storm water
user fee as provided in this chapter; provided, however, that, if no water or
sewer service is being provided at the property to the owner as a customer of
record and such service is being provided to a customer of record other than
the owner, it shall be presumed that the owner and such customer of record have
agreed that the customer of record shall be obligated to pay such storm water
user fee. If the customer of record other than the owner refuses to pay the
storm water user fee, the owner of each developed property shall be obligated
to pay the storm water user fee as defined in this chapter.
   (B)   Non-residential multi-tenant properties shall be billed according to
the placement of utility meters (i.e., if the property contains individual unit
meters), then billing for the storm water user fee shall be billed to
individual units based on the unit’s pro rata percentage of impervious surface.
If the multi-tenant property contains a master meter, then the storm water user
fee for the entire impervious surface area shall be billed to the customer of
record for such master meter.
   (C)   Each unit of a multi-tenant residential building shall be billed a
minimum charge, the same being the single-family residential fee, to the
customer of record for the unit. If an individual unit is not individually
billed for any water or sewer service (i.e., water and sewer utilities are
billed to a master meter), then the customer of record for the master meter
shall be billed as other developed property based on the total impervious
surface area.
(2011 Code, § 18-511) (Ord. 09-39, passed 12- -2009)
§ 18-512 BILLING PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES FOR LATE PAYMENT.
   (A)   Rate and collection schedule. A storm water user fee shall be set at a
rate as set forth in the storm water user fee schedule as adopted by the Board
of Mayor and Aldermen by ordinance, collected at a location and collected on a
schedule, established in accordance with this chapter. The storm water user fee
shall be billed and collected monthly with the monthly utility services bill
for those properties within the corporate limits. The storm water user fee for
those properties utilizing city utilities is part of a consolidated statement
for utility customers, which is generally paid by a single payment to the
city’s Utility Department. The storm water user fee for those properties
utilizing utilities not provided by the city shall be billed and collected by
the city annually or as directed by the city’s Finance Department. All bills
for the storm water user fee shall become due and payable in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the applicable Utilities Department pertaining to
the collection of the storm water user fees.
   (B)   Delinquent bills. The storm water user fee shall be considered
delinquent if not received by the city by the due date stated in the utility
statement and subsequent late fees shall be imposed as set forth in the fee
schedule as adopted by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen as established by an
ordinance.
   (C)   Penalties for late payment; failure to pay. Storm water user fees
shall be subject to a late fee established by ordinance as indicated in the
storm water user fee schedule. The city shall be entitled to recover collection
fees and attorney's fees incurred in collecting delinquent storm water user
fees. The city or other collecting utility provider may discontinue utility
service to any storm water user who fails or refuses to pay the storm water
user fees and may refuse to accept payment of the utility bill from any user
without receiving at the same time, payment of the storm water user fee charges
owed by such user and further may refuse to re-establish service until all such
fees have been paid in full.
   (D)   Mandatory statement. Pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-221-1112, each
bill that shall contain storm water user fees shall contain the following
statement in bold: “THIS TAX HAS BEEN MANDATED BY CONGRESS”. Although the
mandatory statement will be placed on each bill, the city’s Board of Mayor and
Alderman hereby finds and declares that the storm water user fee is a utility
service fee and not a tax.
(2011 Code, § 18-512) (Ord. 09-39, passed 12- -2009; Ord. 19-36, passed 11-18-
2019)
§ 18-513 APPEALS OF FEES.
   (A)   Any person who disagrees with the calculation of the storm water user
fee, as provided in this chapter, may appeal such fee determination to the
Storm Water Advisory Committee within ten days after the date the payment is
due. Any appeal not filed within the time permitted by this section shall be
deemed waived.
   (B)   All appeals shall be filed in writing addressed to the Storm Water
Coordinator and shall state the grounds for the appeal and the amount of the
storm water user fee the appellant asserts is appropriate. The appeal shall
provide such information and documentation supporting the basis of the appeal.
The appeal shall be accompanied by an appeal review fee as set forth in the
storm water user fee schedule adopted by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen. The
appeal review fee shall be refunded to any party who prevails in an appeal of
the calculation of the storm water user fee. As a condition to maintaining an
appeal, the appellant shall pay all charges billed under protest prior to or at
the time of the filing of the appeal.
   (C)   The Storm Water Advisory Committee shall review the appeal and
determine whether the challenged determination is consistent with the
provisions of this chapter. Appeals related to the storm water user fee shall
be decided based on substantiated evidence with a sound engineering and factual
basis. All appeal determinations shall be applied utilizing a strict
interpretation of this chapter. At any hearing related to an appeal or credit
determination, the city shall be allowed to present evidence, findings and
recommendations; appealing parties and applicants shall be given an opportunity
to present evidence, findings and recommendations. The Storm Water Advisory
Committee may request additional information from the appealing party; the
Committee may defer the determination of an appeal one time to the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Storm Water Advisory Committee. Each appeal
shall be placed on the Storm Water Advisory Committee agenda for the next
regularly scheduled meeting, which meeting is at least 20 days after the Storm
Water Coordinator receives the written appeal. The Storm Water Coordinator
shall notify the appellant customer of the date of the appeal review hearing in
writing; such written notice shall be given at least ten days prior to the
hearing by regular mail at the address provided in the written appeal document.
The decision of the Storm Water Advisory Committee shall be final and
conclusive with no further administrative review.
   (D)   If a refund is due, the Storm Water Coordinator shall authorize the
refund which will be provided as a credit against the customer’s storm water
user fee billings until such credit is exhausted.
(2011 Code, § 18-513) (Ord. 09-39, passed 12- -2009)
§ 18-514 STORM WATER USER FEE CREDIT AND ADJUSTMENT POLICY.
   Storm water user fee credits and adjustments are available to other
developed property (i.e., non-single-family residential property) with
exception to a small homes credit, which is available exclusively for single-
family residential property as outlined in the Storm Water Utility Credit and
Adjustment Policy Manual, as adopted by Res. 09-113 and any subsequent
amendments.
(2011 Code, § 18-514) (Ord. 09-39, passed 12- -2009)
TITLE 19: ELECTRICITY AND GAS
      Chapter
         
1.   ELECTRICITY
         
2.   GAS
CHAPTER 1: ELECTRICITY
Section
   
19-101   To be furnished under franchise
§ 19-101 TO BE FURNISHED UNDER FRANCHISE.
   Electricity shall be furnished for the municipality and its inhabitants
under such franchise as the governing body shall grant. The rights, powers,
duties and obligations of the municipality, its inhabitants and the grantee of
the franchise shall be clearly stated in the written franchise agreement which
shall be binding on all parties concerned.
(2011 Code, § 19-101)
Editor’s note:
   The agreements are of record in the office of the City Recorder.
CHAPTER 2: GAS
Section
   
19-201   To be furnished under franchise
§ 19-201 TO BE FURNISHED UNDER FRANCHISE.
   Gas service shall be furnished for the municipality and its inhabitants
under such franchise as the governing body shall grant. The rights, powers,
duties and obligations of the municipality, its inhabitants and the grantee of
the franchise shall be clearly stated in the written franchise agreement which
shall be binding on all parties concerned.
(2011 Code, § 19-201)
Editor’s note:
   The agreements are of record in the office of the City Recorder.
TITLE 20: MISCELLANEOUS
      Chapter
         
1.   FAIR HOUSING REGULATIONS
         
2.   UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
         
3.   POLICE AND RATES FOR USE OF PUBLIC FACILITIES
         
4.   COMPLIANCE MANUAL
         
5.   SHORT-TERM RENTALS
CHAPTER 1: FAIR HOUSING REGULATIONS
Section
   
20-101   Policy
   
20-102   Definitions
   
20-103   Unlawful practices
   
20-104   Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing
   
20-105   Discrimination in the financing of housing
   
20-106   Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services
   
20-107   Exemption
   
20-108   Administration
   
20-109   Education and conciliation
   
20-110   Enforcement
   
20-111   Investigations; subpoenas; giving of evidence
   
20-112   Enforcement by private persons
§ 20-101 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations,
for fair housing throughout the city.
(2011 Code, § 20-101)
§ 20-102 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISCRIMINATORY HOUSING PRACTICE. An act that is unlawful under §§
20-104,
20-105 and
20-106 of this chapter.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as,
or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families,
and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction or
location thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof.
   FAMILY. Includes a single individual.
   PERSON. Includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies,
joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees
in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries.
   TO RENT. Includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a
consideration the right to occupy premises owned by the occupant.
(2011 Code, § 20-102)
§ 20-103 UNLAWFUL PRACTICES.
   Subject to the provisions of subsection (B) below and §
20-107 of this chapter, the prohibitions against discrimination in the sale or
rental of housing set forth in §
20-104 of this chapter shall apply to:
   (A)   All dwellings, except as exempted by subsection (B) below;
   (B)   Nothing in §
20-104 of this chapter shall apply to:
      (1)   (a)   Any single-family house sold or rented by an owner if the
private individual owner does not own more than three single-family houses at
any one time. In the case of the sale of any such single-family house by a
private individual owner not residing in the house at the house at the time of
sale or who was not the most recent resident of the house prior to the sale,
the exemption granted by this subsection (B)(1) shall apply only with respect
to one such sale within any 24-month period if the bona fide private individual
owner does not own any interest in, nor is there owned or reserved on his
behalf, under any express or voluntary agreement, title to or any right to all
or a portion of the proceeds from the sale or rental of more than three such
single-family houses at any one time. The sale or rental of any such single-
family house shall be excepted from the application of this chapter only if the
house is sold or rented:
            1.   Without the use in any manner of the sales or rental
facilities or the sales or rental services of any real estate broker, agent or
salesperson, or of the facilities or services of any person in the business of
selling or renting dwellings, or of any employee or agent of any such broker,
agent, salesperson or person; and
            2.   Without the publication, posting or mailing, after notice of
any advertisement or written notice in violation of §
20-104 of this chapter.
         (b)   But nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of
attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such
professional assistance as necessary to perfect or transfer the title.
      (2)   Rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or
intended to be occupied by no more than four families living independently of
each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of the living
quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   For the purposes of subsection (B) above, a person shall be deemed to
be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if:
      (1)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
principal in three or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
      (2)   He or she has, within the preceding 12 months, participated as
agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence in providing
sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two or more
transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein; or
      (3)   He or she is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for
occupancy by, or occupied by, five or more families.
(2011 Code, § 20-103)
§ 20-104 DISCRIMINATION IN THE SALE OR RENTAL OF HOUSING.
   It shall be unlawful:
   (A)   To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to
refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or
deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion or national
origin;
   (B)   To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions privileges
of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities
in connection therewith because of race, color, religion or national origin;
   (C)   To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published
any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a
dwelling that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on
race, color, religion or national origin, or an intention to make any such
reference limitation or discrimination;
   (D)   To represent to any person because of race, color, religion or
national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or
rental when such dwelling is in fact so available; and
   (E)   For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent
any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into
the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion
or national origin.
(2011 Code, § 20-104)
§ 20-105 DISCRIMINATION IN THE FINANCING OF HOUSING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association,
insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose
business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate
loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying
therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or
maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him or her in the fixing of
the amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of the loan or
other financial assistance, because the race, color, religion or national
origin of such person or of any person associated with him or her in connection
of the loan or other financial assistance, or the present or prospective
owners, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation
to which the loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or
effectiveness or the exception contained in §
20-103(B) of this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 20-105)
§ 20-106 DISCRIMINATION IN THE PROVISION OF BROKERAGE SERVICES.
   It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or
participation in any multiple- listing service, real estate brokers
organization or other service, organization or facility relating to the
business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him or her
in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation on
account of race, color, religion or national origin.
(2011 Code, § 20-106)
§ 20-107 EXEMPTION.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit a religious organization, association
or society, or any non- profit institution or organization operated, supervised
or controlled by or in conjunction with a religious organization, association
or society, from limiting the sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings which it
owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose to persons of the same
religion, or from giving preference to such persons, unless membership in the
religion is restricted on account of race, color or national origin; nor shall
anything in this chapter prohibit a private club not in fact open to the
public, which as an incident to its primary purpose or purposes provides
lodgings which it owns or operates for other than a commercial purpose, from
limiting the rental or occupancy of the lodgings to its members or from giving
preference to its members.
(2011 Code, § 20-107)
§ 20-108 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The authority and responsibility for administering this chapter shall
be in the Mayor.
   (B)   The Mayor may delegate any of these functions, duties and powers to
employees of the city or to boards of such employees, including functions,
duties and powers with respect to investigating, conciliating, hearing,
determining, ordering, certifying, reporting or otherwise acting as to any
work, business or matter under this chapter. The Mayor shall, by rule,
prescribe rights of appeal from the decisions of his or her hearing examiners
to other hearing examiners or to other officers in the city, to boards of
officers or to himself or herself, as are appropriate and in accordance with
law.
   (C)   All executive departments and agencies shall administer their programs
and activities relating to housing and urban development in a manner
affirmatively to further the purposes of the chapter and shall cooperate with
the Mayor to further such purposes.
(2011 Code, § 20-108)
§ 20-109 EDUCATION AND CONCILIATION.
   Immediately after the enactment of the provisions of this chapter, the Mayor
shall commence such educational and conciliatory activities as will further the
purposes of this chapter. He or she shall call conferences of persons in the
housing industry and other interested parties to acquaint them with the
provisions of this chapter and his or her suggested means of implementing it,
and shall endeavor with their advice to work out programs of voluntary
compliance and of enforcement.
(2011 Code, § 20-109)
§ 20-110 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Any person who claims to have been injured by a discriminatory housing
practice or who believes that he or she will be irrevocably injured by a
discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur (hereafter “person
aggrieved”) may file a complaint with the Mayor. Complaints shall be in writing
and shall contain such information and be in such form as the Mayor requires.
Upon receipt of such a complaint, the Mayor shall furnish a copy of it to the
person or persons who allegedly committed or are about to commit the alleged
discriminatory housing practice. Within 30 days after receiving a complaint, or
within 30 days after the expiration of any period of reference under subsection
(C) below, the Mayor shall investigate the complaint and give notice in writing
to the person aggrieved whether he or she intends to resolve the complaints. He
or she shall proceed to try to eliminate or correct the alleged discriminatory
housing practice by informal methods of conference, conciliation and
persuasion. Nothing said or done in the course of these informal endeavors may
be made public or used as evidence in a subsequent proceeding under this
chapter without the written consent of the persons concerned. Any employee of
the Mayor who makes public any information in violation of this provision shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (B)   A complaint under subsection (A) above shall be filed within 180 days
after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. Complaints shall be
in writing and shall state the facts upon which the allegations of a
discriminatory housing practice are based. Complaints may be reasonably and
fairly amended at any time. A respondent may file an answer to the complaint
against him or her and with the leave of the Mayor, which shall be granted
whenever it would be reasonable and fair to do so, may amend his or her answer
at any time. Both complaints and answers shall be verified.
   (C)   If, within 30 days after a complaint is filed with the Mayor, the
Mayor has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance with this chapter, the
person aggrieved may, within 30 days thereafter, file a complaint with the
Secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. The Mayor will
assist in this filing.
   (D)   If the Mayor has been unable to obtain voluntary compliance within 30
days of the complaint, the person aggrieved may, within 30 days thereafter
commence a civil action in any appropriate court against the respondent named
in the complaint to enforce the rights granted or protected by this chapter
insofar as such rights relate to the subject of the complaint. If the court
finds that a discriminatory housing practice has occurred or is about to occur,
the court may enjoin the respondent from engaging in such practice or order
such affirmative action as may be appropriate.
   (E)   In any proceeding brought pursuant to this section, the burden of
proof shall be on the complainant.
   (F)   Whenever an action filed by an individual comes to trial, the Mayor
shall immediately terminate all efforts to obtain voluntary compliance.
(2011 Code, § 20-110)
§ 20-111 INVESTIGATIONS; SUBPOENAS; GIVING OF EVIDENCE.
   (A)   In conducting an investigation, the Mayor shall have access at all
reasonable times to premises, records, documents, individuals and other
evidence or possible sources of evidence and may examine, record and copy such
materials and take and record the testimony or statements of such persons as
are reasonably necessary for the furtherance of the investigation. The Mayor
must comply with the provisions of the Fourth Amendment relating to
unreasonable searches and seizures. The Mayor may issue subpoenas to compel
access to or the production of such materials, or the appearance of such
persons, and may issue interrogatories to a respondent to the same extent and
subject to the same limitations as would apply if the subpoenas or
interrogatories were issued or served in aid of a civil action in the United
States District Court for the district in which the investigation is taking
place. The Mayor may administer oaths.
   (B)   Upon written application to the Mayor, a respondent shall be entitled
to the issuance of a reasonable number of subpoenas by and in the name of the
Mayor to the same extent and subject to the same limitations as subpoenas
issued by the Mayor himself or herself. Subpoenas issued at the request of a
respondent shall show, on their face, the name and address of such respondent
and shall state that they were issued at his or her request.
   (C)   Witnesses summoned by subpoena of the Mayor shall be entitled to the
same witness and mileage fees as are witnesses in proceedings in United States
District Courts. Fees payable to a witness summoned by a subpoena issued at the
request of a respondent shall be paid by him or her.
   (D)   Within five days after service of a subpoena upon any person, the
person may petition the Mayor to revoke or modify the subpoena. The Mayor shall
grant the petition if he or she finds that the subpoena requires appearance or
attendance at an unreasonable time or place, that it requires production of
evidence which does not relate to any matter under investigation, that it does
not describe with sufficient particularity the evidence to be produced, that
compliance would be unduly onerous or for other good reason.
   (E)   In case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena, the Mayor or other
person at whose request it was issued may petition for its enforcement in
municipal or state court for the district in which the person to whom the
subpoena was addressed resides, was served or transacts business.
   (F)   Any person who willfully fails or neglects to attend and testify or to
answer any lawful inquiry or to produce records, documents or other evidence,
if, in his or her power to do so, in obedience to the subpoena or lawful order
to the Mayor shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person who, with intent
thereby to mislead the Mayor makes or causes to be made any false entry or
statement of fact in any report, account, record or other document submitted to
the Mayor pursuant to his or her subpoena or other order, or willfully neglects
or fails to make or cause to be made full, true and correct entries in such
reports, accounts, records or other documents, or willfully mutilates, alters
or by any other means falsifies any documentary evidence, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (G)   The City Attorney shall conduct all litigation in which the Mayor
participates as a party or as amicus pursuant to this chapter.
(2011 Code, § 20-111)
§ 20-112 ENFORCEMENT BY PRIVATE PERSONS.
   (A)   The rights granted by §§
20-103,
20-104,
20-105 and
20-106 of this chapter may be enforced by civil actions in state or local
courts of general jurisdiction. A civil action shall be commenced within 108
days after the alleged discriminatory housing practice occurred. The court
shall continue a civil case brought pursuant to this section or §
20-110(D) of this chapter from time to time before bringing it to trial or
renting dwellings.
   (B)   Any person because he or she is or has been or in order to intimidate
such person or any other person or any class of persons from:
      (1)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion or national origin, in any of the activities, services, organizations
or facilities described in subsection 15(a); or
      (2)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection to so participate.
   (C)   Any citizen because he or she is or has been, or in order to
discourage such citizen or any other citizen from lawfully aiding or
encouraging other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of
race, color, religion or national origin, in any of the activities, services,
organizations or facilities described in subsection 15(a), or participating
lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity
to so participate shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(2011 Code, § 20-112)
CHAPTER 2: UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
Section
   
20-201   Definitions
   
20-202   Erection of utilities above ground prohibited
   
20-203   Depth
   
20-204   Compliance with other laws
   
20-205   Exceptions
   
20-206   Applicability
§ 20-201 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPERATOR. Any person who owns or operates a utility.
   PERSON. Any individual; any corporation, partnership, association or any
other entity organized under the laws of any state; any state; any subdivision
or instrumentality of a state; and any employee, agent or legal representative
thereof.
   UTILITY. Any line, system or facility used for producing, storing,
conveying, transmitting or distributing communications, electricity, gas,
petroleum, petroleum products, hazardous liquids, water, steam or sewage.
(2011 Code, § 20-201)
§ 20-202 ERECTION OF UTILITIES ABOVE GROUND PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful within the city for any operator to construct any
utility above the surface of the ground, except for primary three-phase
electrical service and except for utilities installed in subdivisions having no
lot smaller in size than 10,000 square feet. All utilities hereafter
constructed in subdivisions having lot sizes smaller than 10,000 square feet,
including all electrical service, shall be placed beneath the surface of the
ground, it being the intent of this chapter to prohibit the above ground
construction of utilities, except for primary three phase electrical service
and except for subdivisions having lot sizes of at least 10,000 square feet.
(2011 Code, § 20-202) (Ord. 02-26, passed 10- -2002)
§ 20-203 DEPTH.
   All utilities hereafter constructed shall be placed a sufficient distance
beneath the surface to comply with all laws, codes and regulations pertaining
to such utility and underground construction. Where no such depth is specified,
the depth of the location of the utility shall be prescribed by the Building
Inspector of the city.
(2011 Code, § 20-203)
§ 20-204 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
   All such underground construction shall comply with all other applicable
laws including specifically Tenn. Code Ann. Title 64, Ch. 2.
(2011 Code, § 20-204)
§ 20-205 EXCEPTIONS.
   Where the composition of the materials underlying the surface of the ground
renders underground construction impractical by reason of cost and expense,
danger to surrounding properties arising from the proper means of construction,
or other reasonable cause, application for relief from the provisions of this
chapter may be granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals. In granting the variance
or exception, the Board shall specify the measure or extent of relief granted
from these provisions. Any action taken by the Board of Zoning Appeals may be
modified or rescinded by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen if that final action
is taken by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen within 30 days after the granting
of the exception or variance by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
(2011 Code, § 20-205)
§ 20-206 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any property located in
subdivisions substantially developed prior to 10-31-1986.
(2011 Code, § 20-206)
CHAPTER 3: POLICY AND RATES FOR USE OF PUBLIC FACILITIES
Section
   
20-301   User group categories
   
20-302   Rates to be paid
   
20-303   Administrative and appeal rights
§ 20-301 USER GROUP CATEGORIES.
   Those organizations characterized as “public service organizations” are
those:
   (A)   Having a community-wide service orientation;
   (B)   Engaged in activities designed to benefit the whole community of the
city;
   (C)   Not seeking use of city facilities to promulgate particular political,
religious, social, economic or other partisan ideological beliefs;
   (D)   Not advocating violence, harassment, intimidation or other conduct
disruptive of peace and order; and
   (E)   Not discriminating on the basis of race, religion, gender, country of
origin or age (legitimate membership requirements are permissible).
(2011 Code, § 20-301)
§ 20-302 RATES TO BE PAID.
   (A)   A full day rate is to be charged for any part of a day.
   (B)   Rate charges for parks building and City Hall facilities:
      (1)   Public service organizations: no charge; and
      (2)   Other groups:
         (a)   Parks building and City Hall community room: $35 per day for
city residents, $50 per day for others;
         (b)   City Hall courtroom: $75 per day;
         (c)   City Hall conference room: $25 per day; and
         (d)   City Hall offices: $25 per day.
(2011 Code, § 20-302)
§ 20-303 ADMINISTRATIVE AND APPEAL RIGHTS.
   The City Administrator will have the authority to administer the use of the
facilities, develop application forms for persons requesting use of facilities,
recommend rate adjustments to the Board and forbid use of the facilities to
groups deemed to be irresponsible in their care of the facilities. Any group
not in agreement with a decision of the City Administrator may file an appeal
to be heard by the Board of Mayor and Aldermen at a regular or special called
meeting.
(2011 Code, § 20-303)
CHAPTER 4: COMPLIANCE MANUAL
Section
   
20-401   Compliance Manual adopted by reference
§ 20-401 COMPLIANCE MANUAL ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Compliance Manual, regarding Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964,
is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. 13-07, passed 3-18-2013)
CHAPTER 5: SHORT-TERM RENTALS
Section
   
20-501   Short-term rentals
   
20-502   Additional definitions
   
20-503   Permit required
   
20-504   Minimum standards for short-term rentals
   
20-505   Permit application; action on permit application; permit approval or
appeals to City Commission
   
20-506   Permit approval, transferability, conditions, renewal, revocation
   
20-507   Short-term rental annual fee
   
20-508   Short-term rental agent
   
20-509   Failure to obtain permit; penalties
   
20-510   Invalidity of part; private agreements and covenants
§ 20-501 SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
   (A)   SHORT-TERM RENTAL. A residential dwelling unit that is rented wholly
or partially for a fee for a period of less than 30 continuous days and does
not include a hotel as defined in Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-14-302 or a bed and
breakfast establishment or a bed and breakfast homestay as those terms are
defined in Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-14-502.
   (B)   As per the provisions of Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 13-7-601, et seq., certain
limited provisions of this chapter may not be applicable or wholly applicable
to "non-conforming short-term rental".
(Ord. 25-02, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 20-502 ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS.
      For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NON-CONFORMING. The use of a structure or land that at one time was an
allowed use within a zoning district but because of subsequent amendments to
the code is no longer allowed.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL AGENT. A natural person designated to be responsible for
daily operations by the owner of a short-term residential rental or a short-
term rental permit. Such person shall  be available for and responsive to
contact at all times and someone who is customarily present at a location
within Spring Hill, Tennessee, for purposes of transacting the short-term
residential rental business. The short-term rental agent must meet all other
requirements set forth by state law.
   SHORT-TERM RENTAL OCCUPANTS. Guests, tourists, lessees, vacationers or any
other person who, in exchange for compensation, occupy a short-term rental
dwelling unit for lodging for a period of time not to exceed 30 consecutive
days, but not in any event to be from any period of time less than overnight.
(Ord. 25-02, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 20-503 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person or entity shall operate a short-term rental, unless such use
existed prior to the date of adoption of this chapter, unless a "short-term
rental permit" or "permit" has been first obtained from the city. To obtain a
permit, an otherwise eligible applicant must submit an application in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter of the City Code on a form
provided by the city. If approved, a legible copy of the permit shall be posted
within the unit and shall include all the following information:
   (A)   The name, address, telephone number and email address of the owner of
the short-term rental unit and the short-term rental agent, if applicable;
   (B)   The business license number;
   (C)   Any applicable hotel-motel tax certifications and or numbers as are
applicable pursuant to Tenn. Code Ann. § 67-4-1401, et seq.;
   (D)   The maximum occupancy of the unit;
   (E)   The maximum number of vehicles that may be parked at the unit; and
   (F)   The short-term rental permit number; and
   (G)   Emergency evacuation plan.
(Ord. 25-02, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 20-504 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR SHORT-TERM RENTALS.
   Short-term rental shall meet the following minimum standards:
   (A)   A short-term rental may include a primary dwelling unit and/or a
secondary dwelling unit permitted for construction by the city, but cannot
include uninhabitable structures such as garages, barns, or sheds.
   (B)   A short-term rental must meet all applicable laws related to zoning,
housing, building, health, electrical, gas, plumbing, and life safety.
   (C)   There shall be no more than five bedrooms made available for rental.
   (D)   A short-term rental must be inspected yearly through the application
and renewal process and properly maintained in good operational condition.
Inspections may increase in frequency if the property is the subject of one or
more substantiated complaints.
   (E)   Maximum occupancy. The maximum occupancy shall be determined by the
total of:
      (1)   Two persons per bedroom up to 140 square feet.
      (2)   For bedrooms over 140 square feet, the occupant load will be
determined by the area of the room divided by 70 square feet. For a fractional
number, any fraction shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number.
   (F)   The occupancy maximum shall be conspicuously posted at the primary
entrance of the interior of the short-term residential rental.
   (G)   The short-term rental owner shall not receive any compensation to
allow occupancy for any agreed or contracted period of less than 24 hours.
   (H)   The short-term rental permit holder shall be responsible for
collecting and remitting all applicable hotel-motel and sales taxes and any
other taxes required by state law and/or by the city.
   (I)   Short-term rental units shall provide one off-street parking space per
bedroom. Parking shall only be permitted in a garage, carport, driveway, or
parking lot. On-street parking shall not apply to the required off-street
parking.
   (J)   All occupants shall abide by all generally applicable codes,
ordinances and regulations, including without limitation, applicable noise
restrictions and all applicable waste management provisions of the city.
   (K)   The name and telephone number of the owner of the short-term rental or
the short-term rental.
(Ord. 25-02, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 20-505 PERMIT APPLICATION; ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATION; PERMIT APPROVAL OR
APPEALS TO CITY COMMISSION.
   (A)   Permit applications. Applicants for a short-term rental permit shall
submit a complete application to the City Development Services Department. The
application shall be furnished under oath on a form specified by the city. This
provision shall apply whether the application is for a short-term rental or a
"non-conforming short-term rental", together with documenta1y evidence which
supports classifying to (proposed) short-term rental as a "non-conforming
short-term rental". Such application shall include:
      (1)   The name, address, telephone number, email address, and consent of
the owner of the short-term rental and the short-term rental agent, if
applicable;
      (2)   Documentation that applicant is the owner or the short-term rental
agent;
      (3)   Certification and/or registration number relating to the hotel-
motel occupancy tax authorized by Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 67-4-1401, et seq.;
      (4)   A detailed and dimensioned site plan, indicating the subject
property, the building(s) on the site intended for the short-term rental(s),
proposed parking, and guest access;
      (5)   A floor plan indicating the building layout, dimensioning the
bedrooms intended for the short-term rental(s), and an emergency evacuation
plan;
      (6)   A narrative with the following:
         (a)   A description of the area available for short-term rental (i.e.,
the entire property and house, a guest cottage, a portion of the house, etc.);
         (b)   A description of the number of bedrooms proposed for rental,
which shall not be more than five bedrooms under any circumstances;
         (c)   The maximum number of guests to be accommodated at one time;
         (d)   The days of operation (all year, just holidays, weekend/week
nights, etc.);
         (e)   How trash will be handled, and the method of informing occupants
about method of disposal of trash;
         (f)   A description of how cleaning and maintenance will be provided;
and
      (7)   Proof of insurance on the dwelling unit.
   (B)   Application fee.
      (1)   The permit application fee for owner-occupied short-term rental
shall be $150.
      (2)   The permit application fee for all other non-owner-occupied short-
term rental shall be $300.
   (C)   Application review.
      (1)   The Development Director, or their designee, and Fire Marshal, or
their designee, shall be notified to ensure compliance with state and local
laws.
      (2)   If the application meets all of the requirements set forth in this
chapter, the city shall issue to the applicant a short-term rental permit
within 30 days of receipt of the complete application.
      (3)   The decision of the city as to whether to issue, deny or revoke any
permit shall be final, reviewable only by application for Writ of Certiorari to
the Chancery Court of Maury County, Tennessee, as provided in the Tennessee
Code Annotated.
(Ord. 25-02, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 20-506 PERMIT APPROVAL, TRANSFERABILITY, CONDITIONS, RENEWAL AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Permit approval. The permit application, if approved, shall be issued
for a specific site location and/or address of the proposed short-term rental
or non-conforming short-term rental provided in the application as set forth in
this chapter of the city code. Upon receipt of a short-term rental permit
number, the applicant must display said number on any materials or platforms
used to advertise the short-term rental.
   (B)   Grant or denial of application. Review of an application shall be
conducted in accordance with due process principles and shall be granted unless
the applicant fails to meet the conditions and requirements of this chapter, or
otherwise fails to demonstrate compliance with generally applicable local
ordinances, state or federal law. Any false statements or info1mation provided
in the application are grounds for revocation, suspension and/or imposition of
penalties, including denial of future applications. The decision of the city as
to whether to issue, deny or revoke any permit shall be final, reviewable only
by application for Writ of Certiorari to the Chancery Court of Maury County,
Tennessee, as provided in the Tennessee Code Annotated.
   (C)   Transferability. The permit is non-transferable to another site,
property, location, agent, or owner. Non-conforming short-term rental permits
are subject to additional transferability restrictions as provided in Tenn.
Code Ann. § 13-7-603, as now enacted or hereafter amended.
   (D)   Suspension of Permit. Prior to suspension of a previously issued
permit, the Development Services Director, or their designee, shall issue a
written warning to the property owner of record identifying the reasons for the
written warning and terms or requirements for resolution. All issues listed in
the written warning shall be addressed or resolved within 30 days of the
issuance of the written warning. Following the issuance of at least one written
warning or if the property has been deemed a public health and safety risk, the
Development Services Director may suspend a previously issued permit in the
event that a permittee is found to be non-compliant with any of the terms,
conditions or requirements of this chapter, for a minimum period of 30 days and
a maximum period of 90 days. Any permit which is suspended for administrative
non-compliance with permitting requirements may be, upon payment of a $250
reinstatement and inspection fee, be reinstated upon the permittee
demonstrating, to the satisfaction of the city, that the non-compliance issue
(s) which resulted in suspension of the permit have been resolved.
   (E)   Revocation. The city reserves the right to revoke and/or modify any
permit if any requirements and/or conditions of a permitted short-term rental
are not met. The revocation process shall be as follows:
      (1)   The Development Services Director shall revoke a permit once the
property has three documented warnings, suspensions, and/or city code and/or
other violations of any generally applicable state laws or breaches of the
peace within any running 12-month period and/or based upon unreasonable
interference with the use and enjoyment of adjoining or other nearby
properties. Such violations shall be evidenced by a finding of guilt or fault
or unreasonable interference with the use and enjoyment of nearby properties.
      (2)   The owner or owner or agent may file an appeal of the revocation
within ten business days and considered during a public hearing of the Board of
Mayor and Aldermen.
      (3)   A short-term rental permit, which is revoked, shall prevent its
permit holder and/or any owner of or agent for the specific property from
applying for a new permit for short-term rental permit for a period of one year
from date of revocation.
   (F)   No property shall be operated as a short-term rental with its permit
suspended and/or revoked, until a valid short-term rental permit shall be
subsequently issued by the city.
(Ord. 25-02, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 20-507 SHORT-TERM RENTAL ANNUAL FEE.
   (A)   There shall be a short-term rental permit renewal and inspection fee
to be paid annually from the date of application approval in the amount of the
application fee which, upon inspection by the city and satisfactory
demonstration of compliance by the permit holder and property of the terms,
provisions and conditions of the ordinance, shall entitle the permittee to
renewal of the permit for the ensuing 12 months.
   (B)   Failure to pay the annual renewal fee and to cooperate with permit
inspection requirements shall result in suspension of the permit which, if not
remedied within 60 days after suspension, shall automatically result in
revocation of the permit for that particular location.
(Ord. 25-02, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 20-508 SHORT-TERM RENTAL AGENT.
   (A)   The owner of a short-term rental may designate a short-term rental
agent on its application for a permit for a short-term rental. A property owner
may serve as the short-term rental agent. Alternatively, the owner may
designate a person as his or her agent who is over age 18 and meets all local
and state regulatory requirements to fulfill the duties of a short-term rental
agent. The owner of a short-term rental shall be the default short-term rental
agent.
   (B)   The duties of the short-term rental agent are to:
      (1)   Be reasonably available to handle any problems arising from use of
the short-term rental;
      (2)   Appear on the premises of any short-term rental within four hours
following notification from the city of issues related to the use or occupancy
of the premises. This includes, but is not limited to, notification that
occupants of the short-term rental have created unreasonable noise or
disturbances, engaged in disorderly conduct or committed violations of the city
code or other applicable law pertaining to noise, disorderly conduct,
overcrowding, consumption of alcohol, or use of illegal drugs. Failure of the
agent to timely appear to two or more formal written complaints regarding
violations, may be grounds for penalties and/or permit revocations as set forth
in this chapter.
      (3)   Receive and accept service of any notice of violation or notice of
hearing related to the short-term rental; and
      (4)   Monitor the short-term rental for compliance with all laws,
including without limitations, compliance with the provisions of the hotel-
motel tax authorized by Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 67-4-1401, et seq.
   (C)   An owner may change his or her designation of a short-term rental
agent temporarily or permanently; however, there shall only be one such agent
for a property at any given time. To change the designated agent, the owner
shall notify the city Development Services Office in writing of the new agent's
identity, together with all information regarding such person as required by
the applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (D)   As per the provisions of Tenn. Code Ann. § 13-7-603(a), certain
limited provisions of this subsection may not be applicable or wholly
applicable to "non-conforming short-term rental".
(Ord. 25-02, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 20-509 FAILURE TO OBTAIN PERMIT; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any violation of this chapter, including operating a short-term rental
without first obtaining a permit, after failing to renew a permit, or after the
revocation of a permit, shall be punishable by a civil penalty of $50 per
violation. Each day that the violation continues shall be a separate offense.
There shall be a rebuttable presumption that a person or entity is in violation
of this chapter if they list or hold out a property as a short-term rental
without first obtaining a short-term rental permit. This rebuttable presumption
also applies to those dwellings featured on websites whose primary purpose is
business related to short-term rental reservations.
   (B)   The owner and/or agent of or with respect to a "non-conforming short-
term rental", which may be otherwise exempt from compliance with some of the
regulations, conditions and requirements of this chapter, shall nevertheless be
required to apply for a permit within the 90 days following the effective date
of this chapter. If the owner or agent shall fail to apply within said 90 day
period or shall otherwise fail to meet the requirements of generally applicable
laws, rules and ordinances as to said non- conforming short-term rental, shall,
upon notice from the city, cease operations as a short-term rental and shall
not resume such operations or advertisement as a short-term rental until such
time as the owner and/or agent shall make a proper application for a permit and
demonstrate compliance with all requirements of this chapter and generally
applicable law. As provided in Tenn. Code Ann., § 13-7-603, a "non-conforming
short-term rental" may lose non-conforming status by failure to adhere to and/
or violation of all or any of the qualifying conditions and/or requirements of
Tenn. Code Ann., § 13-7-603, including but not limited to:
      (1)   The property used as a non-conforming short-term rental is sold or
otherwise transferred by or from the owner(s) of the property when first
qualified or established as a non- conforming short-term rental;
      (2)   The property ceases to be used as a short-term rental for any
period of 12 continuous months; or
      (3)   The property has been found to be in violation of a generally
applicable local ordinance or state law on three or more separate occasions and
with no appeal opportunities remaining.
(Ord. 25-02, passed 2-3-2025)
§ 20-510 INVALIDITY OF PART; PRIVATE AGREEMENTS AND COVENANTS.
   (A)   Should any court of competent jurisdiction declare any section, clause
or provision unconstitutional, such decision shall affect only such section,
clause, or provision so declared unconstitutional, and shall not affect any
other section, clause or provision of this title. Additionally, this chapter
shall in no way be used to supersede any privately created agreements or
covenants by any homeowner associations or developers restricting certain uses.
   (B)   Every section, clause, and provision of this chapter is separable and
severable. Should any section, sentence, clause, or provision be declared
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, said
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any other section,
sentence, clause, or phrase.
   (C)   This chapter shall take effect from and after the date of its final
passage, the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city.
(Ord. 25-02, passed 2-3-2025)
APPENDIX A: EMERGENCY RESPONSE AND RECOVERY PLAN
CITY OF SPRING HILL BASIC RESPONSE AND RECOVERY PLAN
I.   BASIC PLAN.
   (A)   Purpose. This document establishes a framework through which the city
may prevent or mitigate the impacts of, prepare for, respond to and recover
from a wide variety of disasters that could adversely affect the health, safety
or general welfare of the citizens and visitors of the city. This emergency
operations plan outlines a method of incident management called the Incident
Command System (ICS) that includes a coordinated (multi-department and or
multi-agency) response to incidents beyond the scope of normal city operations.
Provisions are made for the needed flexibility of direction, coordination and
method of operation to enable city government to accomplish the following
specific goals:
      (1)   Minimize suffering, loss of life, personal injury and property
damage resulting from hazardous and/or emergency conditions;
      (2)   Minimize disaster related shortages and service system disruptions
that would have an adverse impact on residents, visitors and the local economy;
      (3)   Provide immediate relief and promote short-range and long-range
recovery;
      (4)   Avoid or reduce loss of life and property damage resulting from
disasters;
      (5)   Comply with state and federal disaster assistance regulations; and
      (6)   Document all disaster related expenses to ensure the fullest
possible recovery of funds in the event of a presidential declaration.
   (B)   Scope. The city’s emergency plan:
      (1)   Describes the various types of emergencies and disasters that may
occur, and provides procedures for disseminating warning and for determining,
assessing and reporting the severity and magnitude of disasters;
      (2)   Establishes the concepts under which local government will operate
during emergencies by:
         (a)   Defining the emergency role and function of city government; and
         (b)   Defining the responsibilities of city government officials.
      (3)   Create a framework for expeditious, effective and coordinated
deployment of available resources;
      (4)   Identifies functional responsibilities and actions required of city
government to obtain and implement assistance and relief on a state and federal
level, and those actions to be taken in the identification, organization and
mobilization of resources necessary to assist the city before, during and after
an emergency;
      (5)   Outlines the forms of recovery assistance available to individuals,
businesses and governments; and
      (6)   Creates a framework to promote pre and post disaster hazard
mitigation efforts.
   (C)   Assumptions.
      (1)   The city has developed and will continue to update its emergency
plans and possesses the capability to execute such plans.
      (2)   Prediction and warning systems have been established which make it
possible to anticipate some disaster situations that may affect the city.
      (3)   The city has entered into mutual-aid agreements with other local
governments, special districts and private organizations to assist during
emergency operations.
      (4)   The state possesses expertise and resources including specific
plans and procedures that may be utilized in relieving emergency or disaster
related problems that are beyond the capacity of the city.
      (5)   Should city and state resources prove inadequate to cope with
disaster demands, the Governor will request federal assistance under a
presidential declaration.
      (6)   The city has adopted the Incident Command System as its response
model for daily emergency operations through disaster response operations.
   (D)   Location. The city is located in middle Tennessee, in Maury/Williamson
Counties. Population is 24,340 (2007 census).
   (E)   Situation. The city is exposed to the effects of many hazards, varying
widely in type and magnitude. Emergency conditions could result from a number
of natural phenomena such as earthquakes, tornadoes, floods, summer/winter
storms, drought, fires, to include grass and forest fires, high winds, or a
combination of the above. Apart from natural disasters, the city is exposed to
technological hazards such as transportation accidents involving chemicals, oil
and other hazardous material spills, leaks or pollution problems, dumping of
hazardous waste, building or bridge collapse, utility service interruptions,
energy shortages, civil disturbance or riots, warfare or a combination of the
above. A detailed hazard analysis is provided herein.
   (F)   Definitions.
      (1)   CATASTROPHIC DISASTER. Although there is no commonly accepted
definition of a CATASTROPHIC DISASTER, the term implies an event or incident,
including acts of terrorism, which produces severe and widespread damages of
such a magnitude as to result in the requirement for significant resources from
outside the affected area to provide the necessary response. For the purpose of
this plan, a CATASTROPHIC DISASTER is defined as an event that results in large
numbers of deaths and injuries; causes extensive damage or destruction of
facilities that provide and sustain human needs; produces an overwhelming
demand on state and local response resources and mechanisms; causes a severe
long-term effect on general economic activity; and severely affects state,
local and private sector capabilities to begin and sustain response activities.
      (2)   DISASTER. The occurrence of widespread or severe damage, injury,
loss of life or property or such severe economic or social disruption that
supplemental relief assistance is necessary for the county to recover and
alleviate the damage, loss, hardship or suffering caused thereby. At the
federal level, as defined under Pub. Law No. 93-288, a disaster is any natural
catastrophe, (including any hurricane, tornado, storm, flood, high water, wind-
driven water, earthquake, landslide, mudslide, snowstorm, or drought), or,
regardless of cause, any fire, flood or explosion, in any part of the United
States, which in the determination of the President causes damage of sufficient
severity and magnitude to warrant major disaster assistance to supplement the
efforts and available resources of states, local governments and disaster
relief organizations.
      (3)   EMERGENCY. The occurrence or imminent threat of a condition,
incident or event that requires immediate response actions to save lives;
prevent injuries; protect property, public health, the environment and public
safety; or to lessen or avert the threat of a disaster. At the federal level,
an emergency is defined by Title V of Pub. Law No. 93-288, § 102(1), as any
occasion or instance for which, in the determination of the President, federal
assistance is needed to supplement state and local efforts and capabilities to
save lives and to protect property and public health and safety. Title V
includes authority for the President to direct federal agencies to provide
emergency assistance to save lives and protect property and public health and
safety for emergencies and other than natural disasters. Under Title V, the
President may direct the provision of emergency assistance either at the
request of a Governor (§ 501(a)) or upon determination by the President that an
emergency exists for which the primary responsibility for response rests with
the United States (§ 501(b)).
II.   ORGANIZATION. There are eight departments of city government,
organizationally configured as illustrated herein.
III.   CONCEPT OF OPERATIONS.
   (A)   This is an integrated emergency management plan based on the principle
that local government bears the initial responsibility for mitigation,
emergency preparedness, response and recovery. Only after local resources are
depleted or prove to be inadequate should the city request relief from the next
level of government. State assistance is supplied as deemed appropriate by the
Governor and as provided in the state’s Emergency Management Plan.
   (B)   When local and state resources are determined to be inadequate, the
Governor will request a presidential disaster declaration through the Federal
Emergency Management Agency based on state and local damage assessment reports.
   (C)   Phases of emergency management: there are four distinct phases of
integrated emergency management. They include: hazard mitigation; preparedness;
response; and recovery. Specifically, each is described as follows:
      (1)   Hazard mitigation. Actions taken to eliminate or reduce the degree
of long-term risk to human life and property from natural and technological
hazards;
      (2)   Preparedness. Actions taken in advance of an emergency to develop
operational capacities and facilitate an effective response in the event an
emergency occurs;
      (3)   Response. Actions taken immediately before, during or directly
after an emergency occurs, to save lives, minimize damage to property and
enhance the effectiveness and speed of recovery; and
      (4)   Recovery. Activity initiated to return vital life support systems
to minimum operating standards and long-term activity designed to return life
to normal or improved levels.
IV.   EXECUTION
   (A)   Activation of the city plan. Upon activation of the plan by the City
Administrator, the Emergency Management Director will implement increased
readiness procedures and such emergency response actions as might be necessary
to ensure the protection of life and property. For the purposes of integrated
emergency management, the city will use the following terminology to describe
its level of readiness. These readiness levels track those used by county and
state government.
   (B)   Operating conditions (OPCONs).
      (1)   These OPCON levels are declared when a pre-determined set of
criteria has been met. The City Administrator and Emergency Management Director
will assign the appropriate OPCON level, based on the situation at any given
time.
         (a)   OPCONs for the city shall be as follows:
 
OPCON Level of Readiness
5     Day-to-day operations
      Potential emergency or disaster conditions are threatening and may
      require activation of the emergency operations center (EOC) that will
4     serve as incident command post (CIP) for large or city-wide incidents or
      when multiple incidents occur within the city requiring individual CPs
      the EOC will serve as the area command. Small or localized incidents will
      be managed from a single ICP near the scene
3     Emergency or disaster conditions are possible; activation of the EOC and
      implementation of the EOP is required
2     Emergency or disaster conditions are certain; full activation of the ICP
      is required; highest level of preparedness
1     Emergency or disaster conditions are occurring; emergency response
      activities are ongoing
 
         (b)   The OPCON in effect will be that level of operational readiness
or response appropriate to the emergency. The following outline those minimum
actions to be taken by the city’s Emergency Management Director, under a
locally declared numerical OPCON or when the county or state government has
notified the city that a numerical OPCON is in effect.
            1.   OPCON 4. With the concurrence of the City Administrator, the
Director shall:
               a.   Continuously monitor the developing threat;
               b.   Review all pertinent operational readiness plans, policies
and procedures;
               c.   Conduct periodic situational briefings for designated
personnel;
               d.   Ensure that all departmental personnel have been advised of
the threat and have been placed in a “standby” status; and
               e.   Recommend other necessary measures to ensure operational
readiness.
            2.   OPCON 3. With the concurrence of the City Administrator, the
Director shall:
               a.   Complete all OPCON 4 action items;
               b.   Prepare the emergency operations center for activation;
               c.   Establish communications with all county/state/federal
agencies, public utilities and other agencies or organizations as appropriate
to the developing situation;
               d.   Ensure the dissemination of warning information to the
public; and
               e.   Recommend other necessary measures to ensure operational
readiness.
            3.   OPCON 2. The City Administrator will designate an Incident
Commander and, if the county’s EOC is activated, a city representative to the
county’s EOC, the Incident Commander will:
               a.   Complete all OPCON 3 action items;
               b.   Fully activate, provision and staff of the incident command
post;
               c.   Activate all appropriate emergency plans, functional
annexes and procedures;
               d.   Ensure the dissemination of threat, evacuation, shelter and
other information necessary for the protection of life and property;
               e.   Activate all mutual aid agreements;
               f.   Ensure the recall, and deployment of departmental
personnel;
               g.   Coordinate all emergency management activities with county/
state/federal agencies; public utilities and other agencies or organizations as
appropriate to the developing situation;
               h.   Recommend the issuance of emergency proclamations, orders
and ordinances commensurate with the emergency or disaster;
               i.   Implement measures to ensure the greatest level of
protection possible to public facilities;
               j.   Implement financial procedures to fully document all
emergency preparation/response/recovery expenditures; and
               k.   Recommend other measures to ensure operational readiness.
            4.   OPCON 1. The Incident Commander will:
               a.   Complete all OPCON 2 action items;
               b.   Ensure the implementation of such measures as are necessary
to protect life and property;
               c.   Or his or her designee, act as liaison between the city and
county/state/federal response agencies;
               d.   Function as the city’s “applicant agent”;
               e.   Direct all recovery activities; and
               f.   Recommend other measures to facilitate the expenditures and
complete recovery of the community.
      (2)   All personnel are reminded that in many cases the city may have to
respond to a disaster without any advance warning and that internal operation
plans need to include this flexibility.
   (C)   Enactment of emergency ordinances. Upon the recommendation of the City
Administrator, the Mayor and Board of Alderman may enact emergency ordinances
necessary to respond to the emergency or disaster. These ordinances shall
indicate the nature of the emergency or disaster; specify the impacts on the
city; and outline those measures to be implemented to preserve the public
safety and welfare and protect property. Copies shall be filed with the Maury/
Williamson County Office of Emergency Preparedness, the state’s Division of
Emergency Preparedness and be given the widest possible dissemination possible
to ensure full public notification.
V.   RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   General. Appointed city officials share responsibility for the
planning necessary to minimize losses and provide relief from disasters. This
shared responsibility includes activities to ensure mitigation, preparedness,
response and recovery.
   (B)   City government. City government should be prepared to:
      (1)   Direct and control local response to a wide variety of emergencies;
      (2)   Provide immediate response through local resources and personnel;
      (3)   Establish readiness procedures that ensure proper training,
notification of personnel and the availability of personnel, material and
equipment in an emergency;
      (4)   Establish and activate mutual aid agreements when specific aid is
needed;
      (5)   Request assistance from state and federal government when:
         (a)   Local resources are fully committed and found to be inadequate;
and/or
         (b)   A particular capability is required but is not available
locally.
      (6)   Participate in state and federal efforts to accomplish post-
disaster hazard mitigation plans and studies.
   (C)   City Administrator.
      (1)   Act as or designate an Incident Commander;
      (2)   Activate the city’s Emergency Operation Plan;
      (3)   Suspend the provision of any city ordinance prescribing the
procedures for conduct of city business if strict compliance with the provision
prevents, hinders or delays necessary actions in coping with the emergency;
      (4)   Use all resources of the city as necessary to cope with the
emergency; and
      (5)   Transfer the direction, personnel or functions of city departments
or divisions for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency operation.
   (D)   Emergency Management Director. The Emergency Management Director acts
as an advisor to the City Administrator for disaster mitigation, preparedness,
response and recovery and may be appointed by the City Manager to fill a key
position when the emergency operations are implemented. The Emergency
Management Director is responsible to:
      (1)   Direct the efforts of all city departments/divisions with regard to
the development and evolution of this plan;
      (2)   Establish a NIMS compliant system for reporting, analyzing,
displaying and disseminating emergency information;
      (3)   Coordinate the activities of the departments, divisions and other
agencies in preparing for disasters;
      (4)   Receive, review and approve departmental emergency operations
plans;
      (5)   Establish procedures to document recovery efforts and expenses and
act as the city’s applicant agent in accordance with state and federal disaster
assistance programs;
      (6)   Coordinate evacuation operation;
      (7)   Coordinate warning operations; and
      (8)   Coordinate military assistance.
   (E)   City Risk Manager. The Risk Manager provides assistance to the
Incident Commander or his or her appointed designee Emergency Management
Director in disaster mitigation, preparedness, response and recovery.
Responsibilities include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Assist in establishing and monitoring a system for reporting,
analyzing, displaying and disseminating emergency information;
      (2)   Identification of critical areas of loss, damage assessment/
surveys, coordination and communication with insurance representatives and
representatives of state and local authorities;
      (3)   Establish procedures to document recovery efforts and expenses and
as the city’s applicant agent in accordance with state and federal disaster
assistance programs including FEMA coordination and reporting;
      (4)   Assist in monitoring local shelter operations and occupancy levels
of critical facilities;
      (5)   Monitor developing threat and assist EMD in conducting situational
briefings for designated personnel; and
      (6)   Augment incident command operations.
VI.   RESPONSIBILITIES AND TASKS.
   (A)   Incident Commander. The Incident Commander’s (IC) responsibility is
the overall management of the incident/event. On most incidents, a single IC
carries out the command activity. The IC is selected by qualification and
experience. The IC may have a deputy, who must have the same qualifications as
the person for whom he or she works, as he or she must be ready to take over
that position at any time. The major responsibilities of the IC are:
      (1)   Assess the situation and/or obtain a briefing from the prior IC;
      (2)   Determine incidents objectives and strategy;
      (3)   Establish the immediate priorities;
      (4)   Brief command staff and section chiefs;
      (5)   Review meetings and briefings;
      (6)   Establish an appropriate organization;
      (7)   Ensure planning meetings are scheduled as required;
      (8)   Approve and authorize the implementation of an incident action
plan;
      (9)   Ensure that adequate safety measures are in place;
      (10)   Coordinate activity for command and general staff;
      (11)   Coordinate with key people and officials;
      (12)   Approve requests for additional resources or for the release of
resources;
      (13)   Keep agency administrator informed of incident status;
      (14)   Approve the use of trainees, volunteers and auxiliary personnel;
      (15)   Authorize release of information to the new media;
      (16)   Ensure incident status summary is completed; and
      (17)   Order the demobilization of the incident when appropriate.
   (B)   Public Information Officer. The Information Officer (IO) is
responsible for developing and releasing information about the incident to the
news media, to incident personnel and to other appropriate agencies and
organizations. The major responsibilities of the IO are:
      (1)   Determine from the IC if there are any limits on information
release;
      (2)   Develop material for use in media releases;
      (3)   Obtain IC approval of media releases;
      (4)   Inform media and conduct media briefings;
      (5)   Arrange for tours and other interviews or briefings that may be
required;
      (6)   Obtain media information that may be useful to incident planning;
      (7)   Maintain current information summaries and/or displays on the
incident and provide information on the status of the incident to assigned
personnel; and
      (8)   Maintain unit activity log.
   (C)   Liaison Officer. Incidents that are multi-jurisdictional, or have
several agencies involved, may require the establishment of the LO position on
the command staff. The LO is assigned to the incident to be the contact for
assisting and/or cooperating agency representatives. The major responsibilities
of the LO are:
      (1)   Be a contact point for agency representatives;
      (2)   Maintain a list of assisting and cooperating agencies and agency
representatives;
      (3)   Assist in establishing and coordinating interagency contacts;
      (4)   Keep agencies supporting the incident aware of incident status;
      (5)   Monitor incident operations to identify current or potential inter-
organizational problems; and
      (6)   Participate in planning meetings, providing current resource
status, including limitations and capability of assisting agency resources.
   (D)   Safety Officer. The Safety Officer’s function is to develop and
recommend measures for assuring personnel safety and to assess and/or
anticipate hazardous and unsafe situations. The major responsibilities of the
Safety Officer are:
      (1)   Participate in planning meetings;
      (2)   Identify hazardous situations associated with the incident;
      (3)   Review the incident action plan for safety implications;
      (4)   Exercise emergency authority to stop and prevent unsafe acts;
      (5)   Investigate accidents that have occurred within the incident area;
      (6)   Assign assistants as needed;
      (7)   Review and approve the medical plan;
      (8)   Develop the site safety plan and publish site safety plan summary;
and
      (9)   Maintain unit/activity log.
   (E)   Operations Section Chief. The Operations Section Chief is responsible
for the management of all operations directly applicable to the primary
mission. The major responsibilities of the Operations Section Chief are:
      (1)   Develop operations portion of the incident action plan;
      (2)   Brief and assign operations section personnel in accordance with
the incident action plan;
      (3)   Supervise operations section;
      (4)   Determine need and request additional resources;
      (5)   Review suggested list of resources to be released and initiate
recommendation for release of resources;
      (6)   Assemble and disassemble strike teams assigned to the operations
section;
      (7)   Report information about special activities events and occurrences
to the IC; and
      (8)   Maintain unit activity log.
   (F)   Planning Section Chief.
      (1)   The Planning Section Chief is responsible for the collection,
evaluation, dissemination and use of information about the development of the
incident and status of resources. Information is needed to:
         (a)   Understand the current situation;
         (b)   Predict the probable course of incident events; and
         (c)   Prepare alternative strategies for the incident.
      (2)   The major responsibilities of the Planning Section Chief are:
         (a)   Collect and process situation information about the incident;
         (b)   Supervise preparation of the incident action plan;
         (c)   Provide input to the IC and Ops in preparing the IAP;
         (d)   Chair planning meetings and participated in other meetings as
required;
         (e)   Assign available personnel to ICS organizational positions as
appropriate;
         (f)   Establish information requirements and reporting schedules for
planning section units;
         (g)   Determine the need for any specialized resources in support of
the incident;
         (h)   If requested, assemble and disassemble strike teams and task
forces not assigned to Ops;
         (i)   Establish special information collection activities as necessary
(e.g., weather, environmental, toxic and the like);
         (j)   Assemble information on alternative strategies;
         (k)   Provide periodic predictions on incident potential;
         (l)   Report any significant changes in incident status;
         (m)   Compile and display incident status information;
         (n)   Oversee preparation and implementation of demobilization plan;
         (o)   Incorporate plans (e.g., traffic, medical, communications, site
Safety) into the IAP; and
         (p)   Maintain unit activity log.
   (G)   Logistics Section Chief. The Logistics Section Chief is responsible
for providing facilities, services and material in support of the incident. The
major responsibilities of the Logistics Section Chief are:
      (1)   Plan the organization of the logistics section;
      (2)   Assign work locations and tasks to section personnel;
      (3)   Notify the resource unit of the logistics section units activated
and the names of assigned personnel;
      (4)   Assemble and brief branch directors and unit leaders;
      (5)   Participate in preparation of the incident action plan;
      (6)   Identify service and support requirements for planned and expected
operations;
      (7)   Provide input to and review the communication plan, medical plan
and traffic plan;
      (8)   Coordinate and process requests for additional resources;
      (9)   Review the IAP and estimated section needs for the next operational
period;
      (10)   Advise on current service and support capabilities;
      (11)   Prepare service and support elements of the IAP;
      (12)   Estimate future service and support requirements;
      (13)   Receive incident demobilization plan from planning section;
      (14)   Recommend release of unit resources in conformity with incident
demobilization plan; and
      (15)   Maintain unit activity log.
   (H)   Finance/Administration Section Chief. The Finance/Administration
Section Chief is responsible for all financial, administrative and cost
analysis aspects of the incident. The major responsibilities of the Finance/
Administration Section Chief are:
      (1)   Attend planning meetings as required;
      (2)   Manage all financial aspects of an incident;
      (3)   Provide financial and cost analysis information as requested;
      (4)   Gather pertinent information from briefings with responsible
agencies;
      (5)   Develop the operating plan for the section;
      (6)   Meet with assisting and cooperating agency-representatives as
needed;
      (7)   Ensure that all personnel time records are accurately completed and
processed;
      (8)   Provide financial input to demobilization planning;
      (9)   Ensure that all obligation documents initiated at the incident are
properly prepared and completed; and
      (10)   Maintain unit activity log.
   (I)   Department Directors. City department heads are responsible for
emergency operations within their departments as follows.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Continuing to perform routine day-to-day departmental tasks as
needed;
         (b)   Providing departmental technical/operational response to
disasters;
         (c)   Developing, maintaining and exercising plans for performance of
the disaster functions assigned to that department in this plan; and
         (d)   Providing incident command post representation as required in
this plan or as required by the City Administrator or Emergency Management
Director.
      (2)   Specific.
         (a)   Legal Department.
            1.   Provide legal advice to members of the City Council, City
Administrator and City staff; and
            2.   Prepare emergency ordinances, proclamations and the like, as
necessary.
         (b)   Public Information Officer.
            1.   Provide direction and control of public information through
the preparation and release of official information and statements by and for
city officials;
            2.   Provide response to inquiries by media representatives and
official visitors;
            3.   Provide referral service for inquiries regarding missing
persons, availability of assistance to disaster victims and other related
information;
            4.   Provide technical coordination with the commercial broadcast
media; and
            5.   Augment warning systems.
         (c)   Police Department.
            1.   Provide law enforcement services;
            2.   Provide warnings/evacuations;
            3.   Provide communications;
            4.   Provide traffic management;
            5.   Augment search and rescue; and
            6.   Augment recovery and identification of victims.
         (d)   Fire Department.
            1.   Provide fire service;
            2.   Provide emergency medical services;
            3.   Provide search and rescue;
            4.   Provide recovery and identification of victims;
            5.   Provide radiological hazard assessment and establishes
protection measures to mitigate effects;
            6.   Augment evacuation;
            7.   Augment warning systems; and
            8.   Provide set-up of family emergency shelter and EMS.
         (e)   Codes Department.
            1.   Provide damage assessment/survey;
            2.   Provide documentation for FEMA Flood Insurance Program;
            3.   Provide coordination with the state’s Coastal Council;
            4.   Provide condemnation of damaged structures;
            5.   Augment coordination of utility restoration;
            6.   Augments coordination of access to damaged structures;
            7.   Augment warning systems; and
            8.   Augment evacuation.
         (f)   Public Works Department.
            1.   Provide debris removal and clearing of rights-of-way;
            2.   Provide repair/restoration of water/sewer utility service;
            3.   Provide heavy equipment resources;
            4.   Provide the coordination of utility restoration;
            5.   Provide the coordination of emergency transportation assets;
            6.   Provide engineering services;
            7.   Provide pest control;
            8.   Augment search and rescue;
            9.   Augment damage assessments/surveys;
            10.   Augment fire service operations;
            11.   Augment traffic control; and
            12.   Manage mutual aid sector.
         (g)   Parks and Recreation Department.
            1.   Provide timber removal;
            2.   Augment debris removal and clearing of rights-of-way;
            3.   Augment damage assessment/survey;
            4.   Augment search and rescue;
            5.   Augment heavy equipment needs;
            6.   Augment fire service operations;
            7.   Augment recovery and identification of victims; and
            8.   Augment Fire Department with Family Emergency Shelter.
         (h)   Spring Hill City Hall.
            1.   Provide federal/state DAC/DFO facility;
            2.   Provide emergency shelter (recovery phase only);
            3.   Provide emergency mortuary facility; and
            4.   Provide set up of EOC.
         (i)   Finance Department.
            1.   Provide accounting and financial services for receipt and
disbursement of emergency funds;
            2.   Provide information systems back up and support;
            3.   Provide and develop procedures for the procurement and
availability of supplies, equipment and materials;
            4.   Maintain a list of critical resource vendors; and
            5.   Augment incident command post operations.
         (j)   Human Resources Department.
            1.   Provide coordination of volunteer resources; and
            2.   Augment incident command post operations.
         (k)   Planning Department.
            1.   Augment damage assessment survey;
            2.   Augment coordination with OCRM; and
            3.   Augment Incident Command Post operations.
         (l)   Library. Augment Incident Command Post operations.
VII.   DIRECTION AND CONTROL.
   (A)   Governance. It is provided that this plan is the official emergency
management plan for the city governing all emergency operations.
   (B)   Preservation of records. It is the responsibility of all local
officials to ensure that all public records under their control are preserved
and protected in accordance with state and local laws. Examples include:
ordinances; resolutions; deeds; tax records; building permits; City Council
meeting minutes; and the like.
   (C)   Emergency operations center. During a state of emergency, the city
provides direction and control from the primary EOC which is the Spring Hill
City Hall, 199 Town Center Parkway, Spring Hill, TN 37174. Staff members
assigned duty in the EOC during emergency operations are designated in this
appendix.
   (D)   Alternate emergency operations center. Should relocation of the EOC be
necessary, the alternate EOC is the Fire Station 3, Campbell Station Parkway,
Spring Hill, TN 37174.
   (E)   Relief assistance. In the event of a disaster, the city’s Emergency
Management Director is responsible for the direction and support of all
disaster relief activities.
   (F)   Consumer protection. Consumer complaints pertaining to alleged unfair
or illegal business practices will be referred to the city’s Legal Department.
   (G)   Use of local firms. When disaster assistance activities are carried
out by contract or agreement with private contractors, firms or individuals,
preference will be given to the extent feasible and practicable, to
contractors, firms or individuals residing or doing business primarily within
the city limits.
VIII.   PLAN DEVELOPMENT, MAINTENANCE AND EXECUTION.
   (A)   The city’s Emergency Management Director has the overall
responsibility for emergency planning; coordination of resources; and the
conduct of disaster assistance and recovery activities.
   (B)   City department heads have the responsibility for maintaining internal
plans, SOPs and resource data to ensure prompt and effective disaster response.
   (C)   All departments are responsible for the development and maintenance of
their respective segments of the plan.
   (D)   The Emergency Management Director will maintain and update this plan
as required. Other city officials should recommend changes at any time and
provide updated information as to changes in personnel, resources or assignment
of responsibilities.
   (E)   The plan will be executed upon order of the City Administrator or his
or her designee.
   (F)   This plan applies to all elements of the city government whether
legislative, appointed or volunteer.
   (G)   For training purposes and exercises, the Emergency Management Director
may activate this plan to ensure readiness posture.
IX.   LEGAL BASIS, AUTHORITIES AND MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Robert T. Safford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act of
1988, Public Law 100-707, 42 U.S.C. §§ 5121 et seq.;
   (B)   Tenn. Code Ann. Title 25, Art. 4 et seq.;
   (C)   Tenn. Code Ann. Title 58, Art. 1 et seq.;
   (D)   Robert T. Safford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act of
1988, Public Law 100-707, 42 U.S.C. §§ 5121 et seq.;
   (E)   TN Regulation 58-1, Local Government Preparedness Standards, TN Code
of Regulations; and
   (F)   Tennessee Constitution.
_______________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Rural/Metro Ambulance
Disaster Plan, Spring Hill
   Unless otherwise directed due to unusual circumstances, Rural/Metro-Spring
Hill EMS will report through the established incident command structure as per
the city’s Basic Disaster Plan. Appointment of specific officers and
supervisors will be dictated by this NIMS compatible system and these persons
will ultimately decide what roles will need to be filled for each specific
scenario. However, as a general rule, the following actions will occur based on
the appropriate threat/condition level.
   (A)   OPCON 5. EMS will function according to the established daily routine.
EMS units will respond to all calls for service via the EOC with the pre-
designated ALS unit and render care and transportation for patients as needed.
Additionally, EMS will provide supportive assessments and care for Fire
Department staff members on structure, vehicle or brush fires and will
participate in special event standbys and public education activities.
   (B)   OPCON 4. EMS will continue to function in the same manner as OPCON 5.
Additionally, the EMS Operations Supervisor will be notified of the situation
and other preparatory measures maybe implemented if deemed necessary. Special
event standbys and public education activities may be discontinued if the
possible threat could endanger lives, property or are generally deemed unsafe
in some manner.
   (C)   OPCON 3. EMS will continue to function in the same manner as OPCON 4.
Special event standbys and public education activities will most likely be
discontinued due to the probability of unsafe conditions. The routine, daily
chain of command will be responsible for determining whether or not the
activities should continue in the interest of public and staff safety.
Additionally, the Market General Manager will be notified of the situation and
may determine if further preparedness notifications are warranted based on the
scenario. A third ambulance will be inspected and prepared for service in case
it must be placed into service to meet the community’s needs. The MGM will
determine if notification of other Rural/Metro operations is necessary to
prepare, activate or deploy additional assets.
   (D)   OPCON 2. EMS will continue to function in the same manner as OPCON 3;
provided that, conditions permit such activities. Additionally, EMS will
appoint a staff member(s) to serve on the command staff if needed. If the
imminent threat or command determines it necessary, a third ambulance will be
manned and placed in service to respond to the community’s needs. Additional
staff, units, supplies or equipment may be requested from other Rural/Metro
operations and the MGM or command staff member will determine if activation or
deployment is necessary.
   (E)   OPCON 1. EMS will function solely at the discretion of the incident
command structure. All non-essential activities will cease and all assets will
be focused on the missions assigned through command staff. As needed, incident
command will designate or appoint staging, triage, treatment, transport and
mortuary areas and staff. These sections may be staffed or managed by EMS
members and will function in a NIMS compatible manner. The MGM or EMS staff
member assigned to the command staff will activate and deploy additional assets
from other rural/metro operations as needed. Mutual aid may be requested from
other EMS agencies as needed.
(2011 Code, App. A) (Ord. 08-27, passed 10- -2008)
APPENDIX B: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN
   (A)   Prior to the July 1985 announcement by General Motors Corporation that
it would locate its Saturn automobile manufacturing plant adjacent to the city,
its public facilities were adequate to serve its then population as well-as its
projected growth for a period of at least 20 years as its population-had
remained at or near 1,000 inhabitants for many years. (1980 population: 989;
1986 population: 1,094).
   (B)   The city had, in the late 1970s and early 1980s, made substantial
investments in its infrastructure including the following capital improvements:
      (1)   The construction and installation of its first sanitary sewer
system and the construction of the sewage treatment plant north of the Kedron
Road, several miles outside its then present city limits;
      (2)   The expansion and improvement of its water system including the
construction of present tank located adjacent to the City Hall, the enlargement
of the size of certain water mains and the installation of a pump to fill the
reservoir; and
      (3)   The repaving of all streets damaged by the water and sewer line
construction which included almost every street within the city limits with the
exception of U.S. Highway 31.
   (C)   It had also renegotiated its 1965 contract with the Columbia Board of
Public Utilities which furnishes the city its entire water requirements by
extending it for an additional 40 years from 1981.
   (D)   The size of the city had remained more or less constant since its
initial incorporation in about the year 1838 and its population had actually
decreased since that date. Subsequent to Saturn, the city (in most instances at
the request of the property owners involved) undertook several major annexation
programs as the result of which its pre-Saturn size of approximately 900 acres
is now approximately 3,000 acres. Its 1990 population was 1,465, a 48% increase
since the last U.S. Census of 1980.
   (E)   The residential and some limited commercial and industrial
developments and those proposed or foreseen within the annexed areas have
created demands for additions and expansions to the public facilities and
infrastructure of the city including, but not limited to, an additional fire
hall, additional water storage facilities, the improvement of certain roads,
especially Buckner Road, Kedron Road and Beechcroft Road, the acquisition of
additional police cars and firefighting equipment, fire hydrants and street
lights in new subdivisions, and eventually the construction of its own
facilities to acquire a public water supply for the city, either from
underground sources or Duck River, and the construction and operation of a
water treatment plant as well as the water lines required to connect the
eventual source of water to the treatment plant.
   (F)   Before the Saturn announcement in 1985, the police force of the city
consisted of a full-time City Marshal and one part-time police officer, which
were served by one police car. Since Saturn, the police force has increased to
eight including a Chief, Assistant Chief, Captain and five patrolers, all full-
time. The city now often maintains five police cars. The only other employees
pre-Saturn of the city were a part-time Recorder, an employee who operated the
sewage treatment plant and another employee who supervised the public water
system. The Recorder operated in a small room adjacent to the old fire hall on
McLemore Avenue. Since Saturn, the city work force, besides the police,
includes, in addition to the full-time Recorder, two full-time clerical
employees at City Hall, a Building Inspector, three maintenance employees, a
salaried Fire Chief, a sewage treatment plant supervisor and his or her
assistant, a total of 18. The position of City Judge has also been created and
filled.
   (G)   A new City Hall costing in excess of $1,000,000 has been erected and
it is necessary that it be maintained. A new fire hall has been constructed on
Beechcroft Road which was financed by a loan from the Farmers Home
Administration.
   (H)   The following is a list of the proposed capital improvements along
with their estimated costs required to serve the new developments almost all of
which have developed or will develop in areas annexed to the corporate limits
of the city since July of 1985:
Proposed Improvements and Estimated Costs
1994-1999
Proposed Improvements and Estimated Costs
1994-1999
(1) Street improvements, outside pre-1985 city limits
   (a) Kedron Road improvement                                   $500,000
   (b) Buckner Road improvement                                  $100,000
   (c) Buckner Lane improvement                                  $50,000
   (d) Moore Lane improvement                                    $200,000
   (e) Depot Street improvement                                  $100,00
                                                                   $950,000
(2) New water storage facilities
   (a) Williamson County tank                                    $200,000
   (b) Kedron Road tank                                          $200,000
                                                                   $400,000
(3) New fire hall                                                   $100,000
(4) New fire equipment (pumper, tanker truck, rescue equipment
vehicle, extraction equipment, gear for additional firefighters and $375,000
the like)
(5) Additional police cars                                          $50,000
(6) Additional public works equipment                               $130,000
(7) Water supply and treatment plant                                $2,000,000
(8) Upgrading sanitary sewer system                                 $200,000
TOTAL ESTIMATED COSTS                                               $4,205,000
 
   (I)   As stated in the introductory paragraphs, prior to July 1985, the
public facilities of the city were adequate for its purposes for the next 20
years. All of the foregoing facilities, constructed and proposed, and the
additional personnel are required because of developments since the Saturn
announcement almost all of which are in areas annexed to the city since that
time. It is anticipated that the costs of the proposed facilities will be paid
at least in part by the privilege tax on new construction to be imposed by an
ordinance and any other impact fees that may be imposed. In order to construct
some of the improvements it is anticipated that funds may be borrowed on the
full faith and credit of the city and that the taxes herein levied and any
impact fees imposed will be used as partial repayment of such indebtedness. A
portion of these costs will, of necessity, be born by the inhabitants of the
city located within its old corporate limits who will be required to help
defray the cost of the facilities which would not have been required, except
for the new developments cost of which are outside the old corporate limits.
Where the revenue realized from the privilege taxes to be imposed and any other
impact fees that might be imposed are inadequate to meet the payments on any
future indebtedness, the deficiency will be paid by the general revenues of the
city.
   (J)   The proposed improvements will be undertaken as the revenues of the
city allow. The initial priority of the projects is in the order set forth
above. The Board of Mayor and Aldermen may, at any time, by appropriate notion
or resolution, change the priority of the projected capital improvements.
(2011 Code, § App. B)
APPENDIX C: TABLE OF WATER/WASTEWATER LOADS
   (A)   Projected water use and wastewater loads of developments shall be
determined using the following standards as a guide:
Drainage Facility Flow in GPD Design Units
Drainage Facility                    Flow in GPD Design Units
Apartment - Two Bedroom              300         per unit
Apartment - Three Bedroom            350         per unit
Mobile Home Parks                    300         per mobile home space
Single Family Dwelling               350         per unit
Assembly Hall (No Food Service)      2           per seat
Beauty Shop, Styling Salon           200         per station
Bowling Alleys (no food service)     75          per lane
Car Wash (stand-alone)               2500        per bay
Child Care Center                    10          per child and adult
Churches (small)                     5           per sanctuary seat
Churches (large with kitchen)        7           per sanctuary seat
Country Clubs                        50          per member
Dance Halls (No Food Service)        2           per person
                                     75          per doctor
Doctors/Dentists                     20          per employee
                                     10          per patient
Drive-In Theaters                    5           per car space
Factories (no showers)               25          per employee per 8-hour shift
Factories (with showers)             35          per employee -per 8-hour shift
Hospitals (no residents) (with food  300         per bed
service)
Hotels                               130         per unit
Institutions (residents) (with food  100         per person
service)
Laundries (coin-operated)            400         per standard size machine
Nursing and Rest Homes (with food    200         per patient
service)                             100         per resident employee
                                     50          per non-resident employee
Office Buildings                     25          per employee
Office/warehouse space               0.1         per square foot
Retail Store                         20          per employee
Restaurant - Ordinary (not 24-hour)  35          per seat
Restaurant - 24-Hour                 50          per seat
Restaurant - Banquet Rooms           5           per seat
Restaurant - Along Freeway           100         per seat
Restaurant - Tavern (very little     35          per seat
food service)
Restaurant -Curb Service (drive-in)  50          per car space
Service Stations                     1000        Per fuel island
Schools -Elementary (with food       15          per pupil
service)
Schools -High and Junior High (with  20          per pupil
food service)
Shopping Centers (no food service or 0.2         per sq. ft of floor space
laundries)
Swimming Pool                        10          per swimmer
Theaters, auditorium type            5           per seat
Youth and Recreation Camps (w/food   50          per person
service)
 
   (B)   In the event that proposed use(s) are not covered in the above list,
it shall be the responsibility of the City Engineer, upon consultation with the
state’s Department of Health or other such firm, individual or agency as may be
appropriate, or to make such interpretation of the standards as may be
required.
(2011 Code, App. C) (Ord. 21-14, passed 11-15-2021)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Tennessee Code Annotated
References to 2011 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO TENNESSEE CODE ANNOTATED
Tenn. Code Ann. Section Code Section
Tenn. Code Ann. Section   Code Section
2-6-205                   1-107
Title 2, Ch. 10           Title 1, Ch. 6
2-10-122                  Title 1, Ch. 6
2-10-124                  Title 1, Ch. 6
6-2-201                   11-909
6-2-201(14)               5-504
6-2-201(15)               5-504
Title 6, Ch. 3            Title 1, Ch. 1;
                          Title 1, Ch. 2
6-3-104                   1-104
6-4-101                   1-401;
                          1-402
6-4-401(b)                1-501
6-4-402                   5-101
6-54-107                  Title 1, Ch. 6
6-54-108                  Title 1, Ch. 6
6-54-501 et seq.          7-202
                          12-101;
                          12-201;
6-54-501 through 6-54-506 12-401;
                          12-601;
                          12-701;  
                          13-101
6-54-501 through 6-54-513 12-501
                          7-202;
                          12-103;
                          12-203;
6-54-502                  12-403;
                          12-503;
                          12-603;
                          12-703;  
                          13-104
6-54-502(c)               7-202
6-54-601                  7-401
6-55-201 through 6-55-206 5-202
7-63-101 et seq.          15-701
8-21-401                  3-202
8-47-101 et seq.          Title 1, Ch. 6
8-50-501 et seq.          Title 1, Ch. 6
Title 9, Ch. 21           18-504
12-4-101                  Title 1, Ch. 6
12-4-102                  Title 1, Ch. 6
12-9-101 et seq.          7-401
Title 13                  14-102
13-4-101                  14-101
13-7-601 et seq.          20-501
13-7-603                  20-506;
                          20-509
13-7-603(a)               20-508
13-19-106                 12-601
16-18-302                 15-101
16-18-307                 3-402
Title 25, Art. 4 et seq.  App. A
Title 29, Ch. 9           3-209
29-9-108(a)(3)            3-208;
                          3-209
33-10-203                 11-101
38-9-105                  11-806
39-13-512                 9-601
39-15-502                 9-601
39-15-503                 9-601
39-15-504                 9-601
39-15-505                 9-601
39-15-506                 9-601
39-15-511                 9-601
39-15-522                 9-601
39-16-101 et seq.         Title 1, Ch. 6
39-16-401 et seq.         Title 1, Ch. 6
39-17-901(10)             9-601
39-17-1003                9-601
39-17-1004                9-601
39-17-1005                9-601
Title 40, Ch. 6           3-301
40-24-104                 6-203
40-24-105(e)              3-210
Title 55, Ch. 1           15-119
55-4-101 through 55-4-128 15-101
55-4-130 through 55-4-133 15-101
55-4-135 through 55-4-138 15-101
55-7-116                  Title 15, Ch. 1
Title 55, Ch. 8           15-801
55-8-101 through 55-8-131 15-101
55-8-133 through 55-8-180 15-101
55-8-143                  15-401;
                          15-509
55-8-152                  15-303
55-8-160(a)(15)           15-705
55-8-181 through 55-8-191 15-101
55-8-193                  15-101
55-8-199                  15-101
55-8-207                  15-101
Title 55, Ch. 9           15-102
55-9-107                  15-101
55-9-202                  15-101
55-9-401 through 55-9-408 15-101
55-9-601 through 55-9-606 15-101
Title 55, Ch. 10          15-801
55-10-101 et seq.         Title 15, Ch. 1
55-10-106                 15-801
55-10-307                 Title 15, Ch. 1
55-10-401                 Title 15, Ch. 1
55-10-501                 Title 15, Ch. 1
Title 55, Ch. 12          9-403;
                          15-801
55-12-139                 15-101
55-21-108(b)              15-705
Title 55, Ch. 50          15-119
55-50-351                 15-101
56-38-102                 16-301
Title 57                  Title 8, Ch. 1;
                          8-101
Title 57, Ch. 3 or 4      8-102
57-3-208(g)               8-124
57-3-404(f)               8-124
57-3-501                  8-115
Title 57, Ch. 4           8-116,
                          8-124
57-4-301                  8-125
                          8-101;
Title 57, Ch. 5           8-102;
                          8-115
57-5-101                  8-203
57-5-101(b)               8-102
57-5-105                  8-210
57-5-606                  8-223
57-5-608                  8-223
Title 57, Ch. 6           5-401
Title 58, Art. 1 et seq.  App. A
58-2-601 et seq.          7-401
Title 64, Ch. 2           20-204
67-1-701                  5-201
67-1-702                  5-201
67-1-801                  5-201
67-4-701 et seq.          5-301
                          9-707 ;
67-4-1401 et seq.         20-503;
                          20-505;
                          20-508
67-4-1402                 9-707
67-5-2005                 5-202
67-5-2010(b)              5-202
Title 68, Ch. 102         7-306
68-8-101 through 68-8-114 10-201
68-8-108                  10-203
68-8-109                  10-203
68-14-302                 20-501
68-14-502                 20-501
68-102-108                7-306
68-104-101 et seq.        7-701
68-211-903                2-101
68-212-101                15-608
68-221-101 et seq.        18-302
68-221-711                18-307
68-221-1101 et seq.       18-501
68-221-1112               18-512
Title 68, Ch. 102         7-307
                          
 
REFERENCES TO 2011 CODE
2011 Code Section 2017 Code Section
2011 Code Section 2017 Code Section
1-101             1-101
1-102             1-102
1-103             1-103
1-104             1-104
1-105             1-105
1-106             1-106
1-201             1-201
1-202             1-202
1-301             1-301
1-401             1-401
1-402             1-402
1-403             1-403 
1-501             1-501
1-601             1-601
1-602             1-602
1-603             1-603
1-604             1-604
1-605             1-605
1-606             1-606
1-607             1-607
1-608             1-608
1-609             1-609
1-610             1-610
1-611             1-611
2-101             2-101
2-201             2-201
2-202             2-202
2-203             2-203
2-204             2-204
2-205             2-205
2-401             2-401
2-402             2-402
2-403             2-403
2-404             2-404
2-405             2-405
2-406             2-406
2-407             2-407
2-408             2-408
2-409             2-409
3-101             3-101
3-201             3-201
3-202             3-202
3-203             3-203
3-204             3-204
3-205             3-205
3-206             3-206
3-207             3-207
3-301             3-301
3-302             3-302
3-303             3-303
3-401             3-401
3-402             3-402
3-403             3-403
4-101             4-101
4-102             4-102
4-103             4-103
4-104             4-104
4-105             4-105
4-106             4-106
4-301             4-301
4-302             4-302
4-303             4-303
4-304             4-304
5-101             5-101
5-102             5-102
5-201             5-201
5-202             5-202
5-301             5-301
5-302             5-302
5-401             5-401
5-501             5-501
5-502             5-502
5-503             5-503
5-504             5-504
5-505             5-505
5-506             5-506
5-507             5-507
5-508             5-508
5-509             5-509
5-510             5-510
5-511             5-511
5-512             5-512
5-513             5-513
5-514             5-514
5-515             5-515
5-516             5-516
5-601             5-601
5-602             5-602
5-603             5-603
5-604             5-604
5-605             5-605
5-606             5-606
5-607             5-607
5-608             5-608
5-609             5-609
5-610             5-610
5-611             5-611
5-612             5-612
5-613             5-613
5-614             5-614
5-615             5-615 
6-101             6-101
6-102             6-102
6-103             6-103
6-104             6-104
6-105             6-105
6-106             6-106
6-107             6-107
6-108             6-108
6-201             6-201
6-202             6-202
6-203             6-203
7-101             7-101
7-201             7-202
7-202             7-203
7-203             7-205
7-205             7-209
7-206             7-210
7-207             7-211
7-208             7-212
7-301             7-301
7-302             7-302
7-303             7-303
7-304             7-304
7-306             7-305
7-307             7-306
7-308             7-307
7-401             7-401
7-502             7-501
7-503             7-502
7-504             7-503
7-602             7-602
7-701             7-702
7-702             7-711
7-703             7-712
8-101             8-101
8-102             8-102
8-103             8-103
8-104             8-104
8-105             8-105
8-106             8-106
8-107             8-107
8-108             8-108
8-109             8-109
8-110             8-110
8-111             8-111
8-112             8-112
8-113             8-113
8-114             8-114
8-115             8-115
8-116             8-116
8-117             8-117
8-118             8-118
8-119             8-119
8-120             8-120
8-121             8-121
8-122             8-122
8-123             8-123
8-124             8-125
8-125             8-127
8-201             8-201
8-202             8-202
8-203             8-203
8-204             8-204
8-205             8-205
8-206             8-206
8-207             8-207
8-208             8-208
8-209             8-209
8-210             8-210
8-211             8-211
8-212             8-212
8-213             8-213
8-214             8-214
8-215             8-215
8-216             8-216
8-217             8-217
8-218             8-218
8-219             8-219
8-220             8-220
8-221             8-221
8-222             8-222
8-223             8-223
8-224             8-224
8-225             8-225
8-226             8-226
8-227             8-227
8-228             8-228
8-229             8-229
8-230             8-230
9-101             9-101
9-201             9-201
9-202             9-202
9-203             9-203 
9-204             9-204
9-205             9-205
9-206             9-206
9-207             9-207
9-208             9-208
9-209             9-209
9-210             9-210
9-211             9-211
9-212             9-212
9-213             9-213
9-214             9-214
9-301             9-301
9-302             9-302
9-303             9-303
9-304             9-304
9-401             9-401
9-402             9-402
9-403             9-403
9-404             9-404
9-405             9-405
9-406             9-406
9-407             9-407
9-408             9-408
9-409             9-409
9-410             9-410
9-411             9-411
9-412             9-412
9-413             9-413
9-414             9-414
9-415             9-415
9-501             9-501
9-601             9-601
9-602             9-602
9-603             9-603
9-601             9-604
10-101            10-101
10-102            10-102
10-103            10-103
10-104            10-104
10-105            10-105
10-106            10-106
10-107            10-107
10-108            10-108
13-101            10-109
10-201            10-201
10-202            10-202
10-203            10-203
10-204            10-204
10-205            10-205
10-206            10-206
10-207            10-207
11-101            11-101
11-102            11-102
11-201            11-201
11-301            11-301
11-401            11-401
11-402            11-402
11-501            11-501
11-502            11-502
11-503            11-503
11-504            11-504
11-505            11-505
11-601            11-601
11-602            11-602
11-701            11-701
11-702            11-702
11-703            11-703
11-704            11-704
11-801            11-801
11-802            11-802
11-803            11-803
11-804            11-804
11-901            11-901
11-902            11-902
11-903            11-903
11-904            11-904
11-905            11-905
11-906            11-906
11-907            11-907
11-908            11-908
11-909            11-909
11-910            11-910
11-911            11-911
12-101            12-101
12-102            12-102
12-103            12-103
12-104            12-104
12-201            12-201
12-202            12-202
12-203            12-203
12-204            12-204
12-301            12-301
12-302            12-302
12-303            12-303
12-304            12-304
12-305            12-305
12-306            12-306
12-307            12-307
12-308            12-308
12-309            12-309
12-310            12-310
12-311            12-311
12-312            12-312
12-313            12-313
12-401            12-401
12-402            12-402
12-403            12-403
12-404            12-404
12-501            12-501
12-502            12-502
12-503            12-503
12-504            12-504
12-601            12-601
12-602            12-602
12-603            12-603
12-604            12-604
12-801            12-801
12-901            12-901
12-902            12-902
12-903            12-903
12-904            12-904
12-905            12-905
12-701            13-101
12-702            13-102
13-103            13-103
13-102            13-103
13-105            13-103
13-107            13-103
13-101            13-103
12-704            13-104
12-704            13-105
13-201            13-201
13-301            13-301
13-302            13-302
13-303            13-303
13-304            13-304
13-305            13-305
13-306            13-306
13-401            13-401
13-402            13-402
13-403            13-403
13-404            13-404
13-405            13-405
13-406            13-406
13-407            13-407
13-408            13-408
13-409            13-409
14-101            14-101
14-102            14-102
14-103            14-103
14-202            14-202
15-102            15-102
15-103            15-103
15-104            15-104
15-105            15-105
15-106            15-106
15-107            15-107
15-108            15-108
15-109            15-109
15-110            15-110
15-111            15-111
15-112            15-112
15-113            15-113
15-114            15-114
15-115            15-115
15-116            15-116
15-117            15-117
15-118            15-118
15-119            15-119
15-120            15-120
15-121            15-121
15-122            15-122
15-123            15-123
15-124            15-124
15-201            15-201
15-202            15-202
15-203            15-203
15-204            15-204
15-301            15-301
15-302            15-302
15-303            15-303
15-304            15-304
15-305            15-305
15-401            15-401
15-402            15-402
15-403            15-403
15-404            15-404
15-405            15-405
15-501            15-501
15-502            15-502
15-503            15-503
15-504            15-504
15-505            15-505
15-506            15-506
15-507            15-507
15-508            15-508
15-509            15-509
15-601            15-601
15-602            15-602
15-603            15-603
15-604            15-604
15-605            15-605
15-606            15-606
15-607            15-607
15-701            15-701
15-702            15-702
15-703            15-703
15-704            15-704
15-705            15-705
15-801            15-801
16-101            16-101
16-102            16-102
16-103            16-103
16-104            16-104
16-105            16-105
16-106            16-106
16-107            16-107
16-108            16-108
16-109            16-109
16-110            16-110
16-111            16-111
16-112            16-112
16-113            16-113
16-114            16-114
16-201            16-201
16-202            16-202
16-203            16-203
16-204            16-204
16-205            16-205
16-206            16-206
16-207            16-207
16-208            16-208
16-209            16-209 
16-210            16-210
16-211            16-211
16-301            16-301
16-302            16-302
16-303            16-303
16-304            16-304
16-305            16-305
16-306            16-306
16-307            16-307
16-308            16-308
16-309            16-309
16-310            16-310
16-311            16-311
16-312            16-312
16-313            16-313
17-101            17-101
17-102            17-102
17-103            17-103
17-104            17-104
17-105            17-105
17-106            17-106
17-107            17-107
17-108            17-108
17-109            17-109
17-110            17-110
17-111            17-111
17-112            17-112
17-113            17-113
17-201            17-201
17-202            17-202
17-203            17-203
17-204            17-204
17-205            17-205
17-206            17-206
17-207            17-207
17-208            17-208
17-209            17-209
17-210            17-210
17-211            17-211
17-212            17-212
17-213            17-213
17-214            17-214
18-101            18-101
18-102            18-102
18-103            18-103
18-104            18-104
18-105            18-105
18-106            18-106
18-107            18-107
18-108            18-108
18-109            18-109
18-110            18-110
18-111            18-111
18-112            18-112
18-113            18-113
18-110            18-114
18-115            18-115
18-116            18-116
18-117            18-117
18-118            18-118
18-119            18-119
18-120            18-120
18-121            18-121
18-122            18-122
18-123            18-123
18-124            18-124
18-125            18-125
18-126            18-126
18-127            18-127
18-128            18-128
18-129            18-129
18-130            18-130
18-131            18-131
18-132            18-132
18-133            18-133
18-134            18-134
18-135            18-135
18-136            18-136
18-137            18-137
18-138            18-138
18-139            18-139
18-140            18-140
18-141            18-141
18-142            18-142
18-143            18-143
18-144            18-144
18-145            18-145
18-146            18-146
18-147            18-147
18-149            18-149
18-150            18-150
18-151            18-151
18-152            18-152
18-153            18-153
18-154            18-154
18-155            18-155
18-156            18-156
18-157            18-157
18-158            18-158
18-159            18-159
18-160            18-160
18-161            18-161
18-162            18-162
18-163            18-163
18-164            18-164
18-165            18-165
18-166            18-166
18-167            18-167
18-168            18-168
18-169            18-169
18-170            18-170
18-171            18-171
18-172            18-172
18-173            18-173
18-174            18-174
18-175            18-175
18-176            18-176
18-177            18-177
18-178            18-178
18-179            18-179
18-180            18-180
18-201            18-201
18-202            18-202
18-203            18-203
18-204            18-204
18-205            18-205
18-206            18-206
18-207            18-207
18-208            18-208
18-209            18-209
18-210            18-210
18-211            18-211
18-212            18-212
18-213            18-213
18-214            18-214
18-215            18-215
18-301            18-301
18-302            18-302
18-303            18-303
18-304            18-304
18-305            18-305
18-306            18-306
18-307            18-307
18-308            18-308
18-309            18-309
18-310            18-310
18-311            18-311
18-312            18-312
18-313            18-313
18-314            18-314
18-315            18-315
18-316            18-316
18-317            18-317
18-318            18-318
18-319            18-319
18-320            18-320
18-401            18-401
18-402            18-402
18-403            18-403
18-404            18-404
18-405            18-405
18-406            18-406
18-407            18-407
18-408            18-408
18-409            18-409
18-410            18-410
18-411            18-411
18-412            18-412
18-413            18-413
18-501            18-501
18-502            18-502
18-503            18-503
18-504            18-504
18-505            18-505
18-506            18-506
18-507            18-507
18-508            18-508
18-509            18-509
18-510            18-510
18-511            18-511
18-512            18-512
18-513            18-513
18-514            18-514
19-101            19-101
19-201            19-201
20-101            20-101
20-102            20-102
20-103            20-103
20-104            20-104
20-105            20-105
20-106            20-106
20-107            20-107
20-108            20-108
20-109            20-109
20-110            20-110
20-111            20-111
20-112            20-112
20-201            20-201
20-202            20-202
20-203            20-203
20-204            20-204
20-205            20-205
20-206            20-206
20-301            20-301
20-302            20-302
20-303            20-303
App. A            App. A
App. B            App. B
App. C            App. C
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
97-20    12- -1997   18-109
01-37    9- -2001    14-202
01-48    12- -2001   1-105
01-50    12- -2001   15-305
01-51    1- -2002    15-124
02-01    2- -2002    10-101
02-06    4- -2002    13-102;
                     13-103
02-21    9- -2002    1-103
                     7-702;
02-25    10- -2002   7-711;
                     7-712
02-26    10- -2002   20-202
02-34    10- -2002   8-226
03-03    2- -2003    7-209
                     8-210;
03-28    10- -2003   8-212;
                     8-222
03-40    1- -2004    7-209
04-05    5- -2004    7-212
04-10    5- -2004    8-223
04-13    6- -2004    1-105
04-28    11- -2004   8-107
06-05    3- -2006    18-401—
                     18-413
06-35    5- -2006    5-607
06-37    5- -2006    8-226
06-45    9- -2006    18-301—
                     18-320
06-78    11- -2006   11-602
06-79    12- -2006   16-301—
                     16-313
07-03    3- -2007    1-601—
                     1-611
07-09    3- -2007    1-102
07-01    4- -2007    2-401—
                     2-409
07-28    7- -2007    1-106
07-29    7- -2007    18-108
07-26    8- -2007    8-222
07-48    12- -2007   18-108
08-16    2- -2008    11-401;
                     11-402
08-23    7- -2008    15-606;
                     15-705
09-12    3- -2009    15-801
                     7-202;
                     12-101;
                     12-201;
09-14    4- -2009    12-202;
                     12-302;
                     12-401;
                     12-501;
                     12-601
09-21    6- -2009    8-216
09-27    7- -2009    18-114
                     7-202;
                     12-101;
                     12-201;
09-25    8- -2009    12-302;
                     12-401;
                     12-501;
                     12-601
09-39    12- -2009   18-501—
                     18-514
09-42    - -2009     18-508
10-02    2-16-2010   18-111
10-05    3- -2010    18-127
10-07    3-15-2010   17-203
10-09    4-19-2010   18-111
10-16    6-21-2010   18-109
10-25    10-18-2010  2-402
11-07    5-16-2011   18-111
11-08    6-20-2011   8-222
11-11    10-17-2011  7-209
11-15    10-17-2011  15-706
11-22    1-17-2012   1-402
12-10    6-18-2012   11-805
12-17    8-20-2012   8-216
12-20    1-22-2013   18-108
12-21    1-22-2013   15-608
                     2-201;
13-05    2-19-2013   2-202;
                     2-204
13-06    3-18-2013   4-201
13-07    3-18-2013   20-401
13-10    5-20-2013   11-402
13-12    5-20-2013   9-305
13-16    6-17-2013   15-608
                     7-202;
                     12-101;
                     12-201;
13-19    10-21-2013  12-302;
                     12-401;
                     12-501;
                     12-601
13-25    11-18-2013  13-101—
                     13-105
13-29    11-18-2013  9-305
13-30    12-16-2013  10-101—
                     10-109
14-04    2-18-2014   12-401
14-07    4-21-2014   11-402
14-09    4-21-2014   8-103;
                     8-104
14-10    4-21-2014   12-402
14-13    5-19-2014   15-705
14-17    5-19-2014   3-209
14-18    5-19-2014   3-208
14-15    6-16-2014   15-306
14-21    8-18-2014   1-107
14-25    9-15-2014   14-101
15-04    12-21-2015  5-501—
                     5-520
15-33    12-21-2015  15-604
15-34    1-19-2016   15-608
16-13    7-18-2016   11-402
16-16    9-29-2016   15-125
17-15    9-18-2017   5-103
17-16    9-18-2017   Adopting Ordinance
                     2-201;
17-20    12-18-2017  2-204;
                     2-205
18-08    3-19-2018   15-306
18-11    8-20-2018   12-402;
                     12-601
18-21    8-20-2018   14-201
18-25    10-15-2018  15-101
18-27    11-19-2018  16-311
18-28A   12-17-2018  7-701—
                     7-712
19-03    3-18-2019   15-126
19-04    2-19-2019   Adopting Ordinance
19-05    3-18-2019   11-805
19-09    4-15-2019   14-201
                     5-501—
19-11A   4-15-2019   5-517;
                     5-520;
                     5-607
19-14    5-20-2019   18-108
19-20    9-16-2019   14-201
19-28    9-16-2019   14-201
19-30    9-16-2019   18-111
19-31    9-16-2019   18-111
19-32    10-21-2019  7-209;
                     18-108
19-33    10-21-2019  18-109
19-35    11-18-2019  3-210
                     17-212;
19-36    11-18-2019  18-107;
                     18-127;
                     18-512
20-02    5-18-2020   7-601,
                     7-602
20-08    6-15-2020   Adopting Ordinance
                     17-105;
20-12    8-17-2020   17-202;
                     17-203
20-14    9-21-2020   11-806
                     7-202;
                     7-209;
                     12-101;
                     12-201;
                     12-302;
20-16    9-21-2020   12-401;
                     12-402;
                     12-501;
                     12-601;
                     12-602;
                     12-701—
                     12-704
20-17  10-19-2020  4-201
20-18    10-19-2020  4-401
21-01    1-19-2021   1-101
21-12    6-21-2021   Adopting Ordinance
                     18-105,
                     18-131,
21-14    11-15-2021  18-132,
                     18-146—
                     18-151,
                     App. C
21-19B   8-16-2021   9-701—
                     9-712
21-22    12-20-2021  8-201—
                     8-230
21-23    10-18-2021  1-101;
                     1-102
21-24    10-18-2021  18-145
21-28    11-15-2021  14-101
                     8-101;
21-30    12-20-2021  8-102;
                     8-105—
                     8-127
22-02    2-7-2022    4-201
22-03B   2-22-2022   5-607
22-04    2-22-2022   5-102
22-05    3-7-2022    8-107
22-07    5-2-2022    18-108,
                     18-109
22-09    4-18-2022   2-402
22-11    6-6-2022    13-401—
                     13-418
22-16    7-5-2022    2-301—
                     2-306
22-17    6-20-2022   3-102
23-01    1-17-2023   Adopting Ordinance
                     7-101;
                     7-201—
                     7-213;
                     7-301—
                     7-307;
                     7-401;
                     7-501—
                     7-504;
23-02    3-6-2023    7-601—
                     7-603;
                     7-701—
                     7-712;
                     7-801—
                     7-811;
                     7-901—
                     7-908;
                     7-1001—
                     7-1003
23-04    5-1-2023    18-508
23-15    10-2-2023   4-401—
                     4-409
                     7-101;
                     7-201—
                     7-213;
                     7-301—
                     7-307;
                     7-401;
                     7-501—
                     7-504;
23-18    11-20-2023  7-601—
                     7-603;
                     7-701—
                     7-712;
                     7-801—
                     7-811;
                     7-901—
                     7-908;
                     7-1001—
                     7-1003
23-21    12-4-2023   5-104
24-01    4-1-2024    14-201
24-05    5-20-2024   11-402
24-06    5-20-2024   15-123
24-07    6-3-2024    18-111
24-08  6-3-2024    18-111
24-09    6-3-2024    18-108
24-10    6-3-2024    18-109
                     7-101;
                     7-201—
                     7-213;
                     7-301—
                     7-307;
                     7-401;
                     7-501—
                     7-504;
24-16    9-3-2024    7-601—
                     7-603;
                     7-701—
                     7-712;
                     7-801—
                     7-811;
                     7-901—
                     7-908;
                     7-1001—
                     7-1003
24-17    9-3-2024    Adopting Ordinance
25-02    2-3-2025    20-501—
                     20-510
25-14    6-2-2025    14-201
                    
 
