VILLAGE OF BALD HEAD ISLAND,
NORTH CAROLINA
Published by Order of the Village Council
Current with legislation passed through 10-17-2025
Supplement No. 18
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
CURRENT OFFICIALS
of the VILLAGE OF
BALD HEAD ISLAND, NORTH CAROLINA
________
Peter Quinn
Mayor
________
Scott Gardner
Mayor Pro Tempore
________
Emily Hill
Scott Thomas
Virginia White
Village Council
________
K. Chris McCall
Village Manager
________
Charles S. Baldwin IV
Village Attorney
________
Darcy Sperry
Village Clerk
PREFACE
This Code constitutes a codification of the general and permanent ordinances of
the Village of Bald Head Island, North Carolina.
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the ordinances
adopted by the village council. The source of each section is included in the
history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a
note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with
the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the
back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of any ordinance included
herein.
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order,
and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate
usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to
relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations
and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of
this Code.
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system
used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of
two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter
number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section
within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and
the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is
identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted
in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example,
if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between
sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered
6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in
the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the
subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article
embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new
article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved
chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of
chapters is maintained when including new chapters.
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to
the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of
the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the
page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the
left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an
appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates
the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of
ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their
corresponding prefixes:
CHARTER                   CHT:1
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1
CODE                      CD1:1
CODE APPENDIX             CDA:1
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES   CCT:1
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1
CHARTER INDEX             CHTi:1
CODE INDEX                CDi:1
 
Indexes 
   The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular
item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay
phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language
generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous
cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to
direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested.
Looseleaf Supplements 
   A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and
supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication
will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly
edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will
be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for
the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages.
   Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon
the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then
become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted
according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the
publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to
avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and
filed for historical reference purposes.
Acknowledgments 
   This publication was under the direct supervision of Jan Shekitka, Senior
Code Attorney, and Catherine Ponson, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation,
Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the
publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the
project.
   The publisher is most grateful to Alina Medina, Village Clerk, for her
cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication.
It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code
of Ordinances which will make the active law of the village readily accessible
to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day
administration of the village's affairs.
Copyright 
   All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by American Legal
Publishing Corporation and the Village of Bald Head Island, North Carolina.
Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of
contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes;
cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative
table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or
reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of
American Legal Publishing Corporation and the Village of Bald Head Island,
North Carolina.
      © Copyrighted material.
      American Legal Publishing Corporation and the Village of Bald Head
Island, North Carolina. 2020. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 2008-0701
   AN ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF BALD HEAD ISLAND, NORTH CAROLINA AMENDING
ORDINANCE NO. 2008-0701
   WHEREAS, the Village Council of the Village of Bald Head Island, North
Carolina determined it to be in the best interest of the Village and public
administration for the Village Ordinances to be organized by subject matter and
compiled in a Code of Ordinances; and
   WHEREAS, the Village Council previously passed Ordinance No. 2006-0901 with
respect to codification of Village Ordinances and repeal of uncodified
Ordinances; and
   WHEREAS, Ordinance No. 2006-0903 provided for the repeal of uncodified
Ordinances to occur two (2) years from the September 15, 2006 adoption date of
Ordinance No. 2006-0901; and
   WHEREAS, work is ongoing on the codification of the Village’s Ordinances and
it is in the best interest of the Village and public administration for the two
(2) year repeal set forth in Ordinance No. 2006-0901 to be extended for an
additional two (2) year period.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE VILLAGE OF BALD HEAD ISLAND, NORTH
CAROLINA:
   Section 1. The two (2) year period for the repeal of Pre-existing Ordinances
set forth in Sections 2 and 3 of Ordinance No. 2006-0901 is hereby extended for
an additional two-year period, so that the effective date of repeal is the 15th
day of September, 2010.
   Section 2. Except as expressly amended herein, Ordinance No. 2006-0901 is
ratified and reaffirmed.
Passed and adopted by the Village of Bald Head Island Council, this the 18th
day of July, 2008.
                     BY:  /S/
                      LAWRENCE LAMMERT, Mayor
ATTEST:
/S/
Joy Barrow Davis, Village Clerk
1st Reading:   June 13, 2008
2nd Reading:   July 18, 2008
Board Action    Unanimous 5 - 0
ORDINANCE NO. 2010-0901
   AN ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF BALD HEAD ISLAND, NORTH CAROLINA, RESPECTING
CODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES AND AMENDING ORDINANCES NOS. 2008-0701 AND 2006-0903
   WHEREAS, the Village Council of the Village of Bald Head Island, North
Carolina, determined it to be in the best interest of the Village and public
administration for the Village Ordinances to be organized by subject matter and
compiled in a Code of Ordinances; and
   WHEREAS, Village Ordinance No. 2006-0903 (Exhibit “A” hereto) adopted a Code
entitled “Code of Ordinances, Village of Bald Head Island, North Carolina,”
published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of Chapters 1 through 32;
and
   WHEREAS, Municipal Code Corporation subsequently prepared Supplements 1 and
2 to the Code and the Village wishes to adopt same; and
   WHEREAS, Village Ordinance No. 2006-0903 and Ordinance No. 2008-0701
(Exhibit “B” hereto) provided for the repeal on September 15, 2010, of certain
uncodified Pre-existing Ordinances adopted on or before September 15, 2006; and
   WHEREAS, work is ongoing on the codification of the Village Ordinances and
it is in the best interest of the Village and public administration for
uncodified ordinances not to be repealed; and
   WHEREAS, in several instances, Ordinance No. 2008-701 incorrectly referred
to Ordinance No. 2006- 0903 as Ordinance No. 2006-0901 and the Village Council
wishes to correct same; and
   WHEREAS, American Legal Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, has completed the
Third Supplement to the Code of Ordinances and the Village Council wishes to
adopt the same.
   NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE VILLAGE OF BALD HEAD ISLAND, NORTH
CAROLINA:
   Section 1. Ordinance No. 2008-0701 is hereby amended so that all references
to 2006-0901 shall refer to 2006-0903.
   Section 2. Supplements 1 and 2 to the Village Code of Ordinances as
submitted by Municipal Code Corporation are hereby adopted by reference as if
set out in their entirety.
   Section 3. Such Supplements shall be deemed published as of the date hereof
and the Village Clerk is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such
Supplements into the copy of the Ordinances kept on file at Village Hall.
   Section 4. Supplement 3 to the Village Code of Ordinances as submitted by
American Legal Corporation of Cincinnati, Ohio, is hereby adopted by reference
as if set out in its entirety.
   Section 5. Such Supplement shall be deemed published as of the date hereof
and the Village Clerk is hereby authorized and ordered to insert such
Supplements into the copy of the Ordinances kept on file at Village Hall.
   Section 6. The repeal of certain Pre-existing Ordinances set forth in
Ordinances Nos. 2006-0903 and 2008-0701 to occur September 15, 2010, is
rescinded and no Pre-existing Ordinances or other Ordinances shall be repealed
pursuant to Ordinances Nos. 2006-0903 and 2008-0701.
   Section 7. Ordinances Nos. 2006-0903 and 2008-0701 are amended as aforesaid
and any inconsistent provision thereof is rescinded and shall be of no effect.
Passed and adopted by the Village Council of the Village of Bald Head Island
upon first introduction by a supermajority of not less than four Council
members on this the 10th day of September, 2010.
                     BY:  /S/
                      J. Andrew Sayre, Mayor
ATTEST:
/S/
Debra C. Talbert, Village Clerk
                        [Village Seal]
PART I
CHARTER*
*   Editors Note: herein is the Charter of the Village of Bald Head Island,
N.C., being chapter 324 of the Session Laws of 1997, as adopted by the General
Assembly on July 24, 1997, and effective on the same date. Amendments to the
original Charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended
provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains
unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected
without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings,
catchlines and citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for
clarity are indicated by brackets.
   State Law References: laws supplementary to charters, G.S. 160A-3.
Article I. Incorporation, Corporate Powers, and Boundaries
Sec.
1.1. Incorporation.
Sec.
1.2. Powers.
Sec.
1.3. Corporate Boundaries.
Article II. Governing Body
Sec.
2.1. Village Governing Body; Composition.
Sec.
2.2. Village Council; Composition; Terms of Office.
Sec.
2.3. Mayor; Term of Office; Duties.
Sec.
2.4. Mayor Pro Tempore.
Sec.
2.5. Meetings.
Sec.
2.6. Quorum; Voting Requirements.
Sec.
2.7. Qualifications for Office; Compensation; Vacancies.
Article III. Elections
Sec.
3.1. Regular Municipal Elections.
Sec.
3.2. Election of Mayor and Councilmembers.
Sec.
3.3. Special Elections and Referenda.
Article IV. Organization and Administration
Sec.
4.1. Form of Government.
Sec.
4.2. Village Manager; Appointment; Powers and Duties.
Sec.
4.3. Manager's Personnel Authority; Role of Elected Officials.
Sec.
4.4. Village Attorney.
Sec.
4.5. Village Clerk.
Sec.
4.6. Tax Collector.
Sec.
4.7. Finance Director.
Sec.
4.8. Other Administrative Officers and Employees.
Article V. Finance and Taxation
Sec.
5.1. Room Occupancy and Tourism Development Tax.
Article VI. Contract Post Office
Sec.
6.1. Contract Post Office.
Article VII. "No Wake" Speed Zone
Sec.
7.1. "No Wake" Speed Zone.
Article VIII. Miscellaneous
Sec.
8.1. Motorboat Operation.
Sec.
8.2. Sand Dunes.
Sec.
8.3. Beach Regulation.
Article IX. Phased Development Plan
Sec.
9.1. Phased Development Plan.
Sec.
9.2. Vested Rights.
Sec.
9.3. Alteration of Vested Rights.
Sec.
9.4. Land Use Regulation.
Article X. Motor Vehicle Regulation
Sec.
10.1. Motor Vehicle Regulation.
Sec.
10.2. Street Regulation.
Article XI. Sea Turtle Sanctuary
Sec.
11.1. Sea Turtle Sanctuary.
ARTICLE I.
INCORPORATION, CORPORATE POWERS, AND BOUNDARIES
Section 1.1. Incorporation.
   The Village of Bald Head Island, North Carolina, in Brunswick County, and
the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a municipal body politic and
corporate, under the name of the "Village of Bald Head Island," hereinafter at
times referred to as the "Village."
Section 1.2. Powers.
   The Village shall have and may exercise all of the powers, duties, rights,
privileges, and immunities conferred upon the Village of Bald Head Island
specifically by this Charter or upon municipal corporations by general law. The
term "general law" is employed herein as defined in G.S. 160A-1.
Section 1.3. Corporate Boundaries.
   The corporate boundaries shall be those existing at the time of ratification
of this Charter, as set forth on the official map of the Village and as they
may be altered from time to time in accordance with law. An official map of the
Village, showing the current municipal boundaries, shall be maintained
permanently in the office of the Village Clerk and shall be available for
public inspection. Upon alteration of the corporate limits pursuant to law, the
appropriate changes to the official map shall be made and copies shall be filed
in the offices of the Secretary of State, the Brunswick County Register of
Deeds, and the appropriate board of elections.
ARTICLE II.
GOVERNING BODY
Section 2.1. Village Governing Body; Composition.
   The Mayor and the Village Council shall be the governing body of the
Village.
Section 2.2. Village Council; Composition; Terms of Office.
   The Council shall be composed of four members to be elected by all the
qualified voters of the Village for terms of four years, or until their
successors are elected and qualified.
(Ord. No. 2008-1203, 12-12-2008)
Section 2.3. Mayor; Term of Office; Duties.
   The Mayor shall be elected by all the qualified voters of the Village for a
term of four years. The Mayor shall be the official head of the Village
government and preside at meetings of the Council, shall have the right to vote
on all matters before the Council, but shall not have the power to vote again
in instances where there is an equal division on a question, and shall exercise
the powers and duties conferred by law or as directed by the Council.
(Ord. No. 2008-1203, 12-12-2008)
Section 2.4. Mayor Pro Tempore.
   The Council shall elect one of its members as Mayor Pro Tempore to perform
the duties of the Mayor during the Mayor's absence or disability, in accordance
with general law.
Section 2.5. Meetings.
   In accordance with general law, the Council shall establish a suitable time
and place for its regular meetings. Special and emergency meetings may be held
as provided by general law.
Section 2.6. Quorum; Voting Requirements.
   Official actions of the Council and all votes shall be taken in accordance
with applicable provisions of general law, particularly G.S. 160A-75. The
quorum provisions of G.S. 160A-74 shall apply.
Section 2.7. Qualifications for Office; Compensation; Vacancies.
   The qualifications of the Mayor and Council members shall be in accordance
with general law. The Mayor and Council members shall receive no compensation
for their services but may be reimbursed for ordinary and necessary expenses.
Vacancies shall be filled as provided in G.S. 160A-63.
ARTICLE III.
ELECTIONS
Section 3.1. Regular Municipal Elections.
   Regular municipal elections shall be held in each odd-numbered year in
accordance with the uniform municipal election laws of North Carolina.
Elections shall be conducted on a nonpartisan basis and the results determined
using the nonpartisan plurality method as provided in G.S. 163A-1616.
Section 3.2. Election of Mayor and Councilmembers.
   The Councilmembers serving on the date of ratification of this Charter, or
any subsequent amendments thereto, shall serve until the expiration of their
terms or until their successors are elected and qualified. At the regular
municipal election to be held in 2019, three Councilmembers shall be elected.
The two candidates who receive the highest number of votes shall be elected to
four-year terms and the candidate who receives the next highest number of votes
shall be elected to a two-year term. At the regular municipal election to be
held in 2021, and every four years thereafter, the Mayor and two Councilmembers
shall be elected to four-year terms. At the regular municipal election to be
held in 2023, and every four years thereafter, two Councilmembers shall be
elected to four-year terms. Notwithstanding the foregoing, vacancies in
elective offices shall be filled as provided in G.S. 160A-63.
(Ord. No. 2018-0801, 8-17-2018)
Section 3.3. Special Elections and Referenda.
   Special elections and referenda may be held only as provided by general law
or applicable local acts of the General Assembly.
ARTICLE IV.
ORGANIZATION AND ADMINISTRATION
Section 4.1. Form of Government.
   The Village shall operate under the council-manager form of government, in
accordance with G.S. 160A, Article 7, Part 2.
Section 4.2. Village Manager; Appointment; Powers and Duties.
   The Council shall appoint a Village Manager who shall be responsible for the
administration of all departments of the Village government. The Village
Manager shall have all the powers and duties conferred by general law, except
as expressly limited by the provisions of this Charter, and the additional
powers and duties conferred by the Council, so far as authorized by general
law.
Section 4.3. Manager's Personnel Authority; Role of Elected Officials.
   As chief administrator, the Village Manager shall have the power to appoint,
suspend, and remove all officers, department heads, and employees in the
administrative service of the Village, with the exception of the Village
Attorney and any other official whose appointment or removal is specifically
vested in the Council by this Charter or by general law. Neither the Council
nor any of its members shall take part in the appointment or removal of
officers and employees in the administrative service of the Village, except as
provided by this Charter. Except for the purpose of inquiry, or for
consultation with the Village Attorney, the Council and its members shall deal
with the administrative service solely through the Village Manager, Acting
Manager, or Interim Manager, and neither the Council nor any of its members
shall give any specific orders to any subordinates of the Village Manager,
Acting Manager, or Interim Manager, either publicly or privately.
(S.L. 2008-57, § 1, 7-7-2008)
Section 4.4. Village Attorney.
   The Village Council shall appoint a Village Attorney licensed to practice
law in North Carolina. It shall be the duty of the Village Attorney to
represent the Village, advise Village officials, and perform other duties
required by law or as the Council may direct.
Section 4.5. Village Clerk.
   The Village Manager shall appoint a Village Clerk to keep a journal of the
proceedings of the Council, to maintain official records and documents, to give
notice of meetings, and to perform such other duties required by law or as the
Manager may direct. The Village Manager shall supervise and may remove the
Village Clerk.
2008-57, § 2, 7-7-2008)
Section 4.6. Tax Collector.
   The Village shall have a Tax Collector to collect all taxes owed to the
Village, subject to general law, this Charter, and Village ordinances and to
perform those duties specified in G.S. 105-350 and such other duties as
prescribed by law or assigned by the Village Manager. Notwithstanding the
provisions of G.S. 105-349, the Village Manager is authorized to appoint and
remove the Tax Collector and any deputy tax collectors.
Section 4.7. Finance Director.
   The Village Manager shall appoint a Finance Officer to perform the duties
designated in G.S. 159-25 and such other duties as may be prescribed by law or
as the Council may direct, or the Village Council may, at its election, confer
the duties of Finance Officer on the Village Manager as budget Officer. The
Finance Officer may be entitled "Accountant", "Treasurer," "Finance Director,"
"Finance Officer," or any other reasonably descriptive title.
Section 4.8. Other Administrative Officers and Employees.
   The Council may authorize other positions to be filled by appointment by the
Village Manager and may organize the Village government as deemed appropriate,
subject to the requirements of general law.
ARTICLE V.
FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section 5.1. Room Occupancy and Tourism Development Tax.
   The authority of the Village to levy a room occupancy and tourism tax shall
continue as authorized by Chapter 664 of the 1991 Session Laws, and any
subsequent acts.
ARTICLE VI.
CONTRACT POST OFFICE
Section 6.1. Contract Post Office.
   The authority of the Village to operate a contract post office shall
continue as authorized by Chapter 16 of the 1991 Session Laws, as amended by
Chapter 350 of the 1991 Session Laws, and any subsequent acts.
ARTICLE VII.
"NO WAKE" SPEED ZONE
Section 7.1. "No Wake" Speed Zone.
   The "no wake" speed zone established by Chapter 688 of the 1987 Session
Laws, and any subsequent acts, shall continue as authorized.
ARTICLE VIII.
MISCELLANEOUS
Section 8.1. Motorboat Operation.
   The Village may regulate the speed and operation of motorboats within the
Village jurisdiction to preserve the tranquillity and environment of the
Village.
Section 8.2. Sand Dunes.
   The Village may construct, reconstruct, plant, and maintain sand dunes and
regulate access to and across dunes to prevent or repair damage to dunes so as
to provide protection against erosion or overwash.
Section 8.3. Beach Regulation.
   The Village may, by ordinance, establish standards of dress, conduct, and
decorum on the beaches of Bald Head Island and may otherwise regulate the use
of those beaches within the Villagejurisdiction.
ARTICLE IX.
PHASED DEVELOPMENT PLAN
Section 9.1. Phased Development Plan.
   In accordance with an act to incorporate the Village of Bald Head Island,
Chapter 156 of the 1985 Session Laws, the Village Council was required to adopt
by ordinance plans of development consistent with the historical land use
patterns and densities in existence on Bald Head Island at the time of
ratification of the act. The Village Council, after public hearing and upon
recommendation of its Planning Board, adopted a zoning ordinance for the
undeveloped portions of Bald Head Island consistent with those historical land
use patterns and densities. Such zoning ordinance is based upon a "Phased
Development Plan" (as that term is defined in G.S. 160A-385.1(b)(3)), which
plan was prepared by Bald Head Island Limited.
Section 9.2. Vested Rights.
   The owners of the undeveloped portions of Bald Head Island are declared
hereby to have acquired vested rights in accordance with G.S. 160A-385.1 as to
the "Phased Development Plan" entitled "Revised June 29, 1995 STAGE 2 MASTER
PLAN BALD HEAD ISLAND, NORTH CAROLINA, BALD HEAD ISLAND PLANNING DEPARTMENT"
and approved by the State Division of Coastal Management on August 7, 1995.
Notwithstanding the provisions of G.S. 160A-385.1(d), these vested rights shall
be valid through December 31, 1999, and no longer. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to prohibit the further granting of vested rights by the
Village pursuant to theprovisions of G.S. 160A-385.1.
Section 9.3. Alteration of Vested Rights.
   As specifically authorized by G.S. 160A-385.1(e)(l)a., the vested rights
herein granted may only be changed, prior to December 31, 1999, as allowed by
the exceptions set forth in G.S. 160A-385.1(e). In addition, subject to the
approval of the Village and within the limits established by the Village zoning
and other land use ordinances, vested densities may be transferred within the
area depicted on the Stage 2 Master Plan referred to in Section 9.2 of this
Charter so long as the density of development within the total area is not
increased.
Section 9.4. Land Use Regulation.
   Except as herein expressly provided, nothing in this Charter shall be
construed to prohibit the Village from amending its currentland use regulatory
ordinances, in whole or in part, or otherwise regulating the use of land within
the planning and zoning jurisdiction of the Village.
ARTICLE X.
MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATION
Section 10.1. Motor Vehicle Regulation.
   The Village may by ordinance exempt from the provisions of Articles 3, 3A,
11, and 13 of Chapter 20 of the General Statutes, in whole or in part, the
registration, licensing, regulation, inspection, or equipping of motor vehicles
and may regulate the use, operation, possession, and ownership of motor
vehicles within the jurisdiction of the Village of Bald Head Island.
Additionally, notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 20 of the General
Statutes or any other statute, and in addition to those powers now or hereafter
conferred by law, the Village shall have the authority to regulate motor
vehicles and other means of transportation within the jurisdiction of the
Village, including the following:
   (1)   Regulation of the use and operation of all vehicles, as defined in
G.S. 20-4.01(49).
   (2)   Regulation of all electrically powered vehicles or vehicles powered by
fossil fuel or internal combustion engines.
   (3)   Regulation of the size, weight, lighting, safety standards, and engine
or motor size or power characteristics of all vehicles or other means of
transportation within the jurisdiction of the Village.
Section 10.2. Street Regulation.
   In order to establish and preserve the unique character and aesthetics of
Bald Head Island, the Village may adopt, by ordinance, such standards for the
establishment and maintenance of streets and roads within the jurisdiction of
the Village as it deems appropriate. The streets and roads within the
jurisdiction of the Village shall not be under the authority of the Department
of Transportation. The provisions of Articles 2 and 2A of Chapter 136 of the
General Statutes shall not apply within the jurisdiction of the Village. The
Village shall be exempt from the provisions of G.S. 136-66.2.
ARTICLE XI.
SEA TURTLE SANCTUARY
Section 11.1. Sea Turtle Sanctuary.
   The Village of Bald Head Island may create and establish a sea turtle
sanctuary within the areas of the Village limits above the mean low water mark,
to include the foreshore. Any ordinances adopted by the Village to regulate
activities within the sea turtle sanctuary that may or will disturb or destroy
a sea turtle, a sea turtle nest, or sea turtle eggs, must be consistent with
the ordinance powers found in G.S. 160A-174, G.S. 160A-308, and any other law.
The ordinances adopted by the Village may by cross reference incorporate the
criminal statutes regarding the taking of sea turtles in G.S. 113-189 and G.S.
113-337. It shall be unlawful for any person within the sea turtle sanctuary to
disturb or destroy a sea turtle, a sea turtle nest, or sea turtle eggs in
violation of an ordinance adopted by the Village of Bald Head Island.
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE
   This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any
amendments thereto.
 
Ordinance Number Date       Section   Section this Charter
                7-24-1997  1.1--11.1 1.1--
                                      11.1
2008-57(S.L.)    7- 7-2008  1         4.3
                          2         4.5
2008-1203        12-12-2008          2.2,
                                      2.3
2018-0801        8-17-2018           3.2
                                    
  
PART II
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec.
1-1. How Code designated and cited.
Sec.
1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
Sec.
1-3. Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances.
Sec.
1-4. Catchlines, history notes and references.
Sec.
1-5. Severability of parts of Code.
Sec.
1-6. General penalty; enforcement of ordinances; continuing violations.
Sec.
1-7. Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language.
Sec.
1-8. Supplementation of Code.
Sec.
1-9. Ordinances not affected by Code.
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
   The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated "Code of Ordinances, Village of Bald Head
Island, North Carolina," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as
the "Bald Head Island Village Code."
   State Law References: to adopt code of ordinances, G.S. 160A-77; admission
of Code in evidence, G.S. 160A-79.
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
   In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following
definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent
with the manifest intent of the village council or the context clearly requires
otherwise:
   Charter. The term "Charter" shall mean the Charter of the Village of Bald
Head Island, North Carolina as printed in Part I of this volume.
   Code. The term "Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, Village of Bald
Head Island, North Carolina as designated in section
1-1.
   Computation of time. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day
is Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, it shall be excluded.
   State Law References: of time, G.S. 1-593.
   Council, village council. The terms "council" and "village council" shall
mean and refer to the mayor and council of the Village of Bald Head Island,
North Carolina.
   County. The term "county" shall mean the County of Brunswick in the State of
North Carolina, except as otherwise provided.
   Gender. Terms importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter.
   Joint authority. All terms giving a joint authority to three or more persons
or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
persons or officers.
   Month. The term "month" shall mean a calendar month.
   Number. Terms used in the singular include the plural, and the plural
includes the singular number.
   Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all
cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in
such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words
"affirm" and "affirmed."
   Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this Code, they
shall mean standard time or daylight saving time, as may be in current use in
this village.
   Owner. The term "owner," applied to any property, shall include any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of
the whole or a part of such property.
   Person. The term "person" shall include a corporation, firm, partnership,
association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an
individual.
   Personal property. The term "personal property" shall include every species
of property, except real property as defined in this section.
   Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" shall mean next
before and next after, respectively.
   Property. The term "property" shall include real and personal property.
   Real property. The term "real property" shall include lands, tenements and
hereditaments.
   Shall; may. The term "shall" is mandatory, and the term "may" is permissive.
   Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the
curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   Signature and subscription. The terms "signature" and "subscription" include
a mark when the person cannot write.
   State. The term "state" shall be construed to mean the State of North
Carolina, except as otherwise provided.
   Statute references. The terms "General Statutes" and "G.S." shall refer to
the latest edition of the General Statutes of North Carolina, as amended.
   Street. The term "street" shall mean and include any public way, road,
highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and
the approaches thereto within the village and shall mean the entire width of
the right-of-way between abutting property lines.
   Tenant and occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant" applied to a building
or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such
building or land, whether alone or with others.
   Tense. Terms used in the past or present tense include the future as well as
the past and present.
   Village. The terms "village" and "the village" mean the Village of Bald Head
Island, in the County of Brunswick and in the State of North Carolina, except
as otherwise provided.
   Writing and written. The terms "writing" and "written" shall include
printing and any other mode of representing words and letters.
   Year. The term "year" shall mean a calendar year.
   State Law References: definitions and rules of construction, G.S. 12-3.
Sec. 1-3. Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances.
   The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those
of ordinances adopted prior to the adoption of this Code and included in this
Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
Sec. 1-4. Catchlines, history notes and references.
   (a)   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as
mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed
or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part thereof, nor, unless
expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections,
including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
   (b)   The history notes following sections of the Code and the references
scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user only and are not
a part of this code.
Sec. 1-5. Severability of parts of Code.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the village council that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid
judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining
phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since they
would have been enacted by the village council without the incorporation in
this Code of any such unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section.
Sec. 1-6. General penalty; enforcement of ordinances; continuing violations.
   (a)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, violation of any provision of
this Code or any other village ordinance shall not be a misdemeanor or
infraction, as provided by G.S. 14-4.
   (b)   Any provision of this Code or any other village ordinance may be
enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent
jurisdiction. In such case, the general court of justice shall have
jurisdiction to issue such orders as may be appropriate, and it shall not be a
defense to the application of the village for equitable relief that there is an
adequate remedy at law.
   (c)   Any provision of this Code or any other village ordinance that makes
unlawful a condition existing upon or use made of real property may be enforced
by injunction and order of abatement, and the general court of justice shall
have jurisdiction to issue such orders. When a violation of such a provision
occurs, the village may apply to the appropriate division of the general court
of justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement
commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the
unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed in all respects by
the laws and rules governing civil proceedings, including the Rules of Civil
Procedure in general and Rule 65 in particular. In addition to an injunction,
the court may enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the
cause. An order of abatement may direct that buildings or other structures on
the property be closed, demolished or removed; that fixtures, furniture or
other movable property be removed from buildings on the property; that grass
and weeds be cut; that improvements or repairs be made; or that any other
action be taken that is necessary to bring the property into compliance with
this Code or such ordinance. If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with
an injunction or with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the
court, he may be cited for contempt, and the village may execute the order of
abatement. The village shall have a lien on the property for the cost of
executing an order of abatement in the nature of a mechanic's and materialman's
lien. The defendant may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by paying
all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for compliance with the order.
The bond shall be given with sureties approved by the clerk of superior court
in an amount approved by the judge before whom the matter is heard and shall be
conditioned on the defendant's full compliance with the terms of the order of
abatement within a time fixed by the judge. Cancellation of an order of
abatement shall not suspend or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction
therewith.
   (d)   The provisions of this Code and any other village ordinance may be
enforced by any one, all or a combination of the remedies authorized and
prescribed by this section.
   (e)   Except as otherwise specifically provided, each day's continuing
violation of any provision of this Code or any other village ordinance shall be
a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. No. 2011-0402, 4-15-2011)
   State Law References: to impose fines and penalties for violation of
municipal ordinances, G.S. 160A-175; violation of municipal ordinances a
misdemeanor, G.S. 14-4.
Sec. 1-7. Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language.
   (a)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or
in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. When subsequent
ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion of this
Code, such repealed portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from
reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted
in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent
ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or
omitted are readopted as a new Code by the village council.
   (b)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
Code in the following language: "That section ________ of the Code of
Ordinances, Village of Bald Head Island, North Carolina, is hereby amended to
read as follows: . . . ." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as
desired.
   (c)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added,
the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Village of
Bald Head Island, North Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be
numbered ________, which such section reads as follows: . . . ." The new
section shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (d)   All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed
must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the
case may be.
Sec. 1-8. Supplementation of Code.
   (a)   By contract or by village personnel, supplements to this Code shall be
prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all
substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the village
council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made
thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they
will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that
have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so
prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through
the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
   (b)   In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages.
   (c)   When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the
person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive
changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement,
insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For
example, the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes
in such catchlines, headings and titles.
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be
inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subdivision numbers.
      (4)   Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to
"this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or
to "sections ________ to ________" (inserting section numbers to indicate the
sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance
incorporated into the Code).
   (5)   Update position, program, and department names and titles where
necessary to reflect the then-current naming conventions in use by the village
administration.
   (6)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original
meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the code; but in no case shall the
codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material
included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013)
Sec. 1-9. Ordinances not affected by Code.
   Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed
to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following:
      (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective
date of this Code;
      (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money for the village or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the
village or any evidence of the village's indebtedness;
      (3)   Any contract or obligation assumed by the village;
      (4)   Any ordinance fixing the salary of any village officer or employee;
      (5)   Any right or franchise granted by the village;
      (6)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the
village;
      (7)   Any appropriation ordinance;
      (8)   Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or
limited term;
      (9)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes
for such improvements;
      (10)   Any zoning map amendment;
      (11)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat;
      (12)   Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the
village;
      (13)   The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the village not in
conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code;
      (14)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included in this Code;
      (15)   Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the
village;
nor shall any such ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance or part
thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by
this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in
full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.
   State Law References: not repealed by General Statutes, G.S. 164-7.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION*
*   Cross References: contract or obligation assumed by the village saved from
repeal, §
1-9(3); the administrative ordinances or resolutions of the village not in
conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code saved from repeal, §
1-9(13); civil emergencies,
ch. 8; administration of flood damage prevention regulations, §
14-61 et seq.; utilities,
ch. 30; administration of zoning regulations, §
32-41 et seq.; personnel,
app. A; grant criteria procedures for local implementation and enforcement
programs under the coastal area management act,
app. B.
   State Law References: and towns, G.S. ch. 160A.
Article I. In General
Secs. 2-1--2-30. Reserved.
Article II. Mayor and Council
Sec. 2-31--2-60. Reserved
Article III. Officers and Employees
Sec.
2-61. Criminal background check.
Secs. 2-62--2-90. Reserved.
Article IV. Boards, Commissions and Committees
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 2-91--2-110. Reserved.
Division 2. Reserved
Secs. 2-111--2-130. Reserved.
Article V. Finance
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
2-131. Surplus personal property.
Secs. 2-132--2-150. Reserved.
Division 2. Purchasing
Sec.
2-151. Grant of authority.
Sec.
2-152. Report.
Sec.
2-153. Extent of authority.
Sec.
2-154. No limitation of other authority.
Sec.
2-155. Appropriation required.
Sec.
2-156. Application of general statutes.
Secs. 2-157--2-180. Reserved.
Division 3. Construction and Repair Contracts
Sec.
2-181. Grant of authority.
Sec.
2-182. Report.
Sec.
2-183. Extent of authority.
Sec.
2-184. No limitation of other authority.
Sec.
2-185. Appropriation required.
Sec.
2-186. Application of general statutes.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 2-1--2-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
MAYOR AND COUNCIL*
*   Charter References: body,
art. II.
   State Law References: and council, G.S. 160A-66 et seq.
Secs. 2-31–2-60.
ARTICLE III.
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES*
*   Charter References: officers and employees, §
4.2 et seq.
   Cross References: ordinance fixing the salary of any village officer or
employee saved from repeal, §
1-9(4); zoning enforcement officer, §
32-41; local permit officer, app. B, §
15A NCAC 71.0507.
Sec. 2-61. Criminal background check.
   (a)   In order to protect the citizens of the village, and their properties,
the procedures herein are established to provide for fingerprinting and
criminal history checks on all final applicants for regular full and part time
positions in the village government. Employment with the town may be denied for
those persons convicted of any crime against a person, or crimes against
property where intent is an element, or any drug or gambling related offense.
   (b)   The village manager, or designee, shall conduct an investigation of
any final candidate for a permanent full-time or part-time position with the
village government and it shall be a precondition of employment that an
applicant for such a position shall upon request, provide fingerprints and all
other necessary personal identification including a birth certificate, social
security number and drives license, if available, so that the village manager
or designee, may cause a thorough search to be made of local sand state
criminal records to determine if the applicant has a history of criminal
convictions or the crimes enumerated above by the use of the division of
criminal information network (DCI).
   (c)   The department of public safety shall provide the findings from the
use of the DCI to the village manager or designee, provided that all necessary
agreements with the State Bureau of Investigations Divisions of Criminal
Information have been executed.
   (d)    An evaluation of any crime for purpose of employment will take into
account the nature and the circumstances of the offense and the time frame of
the offense as it relates to the essential job functions for the position
applied.
   (e)    If this section or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provision
or applications of the ordinance which can be given separate effect and to that
end the provisions of this section are declared to be severable.
   (f)    Prior to denial or termination of employment based upon criminal
history record inquiry (CHRI) received from the criminal justice agency, the
department of public safety shall verify the existence of a record by either
obtaining a certified public record or by submitting a fingerprint card of the
individual to the CIIS section for verification that the CHRI record belongs to
the individual.
   (g)    Any ordinance or any part of an ordinance in conflict with this
section, to the extent of such conflict, is hereby repealed.
   (h)    This section is adopted in the interest of the public health, safety
and general welfare of the inhabitants of the village pursuant to G.S. 160A et
seq., and shall be in full force and effect from and after its adoption.
(Ord. No. 2006-1201, 12-15-2006; Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013)
   Editors Note: No. 2006-1201, adopted Dec. 15, 2006, did not specifically
amend the Code. Hence, inclusion as §
2-61 was at the discretion of the editor.
Secs. 2-62--2-90. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES*
*   Cross References: board of adjustment, §
32-101 et seq.
   State Law References: to create, change or abolish boards, commissions and
agencies, G.S. 160A-146.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Secs. 2-91--2-110. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
RESERVED
Secs. 2-111--2-130. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
FINANCE*
*   Charter References: and taxation,
art. V.
   Cross References: ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the
payment of money for the village or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of
the village or any evidence of the village's indebtedness saved from repeal, §
1-9(2).
   State Law References: government finance, G. S. ch. 159.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 2-131. Surplus personal property.
   (a)   The village manager is hereby authorized to dispose of all surplus
personal property owned by the village, whenever he determines, in his
discretion, that:
      (1)   The item or group of items has a fair market value of less than
$5,000.00;
      (2)   The property is no longer necessary for the conduct of public
business; and
      (3)   Sound property management principles and financial considerations
indicate that the interests of the village would best be served by disposing of
the property.
   (b)   The village manager may dispose of any such surplus personal property
by any means which he judges reasonably calculated to yield the highest
attainable sale price in money or other consideration, including but not
limited to the methods of sale provided in G.S. 160A-265 et seq. Such sale may
be public or private, and with or without notice and minimum waiting period.
   (c)   The surplus property shall be sold to the party who tenders the
highest offer or exchanged for any property or services useful to the village
if greater value may be obtained in that manner, and the village manager is
hereby authorized to execute and deliver any applicable title documents. If no
offers are received within a reasonable time, the village manager may retain
the property, obtain any reasonably available salvage value, or cause it to be
disposed of as waste material. No surplus property may be donated to any
individual or organization except by resolution of the village council.
   (d)   The village manager shall keep a record of all property sold under
authority of this section and that record shall generally describe the property
sold or exchanged, to whom it was sold, or with whom exchanged, and the amount
of money or other consideration received for each sale or exchange.
(Ord. No. 53, §§ 1--4, 2-20-1998)
   State Law References: to dispose of municipal property, G.S. 160A-266(c).
Secs. 2-132--2-150. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
PURCHASING
Sec. 2-151. Grant of authority.
   Subject to the restrictions and conditions provided in this division, when
purchasing apparatus, supplies, materials or equipment for the use of the
village, in addition to such authority as may be provided by law and/or
otherwise delegated by the village council, the village manager shall have the
authority to:
      (1)   Prepare or cause or be prepared plans and/or specifications setting
forth a complete description of the items to be purchased and the
characteristics, features, and/or requirements therefor;
      (2)   Include, where appropriate, in specifications for the items to be
purchased an opportunity for bidders to purchase as trade-in specified personal
property owned by the village;
      (3)   Advertise, or otherwise secure bids for such items, if required
under applicable law;
      (4)   Award contracts for the purchase of the items and, where
applicable, award contracts for the purchase of the items and the sale of
trade-in property;
      (5)   Reject bids;
      (6)   Readvertise to receive bids;
      (7)   Waive bid bond or deposit requirements;
      (8)   Waive performance and payment bond requirements; and
      (9)   Execute and deliver the purchase contracts.
(Ord. No. 54, § 1, 2-20-1998)
Sec. 2-152. Report.
   At the first meeting of the village council following theaward of any
contracts pursuant to this division, the village manager shall submit a report
to the village council summarizing the bids received and the contracts awarded.
Such report shall be included in the minutes of the meeting at which it is
received.
(Ord. No. 54, § 2, 2-20-1998)
Sec. 2-153. Extent of authority.
   Except in cases of sole source purchases pursuant to G.S. 143-129(f)and
cases or purchases from established contracts pursuant to G.S. 143-129(g),
unless otherwise provided by law, the provisions of this division shall apply
to the purchase of apparatus, supplies, materials or equipment required for use
by the village.
(Ord. No. 54, § 3, 2-20-1998)
Sec. 2-154. No limitation of other authority.
   The provisions of this division are not intended to limit, restrict, or
revoke in any manner authority otherwise granted and/or delegated to the
village manager by statute, law or action of the village council.
(Ord. No. 54, § 4, 2-20-1998)
Sec. 2-155. Appropriation required.
   No purchase shall be made by the village manager under the authority of this
division unless an appropriation for such purpose has been authorized in the
annual budget, or by supplemental appropriation or budget appropriation
amendment duly adopted by the village council.
(Ord. No. 54, § 5, 2-20-1998)
Sec. 2-156. Application of general statutes.
   In acting pursuant to the authority delegated by this division, the village
manager shall comply with the requirements of G.S. 143-128 et seq.
(Ord. No. 54, § 6, 2-20-1998)
   State Law References: to delegate purchasing authority, G.S. 143-129(a).
Secs. 2-157--2-180. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR CONTRACTS
Sec. 2-181. Grant of authority.
   Subject to the restrictions and conditions set forth in this section, in
addition to any such authority as provided by law and/or otherwise delegated by
the village council, the village manager shall have the authority to:
      (1)   Prepare or cause to be prepared plans and/or specifications setting
forth a complete description of the construction and/or repairs needed and the
characteristics, features, and/or requirements therefor;
      (2)   Include, where appropriate, specifications for the services needed
by the village;
      (3)   Advertise or otherwise secure bids for such services if required
under applicable law;
      (4)   Award contracts for the services in keeping with the requirements
of applicable law;
      (5)   Reject bids;
      (6)   Readvertise to receive additional bids, if necessary;
      (7)   Waive bid bond or deposit requirements;
      (8)   Waive performance and payment bond requirements; and
      (9)   Execute and deliver the contracts.
      (10)   Accept and award contracts requiring expenditure of public money
in an amount not greater than $300,000.00 for the purpose of construction and/
or repair on behalf of the village.
(Ord. No. 2000-25, § 1, 10-21-2000; Ord. No. 2002-016, § 1, 8-16-2002)
Sec. 2-182. Report.
   At the first meeting of the village council following the award of any
contracts pursuant to this division, the village manager shall submit a report
to the village council summarizing the bids received and the contracts awarded.
Such report shall be included in the minutes of the meeting at which it is
received.
(Ord. No. 2000-25, § 2, 10-21-2000)
Sec. 2-183. Extent of authority.
   Unless otherwise provided by law, the provisions of this division shall
apply only to the acceptance and award of construction and/or repairs required
by the village.
(Ord. No. 2000-25, § 3, 10-21-2000)
Sec. 2-184. No limitation of other authority.
   The provisions of this division are not intended to limit, restrict, or
revoke, in any manner, authority otherwise granted and/or delegated to the
village manager by statute, law, or action of the village council.
(Ord. No. 2000-25, § 4, 10-21-2000)
Sec. 2-185. Appropriation required.
   The village manager shall not provide for the letting of any contract unless
an appropriation for the construction and/or repair has been authorized in the
annual budget, or by supplemental appropriation or budget appropriation
amendment duly adopted by the village council.
(Ord. No. 2000-25, § 5, 10-21-2000)
Sec. 2-186. Application of general statutes.
   In acting within the authority delegated by this division, the village
manager shall comply with the requirements of the General Statutes, as from
time to time may be amended, modified, supplemented, revised, or superseded, to
the same extent as would have otherwise applied to the village council.
(Ord. No. 2000-25, § 6, 10-21-2000)
   State Law References: to enter into contracts, G.S.160A-16 et seq.
Chapter 3
RESERVED
Chapter 4
ANIMALS*
   *Editors Note— Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. XX, § 3, adopted Oct. 26, 2007,
repealed ch. 4, arts. I, II, §§ 4-1--4-3, 4-31--4-34 in its entirety. Articles
I, II, III, VIII, X, XII, XIII, XIV, XV, XVI, XVII, XVIII, XIX and XX of Ord.
No. 2007-1001 and Ord. No. 2007-1003, adopted Oct. 26, 2007 enacted new
provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment, Ch. 4 pertained to
similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for derivation.
   Cross References— Environment,
ch. 10.
   State Law References— Protection of animals, G.S. 19A-1 et seq.; dogs
generally, G.S. 67-1 et seq.; rabies control, G.S. 130A-184 et seq.; regulation
of domestic animals, G.S. 160A-186.
Article I. In General
Sec.
4-1.   Authority.
Sec.
4-2.   Purpose and objective.
Sec.
4-3.   General provisions.
Sec.
4-4.   Nuisance pets.
Secs. 4-5—4-50. Reserved.
Article II. Rabies Control
Sec.
4-51.   Definitions.
Sec.
4-52.   Vaccination for rabies.
Sec.
4-53.   Bites.
Sec.
4-54.   Sanctions, penalties, fines and remedies.
Secs. 4-55—4-75. Reserved.
Article III. Animal Cruelty
Sec.
4-76.   Definitions.
Sec.
4-77.   Exemptions.
Sec.
4-78.   General care and prohibited acts.
Sec.
4-79.   Failure to report animal cruelty.
Sec.
4-80.   Sanctions, penalties, fines and remedies.
Secs. 4-81—4-120. Reserved.
Article IV. Dangerous Dog or Other Dangerous Animal
Sec.
4-121.   Definitions.
Sec.
4-122.   Exemption.
Sec.
4-123.   Determination of dangerousness.
Sec.
4-124.   Confinement and restraint of a dangerous dog or other dangerous
animal.
Sec.
4-125.   Transfer of ownership of a dangerous animal.
Sec.
4-126.   Sanctions, penalties, fines and remedies.
Secs. 4-127—4-145. Reserved.
Article V. Interference
Sec.
4-146.   Interference.
Secs. 4-147—4-180. Reserved.
Article VI. Impoundment of Animals
Sec.
4-181.   Definitions.
Sec.
4-182.   Impoundment.
Sec.
4-183.   Feral cats.
Sec.
4-184.   Notice.
Sec.
4-185.   Boarding fees.
Secs. 4-186—4-230. Reserved.
Article VII. Civil Penalties
Sec.
4-231.   Civil penalties.
Secs. 4-232—4-275. Reserved.
Article VIII. Redemption of Animals
Sec.
4-276.   Redemption of animals.
Secs. 4-277—4-300. Reserved.
Article IX. Disposition and Adoption of Impounded Animals
Sec.
4-301.   Disposition of impounded animals.
Sec.
4-302.   Adoption fees.
Sec.
4-303.   Recovery of adopted animal.
Secs. 4-304—4-335. Reserved.
Article X. Service and Return of Service
Sec.
4-336.   Method of service and return.
Secs. 4-337—4-365. Reserved.
Article XI. Appeals and Requests for Review
Sec.
4-366.   Appeal procedure.
Sec.
4-367.   Appeal hearing.
Secs. 4-368—4-400. Reserved.
Article XII. Gender
Sec.
4-401.   Gender statement.
Secs. 4-402--4-435. Reserved.
Article XIII. Severability
Sec.
4-436.   Severability.
Secs. 4-437--4-465. Reserved.
Article XIV. Enforcement and Effect of this Chapter
Sec.
4-466.   Enforcement.
Secs. 4-467— 4-479. Reserved.
Article XV. Sea Turtle Sanctuary
Sec.
4-480.   Activities within sea turtle sanctuaries.
Secs. 4-481—4-499. Reserved.
Article XVI. Livestock and Wild Animals
Sec.
4-500.   Definitions.
Sec.
4-501.   Feeding or harassment of wild animals is prohibited.
Sec.
4-502.   Possession of livestock or wild animals prohibited.
Secs. 4-503 —4-519. Reserved.
Article XVII. Unrestrained Dogs.
Sec.
4-520.   Definitions.
Sec.
4-521.   Unrestrained dogs prohibited.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 4-1. Authority.
   This chapter is established pursuant to the following grants of statutory
authority:
      (1)   North Carolina General Statute 153A-121 which delegates to counties
the power to regulate by ordinance, acts, omissions, or conditions detrimental
to the health, safety or welfare of their citizens and the peace and dignity of
the county.
      (2)   North Carolina General Statute 153A-123, which authorizes counties
to levy fines and penalties for violation of their ordinances and allows
counties to secure injunction and abatement orders to further insure compliance
with their ordinances.
      (3)   North Carolina General Statute 153A-127 which authorizes counties
to define and prohibit the abuse of animals.
      (4)   North Carolina General Statute 153A-131 which authorizes counties
to regulate, restrict or prohibit the possession or harboring of animals which
are dangerous to persons or property.
      (5)   North Carolina General Statute 153A-422 which authorizes counties
to establish, equip, operate and maintain animal shelters.
      (6)   North Carolina General Statute 130A-192 which authorizes animal
control officers to determine if there are any dogs and cats not wearing valid
rabies vaccination tags.
      (7)   North Carolina General Statute 67 which authorizes health directors
to declare a dog potentially dangerous.
      (8)   North Carolina General Statute 14-4 which makes it a misdemeanor,
unless otherwise specified, if any person shall be found guilty of violating an
ordinance of the county.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. I, (1), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Sec. 4-2. Purpose and objective.
   This chapter is established for the following purposes and objectives:
      (1)   Animal cruelty. To define and prohibit the abuse of animals;
      (2)   Rabies. To protect citizens and animals of Brunswick County from
rabies transmitted by unconfined, uncontrolled, or unimmunized dogs or cats;
      (3)   Animals at large. To regulate, restrict or prohibit the running at
large of any domestic animals;
   (4)   Stray animals. To regulate, restrict or prohibit the keeping of stray
domestic animals;
      (5)   Animal nuisance. To regulate animals that may be nuisance;
   (6)   Wild or exotic animals, poisonous reptiles and dangerous animals. To
regulate, restrict or prohibit the harboring or keeping or ownership of, wild
or exotic animals, poisonous reptiles and dangerous animals;
      (7)   Animal bites. To establish rules and procedures for dealing with
animal bites;
      (8)   Impoundment of animals. To regulate the impoundment and confinement
of animals;
      (9)   Redemption of impounded animals. To regulate and establish
procedures and fees for redeeming impounded animals in the county's animal
shelter; and
      (10)   Destruction of animals. To regulate and establish procedures for
destroying diseased, strayed, unwanted or unclaimed animals.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. I, (2), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Sec. 4-3. General provisions.
   The following general provisions shall apply to this chapter:
   (a)   Animal services. Authority is hereby granted to Brunswick County
animal services to enforce this chapter. This chapter shall be enforced by all
animal services officers (as defined in subsection (c), having all rights,
powers and immunities granted in this subsection (a)(1)—(13). All employees of
animal services are hereby granted the following rights, powers, and immunities
and said employees, through animal services shall:
      (1)   Have the responsibility, along with law enforcement agencies to
enforce all laws of North Carolina and all ordinances of Brunswick County
pertaining to animals and shall cooperate with all law enforcement officers
within Brunswick County in fulfilling this duty;
      (2)   Enforce and carry out all laws of North Carolina and all ordinances
of Brunswick County pertaining to rabies control;
      (3)   Be responsible for the investigation of all reported animal bites,
for the quarantine of any dog or cat having or suspected of having rabies for a
period of not less than ten days, and for reporting to the local health
director as soon as practicable the occurrence of any such animal bite and the
condition of any quarantined animal;
      (4)   Be responsible for the operation of the animal shelter;
      (5)   Be responsible for the seizure and impoundment, when necessary, of
any animal of Brunswick County involved in a violation of this or any other
ordinance or state law;
      (6)   Investigate cruelty or abuse of animals and protect animals from
cruelty or abuse;
      (7)   Be empowered to seize animals pursuant to G.S. 19A-46, or with the
consent of an owner or occupant of the property, or as evidence if the animals
are in "plain view", or by criminal or administrative search warrant if the
animals are being cruelly treated or abused;
      (8)   Make canvasses of homes and businesses in the county as necessary
for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with this chapter or state statute;
      (9)   Keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of
seizures, impoundments, and disposition of animals coming into the custody of
animal services, bite cases, violations, complaints, investigations, and monies
collected;
      (10)   Be empowered to issue notices of violation and assess civil
penalties for violations of this chapter;
      (11)   Be empowered to go in the yard of animal owners to inspect the
condition of animals;
      (12)   Be empowered to make inspections of buildings or dwellings with
the consent of the owner or occupant, or by administrative search warrant, or
criminal search warrant when there is reasonable cause to believe that this
chapter or state law is being violated; and
      (13)   Be empowered to go upon private property to seize animals pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter or court order.
   (b)   Animal services director. The Brunswick County animal services
director shall be the chief animal services officer, be in charge of animal
services, and supervise the Brunswick County Animal Shelter. The animal
services director shall have the authority to delegate to his animal services
officers or administrative staff any of the powers granted him by this chapter.
Any act done by an animal services officer or a member of the administrative
staff that is in compliance with or within the scope of this chapter, shall be
considered the official act of the animal services director.
   (c)   Animal services officer. All persons employed by the Brunswick County
animal services department shall be considered animal services officers and
shall have all rights, powers, and immunities granted under this chapter and by
the general laws of this state to enforce the provisions of this chapter and
the General Statutes of North Carolina as they relate to animal control and
animal welfare. All animal services officers are hereby appointed animal
cruelty investigators.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. I, (3), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Sec. 4-4. Nuisance pets.
   (a)   Nuisance pets are defined as dogs, or other domesticated animals,
present on Bald Head Island:
      (1)   Who are permitted by owners to roam off the owners' premises, not
accompanied by a responsible person. (This does not include a pet that is
previously reported as "lost" and is being searched for);
      (2)   Who chase, snap at, or otherwise harass pedestrians, bicyclists, or
vehicle drivers;
      (3)   Who damage or destroy property of another person;
      (4)   Who obtain entrance to outside garbage enclosures and scatter their
contents;
      (5)   Who regularly harass other wildlife or pets on Bald Head Island; or
      (6)   Who engage in prolonged noisemaking.
   (b)   Regulations and remedies herein are cumulative and not exclusive of
those of other laws or regulations.
   (c)   A written and signed complaint statement is required to be submitted
to the department of public safety by the reporting party within ten days of
the incident; and the opportunity for a written reply would be accorded to the
pet owner before a pet is determined to be a "nuisance pet" by the Bald Head
Island department of public safety.
   (d)   The village department of public safety is authorized to issue
warnings or appropriate fines to owners of nuisance pets dependent upon the
frequency of filed complaint. Civil fines, if issued, will be $100.00 for first
offense, increasing in $50.00 increments for each subsequent offense within a
12-month period of the most recent offense.
(Ord. No. 2009-0504, 5-15-2009; Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013)
Secs. 4-5--4-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
RABIES CONTROL
Sec. 4-51. Definitions.
   As used in this article the following terms are defined below:
   Bite means the act of an animal seizing flesh with its teeth or jaws so as
to tear, pierce or injure the flesh.
   Cats means any and all domestic felines.
   Confinement means impoundment within the county's animal shelter or other
appropriate facility.
   Dogs means any and all domestic canines.
   Owner means any person, groups of persons, firm, partnership or corporation
owning, keeping, having charge of or taking care of an animal or allowing an
animal to remain on its property for more than 72 hours.
   Rabies vaccinator means a person appointed and certified to administer
rabies vaccine or a licensed veterinarian.
   Rabies vaccine means an animal rabies vaccine approved by the United States
Department of Agriculture for use in this state.
   Restraint means a secure enclosure, chain, leash or other physical device of
sufficient strength which allows the owner to maintain direct control of an
animal.
   Vaccination means the administration of rabies vaccine by a licensed
veterinarian or by a certified rabies vaccinator.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. II, (1), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Sec. 4-52. Vaccination for rabies.
   Owners of dogs and cats shall comply with the provisions of this section.
      (1)   Vaccination. The owner of every dog or cat shall have the animal
vaccinated against rabies at four months of age, again at 16 months of age and
then every three years by a licensed veterinarian or by a certified rabies
vaccinator with a rabies vaccine approved by the United States Department of
Agriculture and approved by the North Carolina Commission for Health Services
for use in this state.
      (2)   Rabies tags. A licensed veterinarian or a certified rabies
vaccinator who administers rabies vaccine to a dog or cat shall issue a rabies
vaccination tag to the owner of the animal. The rabies vaccination tag shall
show the year issued, a vaccination number, the words North Carolina or the
initials "NC" and the words "rabies vaccine". The owner shall make sure that
the dog or cat wears the rabies tag at all times.
      (3)   Rabies vaccination certificates. The owner of a dog or cat must be
able to produce a current rabies vaccination certificate. This certificate
shall be issued by a licensed veterinarian or a certified vaccinator at the
time the dog or cat is vaccinated. A copy of the certificate shall also be
mailed or delivered to the animal services director by the licensed
veterinarian or certified rabies vaccinator within 45 days of the animal being
vaccinated. The animal services director may implement another method for
collecting vaccination certificates. Brunswick County residents who have their
animals vaccinated outside of Brunswick County are responsible for filing the
rabies vaccination certificate within animal services within five days of the
inoculation or within five days of their return to the local area.
      (4)   Nontransferable. Rabies tags cannot be transferred from animal to
animal.
      (5)   Lost, destroyed or stolen rabies tags. If a rabies tag is lost,
destroyed or stolen, a duplicate tag must be obtained from the veterinarian at
a fee not to exceed the actual cost of the tag, link and rivets, plus
transportation cost.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. II, (2), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Sec. 4-53. Bites.
   In order that rabies may be controlled and treated, all persons shall comply
with the provisions of this section.
      (1)   Persons bitten. Wounds inflicted by any animal known to be a
potential carrier of rabies shall be reported immediately to the county health
director and the animal services director by the person who has been bitten, or
in case of a child, his or her parents or guardian or other responsible party.
Any person who has knowledge of a dog or cat inflicting a wound shall
immediately report the same to the county health director and/or the animal
services director, and provide the names and addresses of the person(s) bitten
and the names and addresses of the owner(s) of any animals involved, if known.
Every physician who treats a wound inflicted by any animal known to be a
potential carrier of rabies shall report the incident to the county health
director and/or the animal services director and provide the names and
addresses of the person(s) bitten and the names and addresses of the owner(s)
of any animals involved, if known, within 24 hours of rendering treatment.
      (2)   Confinement of biting dogs and cats and confinement of animals
suspected of having rabies. Every dog or cat that bites a human being shall be
confined immediately. The animal shall be delivered within eight hours of the
incident, by the owner, to the county animal shelter or to a licensed
veterinary hospital. The animal shall be confined for observation for not less
than ten days. The owner shall be responsible for the cost of confinement at
either place. The animal services director shall have authority to order
confinement of a dog or cat to the county's animal shelter or any other
appropriate facility. Brunswick County Animal Services may waive the cost of
confining the animal at the shelter if the bite occurred on the owner's
premises and the animal was provoked. Final authority as to place of
confinement rests with the county health director. After reviewing the
circumstances of a particular case, the county health director may permit the
animal to be confined on the premises of the owner, but only after an
inspection and recommendation from the animal services director. The animal
services director's recommendation shall be based on whether or not there is a
suitable secure enclosure on the premises and other circumstances warrant
confinement on the owner's premises.
         a.   An owner or possessor of an animal which is suspected of having
rabies shall immediately notify the county health director or animal services
director and shall securely confine the animal until further instructed by the
county health director or animal services director.
      (3)   Destruction of infected dogs and cats. If a dog or cat, in or out
of confinement, develops rabies, as determined by a licensed veterinarian, it
shall be the duty of the owner to have such animal euthanized under the
supervision of the animal services director. Any dog or cat known to have been
bitten by another animal which is known or proved to be rabid shall be
euthanized immediately by the owner or by the animal services director unless
the dog or cat has been vaccinated against rabies more than three weeks prior
to being bitten and is given a booster dose of rabies vaccine within three days
of the bite.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. II, (3), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Sec. 4-54. Sanctions, penalties, fines and remedies.
   Violations of this article [and Article II of the Brunswick County Animal
Control Ordinance], are punishable by prosecution in criminal court as provided
by G.S. 14-4, unless a greater penalty is provided elsewhere, or by the
imposition of civil penalties, as prescribed in article VII, or both.
Collection of civil penalties may be by civil action or by the use of a
collection agency.
      (1)   Failure to keep rabies tags on dogs and cats at all times. It shall
be a violation if a dog or cat is observed by an animal services officer not
wearing a valid rabies tag, regardless of whether or not the animal is on or
off the owner's property and regardless of whether or not the animal has been
vaccinated.
      (2)   Failure to produce proof of vaccination and/or failure to have
animal vaccinated when the owner is known. In addition to any civil penalties
imposed for violation of subsection (1) above, the owner of a dog or cat may be
assessed another civil penalty, if he or she fails to produce proof of
vaccination and/or fails to have the animal vaccinated within 72 hours of the
issuance of a written notice of violation and civil penalty. The notice of
violation and civil penalty shall specify that the owner has 72 hours to
produce proof of vaccination and/or to have the animal vaccinated and failure
to do so shall result in the assessment of a civil penalty. If the owner
presents proof of vaccination, within 72 hours of the issuance of the notice of
violation, the civil penalty shall not be assessed. Having the animal
vaccinated or showing proof of vaccination shall not discharge the civil
penalties assessed for violation of subsection (1) above.
         a.   If the animal is not vaccinated and/or the civil penalty is not
paid within 72 hours, animal services shall have the authority to summarily
seize the animal. The owner shall have give five days from the date of seizure
to redeem the animal. The owner may redeem the animal by paying the civil
penalty, the redemption fee and all boarding fees. If the owner wishes to
request a review of the seizure of the animal, the owner must file a written
request with the board of health's environmental committee within five days of
the seizure. If a timely request is filed, the board of health's environmental
committee shall convene within ten days of the receipt of said request. If the
owner disagrees with the board of health's environmental committee decision,
the owner must seek a review by the Brunswick County Superior Court within ten
days of the issuance of the board committee's written decision. If the owner
fails to redeem the animal, or fails to timely request a review of the seizure,
or fails to timely appeal the board committee's written decision, the animal
shall become the property of Brunswick County and shall be disposed of
according to this chapter.
         b.   The animal services officer may, in addition, issue a criminal
summons or warrant, pursuant to the G.S. 130A-25 for the owner's violation of
the G.S. 130A-185 or 130A-192. Any owner, if convicted, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500.00 or imprisoned for not more
than six months.
      (3)   Dogs or cats without valid rabies tags and the owner is unknown. If
a dog or cat is observed not wearing a valid rabies vaccination tag and the
owner is unknown and cannot be found, the animal services director or his
designee may impound the animal. Written notice of impoundment shall be posted
at the animal shelter for a minimum of five days. If the animal has not been
redeemed by the owner after five days the animal shall become the property of
Brunswick County to be disposed of according to this chapter. If the owner is
found, the animal shall be released upon payment of all redemption fees and a
civil penalty for failure to wear a valid rabies vaccination tag. The owner may
also be subject to other appropriate penalties described in Article IV [of the
Brunswick County Animal Control Ordinance], plus a civil penalty for the animal
being at large.
      (4)   Failure to provide animal services with rabies vaccination
certificates. Any veterinarian or certified rabies vaccinator who willfully
refuses to turn over rabies vaccination certificates to animal services
pursuant to G.S. 130A-189, shall be subject to the issuance of a criminal
summons or warrants or the filing of a civil action to obtain the certificates.
      (5)   Failure to notify the county health director and/or the animal
services director of a biting incident and failure to confine biting dogs and
cats. If the owner of a dog or cat, or the person being bitten, or the parent
of a child or other legal guardian or person standing in loco parents of the
person, fails to notify the health director and/or the animal services director
and provide the names and addresses of the person(s) bitten and the names and
addresses of the owner(s) of any animals involved in a biting incident; or the
owner, who has knowledge of a dog or cat biting incident, fails to confine the
animal pursuant to section
4-53, the animal services director or the county health director may seek the
issuance of a criminal summons or warrant charging the person with a violation
of G.S. 130A-196.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. II, (4), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Secs. 4-55--4-75. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
ANIMAL CRUELTY
Sec. 4-76. Definitions.
   As used in this article the following terms are defined below:
   Adequate shelter: An enclosure of at least three sides, a roof and a floor.
The enclosure shall be ventilated and must have sufficient room for the animal
(s) to move around freely and to lie down comfortably. Animals housed under the
following conditions shall not constitute adequate shelter:
      (1)   Underneath outside steps, decks and stoops; or
      (2)   Inside of vehicles; or
      (3)   Underneath vehicles; or
      (4)   Inside metal barrels placed in direct sunlight during the summer;
or
      (5)   Inside cardboard boxes.
   Animal: Every nonhuman species, both domestic and wild.
   Cruelty and cruel treatment: Every act, omission, or act of neglect whereby
unjustifiable, pain, suffering or death is caused or permitted, or attempted to
be caused or permitted, against animals, as well as acts or attempted acts of
teasing, molesting, baiting or trapping animals unlawfully. By way of example
and not limitation, the following acts or conditions shall constitute prima
facie evidence of animal cruelty:
      (1)   A collar, rope or chain embedded in or causing injury to an
animal's neck;
      (2)   Dogs or cats left out in the rain, snow, extreme heat or cold
without shelter;
      (3)   Animals that have not been fed or watered adequately;
      (4)   Intentionally allowing animals to engage in a fight;
      (5)   Allowing animals to live in unsanitary conditions; and
      (6)   Allowing animals to live under crowded conditions; and
      (7)   Failure or refusal of an owner to obtain medical treatment for an
animal when in an animal services officer's opinion such treatment is needed.
   Owner: Any person or group of persons owning, keeping, having charge of or
taking care of an animal.
   Person: Any human being, firm, partnership or corporation including any
nonprofit corporation.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. III, (1), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Sec. 4-77. Exemptions.
   This article shall not apply to agencies conducting biomedical research or
training, lawful activities for sport, the production of livestock or poultry
for sale as a consumer product and the lawful destruction of any animal for the
purpose of protecting livestock, poultry or humans.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. III, (2), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Sec. 4-78. General care and prohibited acts.
   All animals shall be kept and treated under sanitary and humane conditions
and failure of the owner or possessor of the animal to abide by the provisions
listed below shall subject the owner or possessor to the sanctions described in
section
4-80.
      (1)   Food, water and shelter. All animals in the possession of any
persons shall be provided proper and adequate food and water. All animals,
unless otherwise indicated in this chapter, shall be given at suitable
intervals not to exceed 24 hours, a quantity of wholesome foodstuff suitable
for the species and age, sufficient to maintain a healthful level of nutrition.
All animals shall have access to a constant supply of clean, fresh water. All
animals shall be provided proper and adequate shelter from the weather at all
times.
      (2)   Clean shelter. All shelter for animals and the area surrounding
said shelter shall be kept clean at all times.
      (3)   Medical treatment. All owners or possessors of animals shall
provide proper medical attention for sick, diseased or injured animals. A sick
animal shall go no longer than 24 hours without veterinary care.
      (4)   Cruelty and cruel treatment. No person shall beat, torment,
overload, overwork, tease, molest or bait an animal or otherwise cruelly treat
an animal as defined in section
4-76. No person shall shoot a dog or any other animal, either on or off the
owner's property, unless the animal is in the act of attacking a human being,
sheep, cattle, hog, goat, or poultry or any domestic animal or as otherwise
allowed by the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission. This shall not
apply to animal services officers when in the performance of their duties. No
person shall trap a dog or cat without the permission of animal services.
      (5)   Illegal contest or combat. No person shall cause, permit or
instigate any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other illegal contest or combat
between animals or animals and humans.
      (6)   Poisoning of animals. No person shall expose any known poisonous
substance or mix a poisonous substance with food, so that it will likely be
eaten by any animal. This does not include acts or attempts of persons to rid
their own property of rats or any other acts permitted by the North Carolina
Wildlife Resources Commission.
      (7)   Confining animals to motor vehicles or transporting animals. No
person shall leave an animal in a closed car, truck or other vehicle for such
duration or at temperatures as an animal services officer, in his sole
discretion, deems harmful or potentially harmful to the animal. No person shall
carry or cause to be carried in or upon any vehicle or other conveyance, any
animal in a cruel or inhumane manner.
      (8)   Abandonment. No person shall turn loose or discard any domesticated
animal or pet with the intent of abandoning such animal or pet.
      (9)   Disposing of dead animals. All possessors or owners of animals that
die, from any cause, shall bury the dead animal to a depth of at least three
feet beneath the surface of the ground on his or her leased or owned property.
No animal shall be buried within 300 feet of any flowing stream or public body
of water. In the alternative, said animal shall be completely burned or
otherwise disposed of in a manner approved by the state veterinarian. In any
event, all dead animals shall be disposed of within 24 hours after knowledge of
the death. No possessor or owner of a dead animal[(s)] shall remove the carcass
of a dead animal from his premises to the premises of another person without
written permission of the person having charge of such premises and without
burying said carcass as provided above.
      (10)   Reporting injured or killed domestic animals. All persons who
injure or kill a domesticated animal by running over, into, or otherwise coming
in contact with such an animal with an automobile, motorcycle, bicycle or other
vehicle shall notify the owner of the animal immediately. If the owner is not
known, the person who injured or killed the animal shall immediately notify the
animal services director, or the department of public safety if the injury or
death occurred in the city, or the sheriff's department if the injury or death
occurred in the county. The person who injured or killed the animal shall give
his or her name and address to the appropriate authority. An owner or lessee of
real property who finds an injured or suffering domesticated animal on his
property shall report the same to animal services as soon as the animal is
discovered on the real property.
      (11)   Animals given away as prizes. No live animal shall be given away,
raffled or offered as a prize, premium or advertising device for, or as an
inducement to enter, any contest, game or other competition involving skill or
chance.
      (12)   Public exhibits of animals. Animal services shall have the
authority to inspect public exhibits of animals which are a part of fairs,
carnivals, festivals, fund raising events, petting zoos and any other activity
or function carried on in Brunswick County. Brunswick County Animal Services
shall have the authority to close down any exhibit, function or activity if it
is determined that animals are being cruelly treated or animals run the risk of
causing injury or harm to the public or run the risk of being injured or harmed
themselves. Animal services, the health department nor brunswick county accept
any liability for any injury, damage of property or loss visiting or monitoring
public exhibits of animals.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. III, (3), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007;
Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013)
Sec. 4-79. Failure to report animal cruelty.
   An owner or lessee of property who knows, or based on facts and
circumstances should know, that animals are being or have been cruelly treated
on the owner's or lessee's real property, shall report said act or acts of
cruelty to the animal services department. The owner or lessee of real property
who fails to report acts of animal cruelty shall be subject to the appropriate
sanctions described in section 4-80, below.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. III, (4), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Sec. 4-80. Sanctions, penalties, fines and remedies.
   Violations of this article [and Article III of the Brunswick County Animal
Control Ordinance], are punishable by prosecution in criminal court as provided
by G.S. 14-4, unless a greater penalty is provided elsewhere, or by the
imposition of civil penalties, as prescribed in Article VII, or both.
Collection of civil penalties may be by civil action or by the use of a
collection agency.
      (1)   Failure to adequately provide for animals and cruel treatment of
animals. Whenever it has been determined by an animal services officer that an
animal is not being adequately provided for or is being cruelly treated, as
defined in section
4-78, above, he may file with the magistrate a sworn complaint requesting an
order allowing him to take immediate custody of, and provide suitable care for,
the animal. The magistrate, pursuant to G.S. 19A-46 and this chapter, shall
issue the order only when he finds probable cause to believe that the animal is
being cruelly treated and that it is necessary for the animal services officer
to take immediate custody. Any magistrate's order issued under this section
shall be valid for only 24 hours after its issuance. After the animal services
officer executes the order, he shall return it with a written inventory of the
animal(s) seized to the clerk of court.
         a.   The animal services officer may request that a law enforcement
officer accompany him to help seize the animal. He may forcibly enter any
premises or vehicle when necessary to execute the order only if he reasonably
believes that the premises or vehicle is unoccupied by any person and that the
animal is on the premises or in the vehicle and only if the animal services
officer is accompanied by a law enforcement officer. In any case, he must give
notice of his identity and purpose to anyone who may be present before entering
the premises. If the premises is occupied and access to the premises and the
animal is denied by the occupant, the animal services officer shall obtain a
judicial order from a district court judge authorizing forcible entry. Forcible
entry shall only be used during the daylight hours.
         b.   When the animal services officer seizes an animal, he must leave
with the owner, if known, or affix to the premises or vehicle a copy of the
magistrate's order and a written notice of the description of the animal, the
place where the animal will be taken, the reason for taking the animal, a list
of conditions, if any, which must be met before the owner can redeem the animal
and the animal services officer's intent to file a complaint in district court
requesting custody of the animal if the conditions are not met.
         c.   When the animal services officer takes custody of such an animal,
he shall file a verified complaint asking the district court to determine
custody of the animal. The animal services officer may also seek injunctive
relief and any other relief he deems appropriate. This complaint shall be filed
as soon as possible, but in no event longer than 30 days after the taking of
the animal. If the owner surrenders the animal, the animal services officer
does not have to file a complaint seeking custody of the animal.
         d.   The animal services officer must take any animal seized directly
to a safe and secure place and provide suitable care for it. The necessary
expenses of caring for a seized animal, including necessary veterinary care,
shall be a charge against the animal's owner and a lien on the animal to be
enforced as provided by G.S. 44A-4.
      (2)   Alternative remedy and sanction. If it is determined by an animal
services officer that an animal is not in immediate danger, or the condition or
problem which gives rise to inadequate care or cruel treatment can be corrected
immediately or within a short period of time, not to exceed 72 hours, he may,
in lieu of subsection (1), above, issue a written notice of violation
requesting the owner or possessor of the animal to cease and desist or to
correct the problem within 72 hours. If the condition or problem is not
corrected within 72 hours or the owner or possessor of the animal fails to
cease or desist from the cruel treatment or fails to adequately provide for the
animal, the animal services officer may take action as outlined in subsection
(1), above.
      (3)   Violation of section
4-78(2); (clean shelter). Notwithstanding the other provisions and sanctions of
this article, when it has been determined by an animal services officer that
animals have been allowed to live in unsanitary conditions, and that said
conditions resulted from the owner's unwillingness or inability to clean the
area where animals are housed or that the conditions resulted from the number
of animals involved, animal services may summarily seize the animals. Before
the animals are seized, the animal services director or health director shall
issue a declaration of unsanitary conditions and notice of seizure to the
owner. If the owner wishes to request a review of the seizure of the animals,
the owner must file a written request with the board of health's environmental
committee within five days of the seizure. If a timely request is filed, the
board of health's environmental committee shall convene within ten days of the
filing of said request. If the within ten days of the filing of said request.
If the owner disagrees with the board of health's environmental committee
decision, the owner must seek a review by the Brunswick County Superior Court
within ten days of the issuance of the board committee's written decision. If
the owner fails to timely request a review of the seizure or fails to timely
appeal the committee's written decision, the animal shall become the property
of Brunswick County and shall become the property of Brunswick County and shall
be disposed of according to this chapter.
      (4)   Violation of section
4-78(4)--(9). When it has been determined by an animal services officer that
there has been a violation of one or more of the following subsections (4)--
(9), he may initiate the issuance of a criminal summons or warrant for
violating the following criminal statutes:
         a.   G.S. 14-360, Cruelty to Animals;
         b.   G.S. 14-361.1, Abandonment of Animals;
         c.   G.S. 14-362 and 14-362.1, Cockfighting and other Animal fights;
         d.   G.S. 14-363, Transporting Animals Cruelly;
         e.   G.S. 14-401, Animal Poisoning;
         f.   G.S. 106-403 and 106-405, Disposing of Dead Animals.
   Any person found guilty under any of the above criminal statutes shall be
subject to the penalty therein prescribed, or if no penalty therein prescribed,
or if no penalty is prescribed, then according to G.S. 14.4.
      (5)   Violation of section
4-78(10); (reporting injured or killed domestic animals). When it has been
determined by an animal services officer that a domesticated animal has been
injured or killed, as a result of coming into contact with an automobile,
motorcycle, bicycle or other vehicle, and the person operating said conveyance
fails to report the same, and the operator can be identified by an eyewitness
or physical evidence, the animal services officer may issue a written notice of
violation and civil penalty to the operator.
         a.   Any owner or lessee of real property who fails to report the
existence of an injured or suffering domesticated animal on his property as
required by section
4-78(10) above, may be issued a written notice of violation and civil penalty.
      (6)   Violation of section
4-78(11) or (12); (animals as prizes and public exhibits of animals). Any
person who violates section
4-78(11) shall be subject to the issuance of a criminal warrant or summons and,
if convicted, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to
exceed $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six months. Any person who fails
or refuses to close down an exhibit, function or activity after being
instructed to do so by animal services shall be subject to the issuance of a
criminal warrant or summons and, if convicted, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or imprisoned for not more than six
months.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. III, (5), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Secs. 4-81--4-120. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
DANGEROUS DOG OR OTHER DANGEROUS ANIMAL
Sec. 4-121. Definitions.
   As used in this article the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth below:
   At large means when any previously determined dangerous dog or other
dangerous animal is off of the property of its owner and not under restraint or
when any previously determined dangerous dog or other dangerous animal is not
confined to a secure enclosure while on the property of its owner, it shall be
deemed at large.
   Dangerous animal means:
      (1)   A dog or other animal that:
         a.   Without provocation has killed or inflicted severe injury on a
person, or
         b.   Is determined by the health director to be potentially dangerous
because the animal has engaged in one or more of the behaviors listed in the
definition of a potentially dangerous animal; or
      (2)   Any dog owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of
dog fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting.
   Potentially dangerous animal means a dog or any other animal that without
provocation has killed or inflicted severe injury on a person, or a dog or
another animal that has:
      (1)   Inflicted a bite on a person that resulted in broken bones or
disfiguring lacerations or required cosmetic surgery or hospitalization; or
      (2)   Killed or inflicted severe injury upon domestic animal when not on
the owner's real property; or
      (3)   Approached a person when not on the owner's property in a vicious
or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack.
   Owner means any person, group of persons, firm, partnership or corporation
owning, keeping, harboring, having charge of or taking care of a dangerous dog
or other dangerous animal or allowing a dangerous dog or other dangerous animal
to remain on its property for 72 hours.
   Owner's property means any real property owned or leased by the owner of a
dangerous dog or other dangerous animal, not including any public right-of-way
or the common areas of a condominium, apartment complex or townhouse
development.
   Restraint: means a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal is restrained
if it is firmly under the control of a competent person by means of a leash,
chain, or rope at all times. When the animal is not in a secure enclosure but
on the owner's property it shall be securely under restraint by a competent
person who by means of a leash, chain, or rope has the animal firmly under
control at all times. When a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal is off
of the property of its owner, restraint shall also include a secure muzzle on
the animal. For purposes of this section, tying a dangerous animal or
potentially dangerous animal to a stake, pipe, tree or any other stationary
object shall not constitute restraint. When the animal is not under the control
of a competent person, restraint shall mean confinement to a secure enclosure
deemed appropriate by the health director or his designee.
   Secure enclosure means an enclosure from which dangerous animal or
potentially dangerous animal cannot escape unless freed by an owner. Enclosures
shall be of a size appropriate for the animal it will hold, and must have a
concrete floor. The enclosure shall be constructed with a minimum of 11½ gauge
galvanized chain link fencing securely attached to the frame of said enclosure.
The enclosure shall have a wire top also constructed of a minimum 11½ gauge
galvanized chain link fencing. The enclosure's exit/entry gate must be equipped
with a pad lock. Such facilities must be approved by the health director or his
designee. Human dwelling units shall not be approved as enclosures for
dangerous animals.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. VIII, (1), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-
2007)
Sec. 4-122. Exemption.
   This article shall not apply to a dog being used by a law enforcement
officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties, or a dog
being used in a lawful hunt, or a dog used as a hunting dog, herding dog, or
predator control dog on the property of or under the control of its owner, or a
dog where the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a person who, at the
time of the injury, was committing a willful trespass or tort, was tormenting,
abusing, or assaulting the dog, had tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog or
was committing or attempting to commit a crime.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. VIII, (2), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-
2007)
Sec. 4-123. Determination of dangerousness.
   If the health director receives information that a dog or any other animal
has exhibited or committed any of the acts described in the potentially
dangerous animal definition above, he must make a determination as to whether
the animal is potentially dangerous. The health director must issue a written
determination within five days of learning about the dangerous propensity of
the animal. Whatever determination makes must be placed in writing. The written
decision must contain his reasons for declaring or not declaring the animal
potentially dangerous. If the animal is declared potentially dangerous,
specific instructions in accordance with section
4-124, of this article and any other controls as deemed as necessary by the
health director or his designee shall be given. These instructions must be
followed during the pendency of any appeal filed by the owner and at all times
thereafter unless the owner prevails on appeal. Animals declared dangerous or
potentially dangerous shall be seized by Brunswick County Animal Services and
impounded at Brunswick County Animal Shelter or other facility approved by the
health director or his designee. The animal shall be impounded for 14 days or
until such time as the secure enclosure is constructed by the owner at the
discretion of the health director and approved by the health director or his
designee. All fines penalties and fees shall be paid by the owner of the
dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal prior to the animal being
reclaimed. Dangerous animals or potentially dangerous animals not reclaimed by
the owner after 20 days of being deemed dangerous shall become property of
Brunswick County and be humanely destroyed. The written decision shall be
served on the owner of the animal. If the owner of the animal disagrees with
the health director's decision, he must file a written appeal and request for
hearing with the board of health's environmental committee within five days of
receiving the written decision. The board of health's environmental committee
shall schedule a hearing within ten days of receiving the appeal and request
for hearing. The board of health's environmental committee shall render a
written decision within three days after the hearing and serve the same on the
owner. The owner may appeal the board of health's environmental committee
decision to the superior court by filing notice of appeal and a petition for
review within ten days of the final decision of the board of health's
environmental committee. The appeal shall be heard de novo in superior court
pursuant to G.S. 67 4.l(c).
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. VIII, (3), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-
2007)
Sec. 4-124. Confinement and restraint of a dangerous dog or other dangerous
animal.
   The owner of a dangerous dog or other dangerous animal shall keep the animal
within a secure enclosure, as defined in section
4-121, of this article, on his property, or on the property of another with
written permission. When the animal is not in a secure enclosure but on the
owners property it shall be securely under restraint by a competent person who
by means of a leash, chain or rope has the animal firmly under control at all
times. When the animal is off of the property of the owner, it shall be
securely muzzled and under restraint by a competent person who by means of a
leash, chain or rope has the animal firmly under control at all times. The
owner shall notify animal services immediately of an escape by the animal. All
dangerous dogs must be microchipped for identification by a licensed
Veterinarian within 20 days at the owner's expense and animal services provided
with the identification number. All owners of dangerous dogs must purchase a
sign from animal services that states "DANGEROUS DOG" and post same on the
enclosure where said dog is confined.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. VIII, (4), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-
2007)
Sec. 4-125. Transfer of ownership of a dangerous animal.
   If the owner of a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal transfers
ownership or possession of the animal to another person, the owner shall
provide written notice to the new owner or person taking possession that the
animal is dangerous, as defined in this article and the owner shall provide
animal services with written notice that ownership or possession of the animal
prior to the transfer of ownership.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. VIII, (5), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-
2007)
Sec. 4-126. Sanctions, penalties, fines and remedies.
   Violations of this article [and Article VIII, of the Brunswick County Animal
Control Ordinance], are punishable by prosecution in criminal court as provided
by G.S. 14-4, unless a greater penalty is provided elsewhere, or by the
imposition of civil penalties as prescribed in article VII, or both. Collection
of civil penalties may be by civil action or by the use of a collection agency.
      (1)   Dangerous animal or potentially dangeous animal found at large.
         a.   If an animal, which has previously been determined to be
dangerous or potentially dangerous by the health director, is found at large,
it may be tranquilized or humanely destroyed by an animal services officer with
or without prior notice to the owner, only after unsuccessful attempts to catch
it and authorization from the animal services director. If an animal services
officer does tranquilize or humanely destroy such an animal, he shall submit a
written report of the incident to the animal services director within 72 hours
of the incident and shall make a good faith attempt to notify the owner of the
incident.
         b.   If an animal which previously has been determined to be dangerous
or potentially dangerous by the health director is determined by an animal
services officer to pose immediate danger to the health and safety of any
person or animal, the dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal may be
tranquilized or humanely destroyed at the animal service officer's discretion,
with or without prior notification to the owner. In the event the animal
services officer does tranquilize or humanely destroy such animal, he shall
submit a written report of the incident to the animal services director within
72 hours of the incident and shall make a good faith attempt to notify the
owner of the incident.
         c.   If a dangerous animal or potentially dangerous animal is caught
while at large or seen at large, it may be impounded and humanely destroyed.
Animal services may go upon private property to seize the animal. The health
director may issue a notice of intent to destroy the animal to the owner. The
owner may appeal this intended action by filing a written request with the
board of health's environmental committee within five working days of receiving
the ritten decision. The board of health's environmental committee shall
schedule a hearing within ten days of receiving the appeal and request for
hearing. The board of health's environmental committee shall hear the appeal
and render a final written decision within three working days after the hearing
and serve the same on the owner. The owner may appeal the board of health's
environmental committee decision to the superior court by filing notice of
appeal and a petition for review within ten days of the final decision of the
board of health's environmental committee. If the owner fails to seek a timely
review of the animal services director's notice of intent to destroy the animal
or if he fails to file a timely appeal of the board of health's environmental
committee's decision, animal services may humanely destroy the animal.
         d.   If the owner of a dangerous or potentially dangerous animal has
failed to adhere to the written dangerous dog instructions provided by the
health director, the health director may issue an order of seizure with intent
destroy the animal to the owner. The owner may appeal this intended action by
filing a written request with the board of health's environmental committee
within five working days of receiving the written decision. The board of
health's environmental committee shall schedule a hearing within ten days of
receiving the appeal and request for hearing. The board of health's
environmental committee shall hear the appeal and render a final written
decision within three working days after the hearing and serve the same on the
owner. The owner may appeal the board of health's environmental committee
decision to the superior court by filing notice of appeal and a petition for
review within ten days of the final decision of the board of health's
environmental committee. If the owner fails to seek a timely review of the
health director's notice of intent to destroy the animal or if he fails to file
a timely appeal of the board of health's environmental committee's decision,
animal services may humanely destroy the animal.
      (2)   Failure to confine or restrain a dangerous animal and failure to
provide notice of transfer. Any owner who fails to confine or restrain a
dangerous animal or any owner who fails to provide the written notices
described in section
4-125, above or violates any provisions of this article shall be subject to the
sanctions, fines, penalties and remedies mentioned above as well as being
subject to the issuance of a criminal warrant or summons. If convicted, the
owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed
$500.00 or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both (G.S. 67-4.2)
(c)).
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. VIII, (6), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-
2007)
Secs. 4-127--4-145. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
INTERFERENCE
Sec. 4-146. Interference.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, or molest an
employee of animal services or any other person duly authorized by this chapter
while in the performance of duty. It shall also be unlawful for any person to
seek release, or attempt to release, or to release any animal in the custody of
animal services, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. The
animal services director may initiate the issuance of a criminal warrant for
any person violating this article. If convicted, the person shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of up to $500.00 or imprisonment for not
more than six months.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. X, 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Secs. 4-147--4-180. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS
Sec. 4-181. Definitions.
   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set
forth below:
   Animal means every nonhuman species, both domestic and wild.
   Feral cat means a domestic cat which has adapted to survive in the wild, is
homeless and ownerless, having descended from stray and possibly generations of
abandoned house pets.
   Impoundment means possession or seizure of an animal by Brunswick County
Animal Services for placement in the county's animal shelter or any other
appropriate facility.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. XII, (1), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Sec. 4-182. Impoundment.
   Not inconsistent with the proceeding articles of this chapter, any healthy
animal, with the exception of a feral cat, which appears to be lost, strayed or
unwanted, or any dog or cat which is found not wearing a current valid rabies
vaccination tag, or any wild or exotic animal or poisonous reptile which has
escaped or poses the danger of escaping may be confined to the animal shelter
or any other appropriate facility in a humane manner for a minimum period of
five days, unless otherwise specified by this chapter, for redemption by the
owner. Any animal not redeemed within five days shall become the property of
Brunswick County and shall be disposed of pursuant to this chapter. Brunswick
County Animal Services is authorized to obtain suitable board, maintenance and
care from any available source for any impoundment animal for which the animal
shelter is not equipped to care. The owner of any animal impounded and cared
for under this provision of the ordinance may redeem the animal upon payment of
all costs for maintenance, transportation and care plus regular redemption fees
provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. XII, (2), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Sec. 4-183. Feral cats.
   A feral cat shall be held for three working days for redemption by a
possible owner. If the feral cat is not redeemed within three working days, it
may be euthanized pursuant to this chapter. Before a feral cat is euthanized, a
panel of three persons must unanimously declare the cat a feral cat. If the
panel cannot agree unanimously, the cat must be held for five days. The panel
is to be made up of three animal services staff members, each with a minimum of
one year's experience with animal services.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. XII, (3), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Sec. 4-184. Notice.
   A good faith effort shall be made to notify known owners of impounded
animals. If the owner is known, a written notice of impoundment shall be served
on the owner or affixed to the owner's premises. The written notice shall
describe the animal, state the date, time and place the animal was picked up
and inform the owner of the conditions whereby the animal may be redeemed.
Instructions on how to determine if an animal has been impounded shall be
posted at the animal shelter. The posting of these instructions at the animal
shelter shall constitute adequate notice to an unknown owner.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. XII, (4), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Sec. 4-185. Boarding fees.
   The animal services director, with the assistance of shelter personnel,
shall charge to the owner the following fees, which must be paid before an
animal may be redeemed:
   Boarding fee for dogs, per day . . . . . $10.00
   Boarding fee for cats, per day . . . . . 10.00
   Boarding fee for all other animals kept at the animal shelter, per day . . .
. . 10.00
   Boarding fee for all other animals not kept at the animal shelter . . . . .
The actual amount charged by the caretaker or boarder of the animal.
   Nonroutine charge for transporting the animal . . . . . The actual amount
charged by the person providing the transportation.
   The above fees are in addition to the redemption fees set forth in article
VIII and are subject to adjustment or change by the Brunswick County Board of
County Commissioners at any time.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. XII, (5), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Secs. 4-186--4-230. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.
CIVIL PENALTIES
Sec. 4-231. Civil penalties.
   Animal services is authorized to assess civil penalties for violations of
this chapter. Any assessed civil penalty not paid within 20 days of issuance
may be turned over to a collection agency or efforts made to collect in civil
court.
   Failure to wear rabies tag . . . . . $50.00
   Failure to vaccinate . . . . . 100.00
   Failure to notify, or provide information of a bite . . . . . 100.00
   Manner of keeping and treating animals . . . . . 100.00
   Failure to give notice of injuring animal . . . . . 50.00
   Failure to give notice of injured animal on property . . . . . 50.00
   Unprovoked dog bite while running at large . . . . . 500.00
   Animals running at large 1st time . . . . . 50.00
      2nd time . . . . . 75.00
      3rd time . . . . . 100.00
      4 or more . . . . . 150.00
   Failure to confine dog/cat in estrus . . . . . 75.00
   Animal public nuisance 1st time . . . . . 50.00
      2[nd] or more . . . . . 75.00
   Harboring stray animals . . . . . 50.00
   Dangerous dog violations . . . . . 100.00
   Violation of exotic animal ordinance (per day) . . . . . 50.00
   Interference with officer . . . . . 150.00
   Interference with trap or cage . . . . . 100.00
   Unspecified violations of the ordinance (each) . . . . . 50.00
   Miscellaneous fees--Euthanasia by request . . . . . 10.00
   Tranquilize small animal by request . . . . . 10.00
   Tranquilize large animal by request . . . . . 15.00
   Lost darts . . . . . 10.00
   These amounts may be changed by the Brunswick County Board of Commissioners
at any time.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. XIII, 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Secs. 4-232--4-275. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII.
REDEMPTION OF ANIMALS
Sec. 4-276. Redemption of animals.
   An owner of an animal, which has been impounded by animal services, may
resume possession of the animal, except as already provided or in other
articles of this chapter, upon compliance with the following provisions:
      (1)   Proof and acknowledgement of ownership. Any person attempting to
redeem an impounded animal shall present proof sufficient to satisfy shelter
personnel of ownership of the animal. Evidence of ownership may include but is
not limited to any of the following.
         a.   License tag from another county;
         b.   Rabies tag for the animal;
         c.   Ownership documents, pedigree papers, bill of sale and any other
document identifying the person as owner of the animal;
         d.   Photographs of the animal with the owner or other family members;
or
         e.   Affidavit from two people in the community stating that the
animal has been seen in the presence or possession of the person attempting to
resume possession.
   Any person attempting to redeem an animal on behalf of an owner shall
present proof sufficient to satisfy shelter personnel that he or she is acting
as agent for the owner.
      (2)   Time of redemption. Any person attempting to redeem an animal must
make contact with the animal shelter within five days of the animal being
impounded at the animal shelter or some other appropriate facility. After
making contact, that person shall be given a reasonable amount of time to prove
ownership of the animal not to exceed five additional days.
      (3)   Payment of redemption fees, boarding fees and civil penalties. The
owner of an impounded animal must pay all redemption fees, boarding fees and
civil penalties assessed against the animal before it can be released from the
shelter. Any person, after presenting sufficient proof of ownership, may redeem
the animal after paying the following fees and costs:
      1st Redemption by owner . . . . . $50.00 + Boarding fee + Civil penalty
      2nd Redemption by owner . . . . . 75.00 + Boarding fee + Civil penalty
      3rd Redemption by owner . . . . . 100.00 + Boarding fee + Civil penalty
      4th and subsequent redemption . . . . . 150.00 + Boarding fee + Civil
penalty
   If an owner cannot prove a current rabies vaccination, he/she will be
charged an additional $10.00 for a rabies vaccination certificate.
   These amounts may be changed by the Brunswick County Board of Commissioners
at any time. The animal shall become the property of Brunswick County if the
owner fails to pay all amounts due and if the appropriate holding period has
passed, and will then be disposed of as provided by this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. XIV, (1), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Secs. 4-277--4-300. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX.
DISPOSITION AND ADOPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS
Sec. 4-301. Disposition of impounded animals.
   If an animal is not redeemed by its owner within the allowed time for
redemption, the animal shall become the property of Brunswick County without
any further notice to the owner. Once the animal becomes the property of
Brunswick County, the animal services director is authorized to adopt the
animal out or euthanize it. Any sick or diseased animal, which appears to be
lost, strayed or unwanted and is found not wearing a rabies vaccination tag or
any other form of identification may be euthanized immediately by order of the
animal services director. Any sick or diseased animal, with proof of ownership,
confined in the county animal shelter, may be euthanized by order of the animal
services director after recommendation of a licensed veterinarian.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. XV, (1), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Sec. 4-302. Adoption fees.
   Adoption fees shall be set by the board of county commissioners.
   All dogs over six months . . . . . $65.00
   Includes a physical examination, heartworm test, rabies vaccination, and
spay or neuter.
   All dogs under six months . . . . . 46.00
   Includes a physical examination, rabies vaccination, and spay or neuter.
   All female cats and kittens . . . . . 55.00
   Includes a physical examination, feline leukemia/F.I.V. test, rabies
vaccination, and spay or neuter.
   All male cats . . . . . 35.00
   Includes a physical examination, feline leukemia/F.I.V. test, rabies
vaccination, and spay or neuter.
   Bonafide rescue groups . . . . . 5.00
   Nonprofit animal rescue groups that provide their own medical services and
documentation thereof to animal services are entitled to this reduced rate.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. XV, (2), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Sec. 4-303. Recovery of adopted animal.
   The animal services director is authorized to recover, reclaim or repossess
an animal and dispose of the animal according to this chapter if the adopting
party violates the adoption agreement.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. XV, (3), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Secs. 4-304--4-335. Reserved.
ARTICLE X.
SERVICE AND RETURN OF SERVICE
Sec. 4-336. Method of service and return.
   Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all notices or citations
required to be sent or delivered pursuant to this chapter shall be served and
return of service made as follows:
      (1)   Personal service. The animal services director or animal services
officer may deliver notices or citations to all persons due a notice or
citation pursuant to this chapter. If he does so, he must get the person to
sign a certificate verifying that the notice or citation was in fact received,
and the animal services director or animal services officer shall sign a return
of service certificate verifying that he is fact served the notice or citation.
If the person being served refuses to sign the notice or citation verifying
receipt of the same, the person making service shall write in the appropriate
space "refused to sign". The person's refusal shall not invalidate the service.
The animal services director or animal services officer may leave the notice or
citation with anyone of suitable age and discretion at the residence or place
of business of the person being served. The person serving said notice or
citation shall have the recipient sign the service certificate.
      (2)   Registered or ceritified mail. The animal services director may
serve notices or citations by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. XVI, (1), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Secs. 4-337--4-365. Reserved.
ARTICLE XI.
APPEALS AND REQUESTS FOR REVIEW
Sec. 4-366. Appeal procedure.
   All civil citations may be appealed in writing. The notice of appeal must be
addressed to
   Brunswick County Animal Services,
   Attention:
   Animal Services Director,
   P.O. Box 92,
   Supply, NC 28462
and postmarked or personally delivered within 20 days of receipt of the
citation.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. XVII, (1), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-
2007)
Sec. 4-367. Appeal hearing.
   (a)   Appeals of animal services civil citations shall be heard within 30
days of the notice of appeal, unless a continuance is mutually agreed upon. The
appeal hearing shall be held by the health director or his designee. All
testimony offered in a hearing held pursuant to this article shall be given
under oath and recorded by tape recording or any other reasonable manner. The
hearing shall be open to the public. The person requesting the hearing may be
represented by an attorney. The animal services director or animal services
officer shall have the burden of proving that this chapter has been violated
and that the proposed sanction is in accordance with the ordinance. The person
requesting the hearing will then be given the opportunity to prove that this
chapter has not been violated and/or that the sanction is not in compliance
with the ordinance. The person requesting the hearing may admit the violation
and confine his proof to showing that the sanction is not in accordance with
the ordinance. The animal services director will then be given the opportunity
to address any conflicts or inconsistencies created by the evidence or
statements.
   (b)   The health director or his designee will render a decision and a
notice of decision will be furnished to all parties concerned (complainant,
bite victim, animal owner, etc.). If the sanctions/penalties are upheld, the
animal owner will have 20 days to pay any fines or fees before collection
efforts are initiated. The animal owner may further appeal the decision of the
health director or his designee to Brunswick County Superior Court within ten
days of the service of the notice of decision.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. XVII, (2), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-
2007)
Secs. 4-368--4-400. Reserved.
ARTICLE XII.
GENDER
Sec. 4-401. Gender statement. 
   In this chapter, words of the masculine gender shall be deemed and construed
to include correlative words of the feminine and neuter genders, words
importing the singular number shall include the plural number, and vice versa.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. XVIII, 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Secs. 4-402--4-435. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII.
SEVERABILITY
Sec. 4-436. Severability.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional in any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and
such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. XIX, 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Secs. 4-437--4-465. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIV.
ENFORCEMENT AND EFFECT OF THIS CHAPTER
Sec. 4-466. Enforcement.
   The animal services director or any other person duly authorized to initiate
legal action on behalf of Brunswick County may take necessary legal steps to
enforce this chapter. This chapter shall be enforced by imposing the specific
sanctions, penalties, fines and other remedies described herein, by seeking
injunctive relief, orders of abatement, orders of custody and any other means
prescribed by statute or common law. Any violation of this chapter, which does
not carry a specific sanction, penalty or fine, shall be punishable as a
general criminal misdemeanor as defined by North Carolina law.
(Ord. No. 2007-1001, Art. XX, (1), 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2007-1003, 10-26-2007)
Secs. 4-467--4-479. Reserved.
ARTICLE XV.
SEA TURTLE SANCTUARY
Sec. 4-480.   Activities within sea turtle sanctuaries.
   (a)   The areas within the village limits above the mean low water mark,
including the foreshore, are hereby declared to be a sea turtle sanctuary.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully take any sea turtle
or to take any action that may or will disturb or destroy any sea turtle,
including but not limited to green, hawksbill, Kemp's ridley, loggerhead, and
leatherback turtles, their nests, hatchlings, or eggs within the sea turtle
sanctuary.
   (c)   Commercial fishing activities permitted by law that are conducted as
specified in the General Statutes shall not be governed by this section.
   (d)   Notwithstanding article VII of this chapter, any violations of this
article shall be deemed a civil violation, punishable by a civil fine of
$100.00. In addition, violation of this section shall be punishable pursuant to
G.S. 14-4 as a class 3 misdemeanor with a fine that shall not exceed $500.00 in
the discretion of the court. Any violation of this section may also result in
criminal charges as provided in G.S. 113-189 and 113-337. Nothing contained in
this section shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action as
is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. No. 2009-0901, 9-18-2009)
Secs. 4-481--4-499. Reserved.
ARTICLE XVI.
LIVESTOCK AND WILD ANIMALS
Sec. 4-500. Definitions.
   Livestock means horses, mules, cattle, swine, goats, sheep, poultry and any
and all other animals typically maintained individually or in flocks for
productive or useful purposes and whether or not an animal is maintained by any
specific individual as a pet.
   Wild animals shall include any animal which is:
      (1)   Not normally domesticated or, because of its size or vicious
propensities, or any other physical characteristics, propensities, or traits
poses a potential danger to persons, animals or property, including but not
limited to poisonous reptiles, wild cats, wolves, foxes, bears, raccoons,
alligators, deer, otters, and possums; or
      (2)   Classified as a wild animal by the State Wildlife Resources
Commission.
(Ord. No. 2009-0901, 9-18-2009)
Sec. 4-501.   Feeding or harassment of wild animals is prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally feed any wild
animal within the confines of the village.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally annoy, harass,
provoke, injure or otherwise infuriate or enrage a wild animal within the
confines of the village.
(Ord. No. 2009-0901, 9-18-2009)
Sec. 4-502.   Possession of livestock or wild animals prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or keep any livestock or
wild animals within the confines of the village.
   (b)   Any violations of this article shall be deemed a civil violation,
punishable by a civil fine pursuant to article VII of this chapter. To the
extent article VII does not apply to a violation of this article, the violation
shall be punishable by civil fine of $50.00. Each day during or on which the
violation continues to occur shall be deemed a separate offense. In addition, a
violation of this section shall be punishable pursuant to G.S. 14-4 as a class
3 misdemeanor with a fine that shall not exceed $500.00 in the discretion of
the court.
(Ord. No. 2009-0901, 9-18-2009)
Secs. 4-503 - 4-519. Reserved.
ARTICLE XVII.
UNRESTRAINED DOGS
Sec. 4-520. Definitions.
   Leash means a physical tether not to exceed ten feet in length, one end of
which is attached to a dog and the other is held by the dog's owner or
custodian and by which such owner or custodian is physically capable of
controlling the dog.
   Owner means any person owning, keeping, or harboring a dog or cat. The head
of the household shall be presumed to be the owner of any dog or cat kept or
harbored by any person residing in the household.
   Turtle season means that period of time from May 1 through November 15 of
each year.
   Unrestrained dog means any dog which is not:
      (1)   Under the immediate control of its owner;
      (2)   Within the limits and boundaries of the private property on which
its owner or any person authorized by the owner to keep the animal shall
reside; or
      (3)   On or in any vehicle being operated or parked upon any public or
private street and physically confined within the vehicle so as to prevent exit
therefrom.
(Ord. No. 2009-0901, 9-18-2009)
Sec. 4-521. Unrestrained dogs prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to maintain an unrestrained dog
within the confines of the village, whether by intentional or negligent act or
omission of the owner.
   (b)   From sunset to sunrise of every day during turtle season, any dog on
any beach must be physically restrained by a leash.
   (c)   The owner or custodian of any dog or cat that excretes any feces on
public property, including the beach strand, or on private property without the
consent of the owner or person in lawful possession thereof shall immediately
remove such feces deposited by such animal and dispose of the feces in an
appropriate manner.
   (d)   Any violations of this article shall be deemed a civil violation,
punishable by a civil fine pursuant to article VII of this chapter. To the
extent article VII does not apply to a violation of this article, the violation
shall be punishable by a civil fine of $50.00. In addition, a violation of this
section shall be punishable pursuant to G.S. 14-4 as a class 3 misdemeanor with
a fine that shall not exceed $500.00 in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. No. 2009-0901, 9-18-2009)
Chapter 5
RESERVED
Chapter 6
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS*
*   Cross References:
ch. 10; fire prevention and protection,
ch. 12; floods,
ch. 14; solid waste management,
ch. 20; stormwater management,
ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places,
ch. 24; subdivisions,
ch. 26; utilities,
ch. 30; zoning,
ch. 32; nonconforming uses, §
32-221 et seq.
   State Law References: to regulate the construction of buildings, G.S. 160A-
415.
Article I. In General
Secs. 6-1--6-20. Reserved.
Article II. Inspections
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
6-21. Key boxes required on all commercial structures.
Secs. 6-22--6-30. Reserved.
Division 2. Adoption of Regulatory Codes by Reference
Sec.
6-31. Scope of article and codes.
Sec.
6-32. Building code adopted.
Sec.
6-33. Plumbing code adopted.
Sec.
6-34. Mechanical code adopted.
Sec.
6-35. Electrical code adopted.
Sec.
6-36. Residential building code.
Sec.
6-37. Amendments to codes.
Sec.
6-38. Compliance with codes.
Sec.
6-39. Copies of codes filed with clerk.
Secs. 6-40--6-60. Reserved.
Division 3. Inspection Department
Sec.
6-61. Organization of department.
Sec.
6-62. General duties of department and inspectors.
Sec.
6-63. Conflicts of interest.
Sec.
6-64. Reports and records.
Sec.
6-65. Inspection procedure.
Sec.
6-66. Oversight not to legalize violation.
Sec.
6-67. Powers of inspection officials.
Secs. 6-68--6-80. Reserved.
Division 4. Enforcement
Sec.
6-81. Registration of contractors.
Sec.
6-82. Permit required.
Sec.
6-83. Application for permit.
Sec.
6-84. Plans and specifications.
Sec.
6-85. Limitations on issuance of permits.
Sec.
6-86. Issuance of permit.
Sec.
6-87. Revocation of permits.
Sec.
6-88. Time limitations on validity of permits.
Sec.
6-89. Changes in work.
Sec.
6-90. Permit fees; land use development review fees.
Secs. 6-91--6-110. Reserved.
Division 5. Condemnation, Repair, and Demolition of Unsafe Buildings
Sec.
6-111. Duty of inspection department.
Secs. 6-112--6-130. Reserved.
Division 6. Enforcement of Housing Code
Sec.
6-131. Duty of inspection department.
Secs. 6-132--6-160. Reserved.
Article III. Fire Districts
Sec.
6-161. Districts established.
Sec.
6-162. Primary fire district.
Sec.
6-163. Secondary fire district.
Sec.
6-164. Occupancy.
Sec.
6-165. Pre-existing usage.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 6-1--6-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
INSPECTIONS*
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 6-21. Key boxes required on all commercial structures.
   (a)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Building inspector means and refers to the village building official or his
duly authorized designee.
   Commercial structure means any structure defined by the state fire
prevention code as a commercial building.
   Key Box means a secure box of approved design in which shall be located a
building key, which shall permit access to such structure by the village
department of public safety in the event of a fire alarm emanating from such
structure and which is referenced in section 506 of the state fire prevention
code.
   (b)   Approval by building inspector. No commercial structure shall be
constructed, nor any certificate of occupancy issued therefor, unless the owner
thereof shall have installed a key box approved in design, with the location
approved by the building inspector, and the means of access to such box having
been delivered to the director of the department of public safety or his duly
authorized designee. Further, such key box shall be continuously thereafter
maintained so as to permit access to such structure by the director of the
department of public safety or his duly authorized designee in the event of a
fire or medical emergency therein or alarm indicating the presence of fire or
medical emergency.
   (c)    Violations. Violation of this section shall constitute a class 3
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day during which
such violation exists shall constitute a separate violation of this section.
(Ord. No. 2003-005, §§ 1--3, 3-21-2003; Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013)
Secs. 6-22--6-30. Reserved.
*   State Law References: inspection, G.S. 160A-411 et seq.
DIVISION 2.
ADOPTION OF REGULATORY CODES BY REFERENCE
Sec. 6-31. Scope of article and codes.
   The provisions of this article and of regulatory codes adopted in this
article and the regulatory codes adopted in this article shall apply to the
following:
      (1)   The location, design, materials, equipment, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, moving, demolition, removal,
use, and occupancy of every building or structure or any appurtenances
connected or attached to such building or structure;
      (2)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance
of plumbing systems consisting of house sewers, building drains, waste and vent
systems, hot and cold water supply systems, and all fixtures and appurtenances
thereof;
      (3)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance
of mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and
refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment, and appurtenances thereof;
      (4)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance
of electrical systems and appurtenances thereof.
(Ord. No. 2, art. I, § 1-1, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-32. Building code adopted.
   The latest edition of the state building code, (volume l, General
Construction), as adopted by the state building code council and as amended, is
hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth in this article.
(Ord. No. 2, art. I, § 1-2, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-33. Plumbing code adopted.
   The latest edition of the state plumbing code (state building code, volume
II, Plumbing) as adopted by the state building code council and as amended, is
hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth in this article.
(Ord. No. 2, art. I, § 1-3, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-34. Mechanical code adopted.
   The latest edition of the state mechanical code (state building code, volume
III, Mechanical) as adopted by the state building code council and as amended,
is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth in this article.
(Ord. No. 2, art. I, § 1-4, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-35. Electrical code adopted.
   The latest edition of the state electrical code (state building code, volume
IV, Electrical), as adopted by the state building code council and as amended,
is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth in this article.
(Ord. No. 2, art. I, § 1-5, 1-27-1986)
   Cross References:
ch. 30.
Sec. 6-36. Residential building code.
   The latest edition of the state uniform residential building code (state
building code, volume I-B, Residential), as adopted by the state building code
council is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though set forth in this
article.
(Ord. No. 2, art. I, § 1-6, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-37. Amendments to codes.
   Amendments to the regulatory codes adopted by reference in this article,
which are from time to time adopted and published by the agencies or
organizations referred to in this article shall be effective in the village at
the time such amendments are filed with the village clerk or building inspector
as provided in section
6-39.
(Ord. No. 2, art. I, § 1-7, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-38. Compliance with codes.
   (a)   All buildings or structures which are hereafter constructed,
reconstructed, erected, altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished, or
moved shall conform to the requirements, minimum standards, and other
provisions of either the state building code, General Construction, volume I,
or the state building code, volume I-B, Residential, whichever is applicable,
or of both if both are applicable.
   (b)   Every building or structure intended for human habitation, occupancy,
or use shall have plumbing, plumbing systems, or plumbing fixtures installed,
constructed, altered, extended, repaired, or reconstructed in accordance with
the minimum standards, requirements, and other provisions of the state plumbing
code (state building code, volume II, Plumbing).
   (c)   All mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, and refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment, and
appurtenances shall be installed, erected, altered, repaired, used and
maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements, and other
provisions of the state mechanical code (state building code, volume III,
Mechanical).
   (d)   All electrical wiring, installations and appurtenances shall be
erected, altered, repaired, used and maintained in accordance with the minimum
standards, requirements, and other provisions of the state electrical code
(state building code, volume IV, Electrical).
(Ord. No. 2, art. I, § 1-8, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-39. Copies of codes filed with clerk.
   An official copy of each regulatory code adopted in this article, and
official copies of all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the office
of the village clerk or building inspector. Such copies shall be the official
copies of the codes and the amendments.
(Ord. No. 2, art. I, § 1-9, 1-27-1986)
Secs. 6-40--6-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
INSPECTION DEPARTMENT
Sec. 6-61. Organization of department.
   The village does hereby create an inspection department of the village
government which shall consist of a building inspector who shall be licensed by
the state department of insurance as a plumbing inspector and a mechanical
inspector. The inspection department shall consist of any other inspectors or
deputy or assistant inspectors as may be authorized from time to time by the
village council.
(Ord. No. 2, art. II, § 2-1, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-62. General duties of department and inspectors.
   It shall be the duty of the inspection department to enforce all of the
provisions of this article and the provisions of G.S.160A-412.
(Ord. No. 2, art. II, § 2-2, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-63. Conflicts of interest.
   No officer or employee of the inspection department shall be financially
interested in the furnishing of labor, material, or appliances for the
construction, alteration, or maintenance of a building or any part thereof, or
in the making of plans or specifications therefor in violation of G.S. 160A-
415.
(Ord. No. 2, art. II, § 2-3, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-64. Reports and records.
   The inspection department, and each inspector, shall keep complete,
permanent, and accurate records in convenient form of all applications
received, permits issued, inspections, and reinspections made, and all other
work and activities of the inspection department. Periodic reports shall be
submitted to the village council, and to other agencies, as required.
(Ord. No. 2, art. II, § 2-4, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-65. Inspection procedure.
   (a)   Inspections generally.
      (1)   The inspection department shall inspect all buildings and
structures and work therein for which a permit of any kind has been issued as
often as necessary in order to determine whether the work complies with this
article and the appropriate codes.
      (2)   When deemed necessary by the appropriate inspector, materials and
assemblies may be inspected at the point of manufacture or fabrication, or
inspections may be made by approved and recognized inspection organizations;
provided, no approval shall be based upon reports of such organizations unless
the appeals are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such
organization.
      (3)   All holders of permits or their agents shall notify the inspection
department and the appropriate inspector at each of the following stages of
construction so that approval may be given before work is continued:
         a.   Foundation inspection. The foundation inspections shall be made
after trenches are excavated and the necessary reinforcement forms are in
place, and before concrete is placed. Drilled footings, piles, and similar
types of foundations shall be inspected as installed.
         b.   Framing inspection. The framing inspection shall be made after
all structural framing is in place and all roughing-in of plumbing and
electrical and heating has been installed, after all fire blocking, chimneys,
bracing and vents are installed, but before any of the structure is enclosed or
covered. Poured in place concrete structural elements shall be inspected before
each pour of any structural member.
         c.   Fireproofing inspection. The fireproofing inspection shall be
made after all areas required to be protected by fireproofing are lathed, but
before the plastering or other fireproofing is applied.
         d.   Final inspection. The final inspection shall be made after the
building or structure has all doors hung, fixtures set, and is ready for
occupancy, but before the building is occupied.
   (b)   Calls for inspection. Request for inspections may be made to the
office of the inspection department or to the appropriate inspector. The
inspection department shall make inspections as soon as practicable after
request is made therefor, provided such work is ready for inspection at the
time the request is made.
   (c)   Reinspections. Reinspections may be made at the convenience of the
inspector. No work shall be inspected until it is in proper and completed
condition ready for inspection. All work which has been concealed before the
inspection and approval shall be uncovered at the request of the inspector and
placed in condition for proper inspection. Approval or rejection of the work
shall be furnished by the appropriate inspector in the form of a notice posted
on the building or given to the permit holder or his agent. Failure to call for
inspections or proceeding without approval at each stage of construction shall
be deemed a violation of this article.
   (d)   Certificate of occupancy. No new building or part thereof shall be
occupied, and no addition or enlargement of any existing building shall be
occupied, and no existing building, after being altered or moved, shall be
occupied, and no change of occupancy shall be made in any existing building or
part thereof, until the inspection department has issued a certificate of
occupancy therefor. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a
portion of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion
and occupancy of the entire building. Application for a certificate of
occupancy may be made by the owner or his agent after all final inspections
have been made for new buildings, or, in the case of existing buildings, after
supplying the information and data necessary to determine compliance with this
article, the appropriate regulatory codes and chapter
32, pertaining to zoning, for the occupancy intended. The inspection department
shall issue a certificate of occupancy when, after examination and inspection,
it is found that the building in all respects conforms to the provisions of
this article, the regulatory codes, and chapter
32, pertaining to zoning, for the occupancy intended.
(Ord. No. 2, art. II, § 2-5, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-66. Oversight not to legalize violation.
   No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any inspector or other
official or employee of the inspection department shall be deemed to legalize
the violation of any provision of this article or any provision of any
regulatory codes adopted in this article.
(Ord. No. 2, art. II, § 2-6, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-67. Powers of inspection officials.
   (a)   Authority. Inspectors are hereby authorized, empowered, and directed
to enforce all the provisions of this article and the regulatory codes adopted
in this article.
   (b)   Right-of-entry. With an appropriate warrant or permission from the
owner or occupant, inspectors shall have the right-of-entry to any premises
within the jurisdiction of the regulatory codes adopted in this article at
reasonable hours for the purpose of inspection or enforcement of the
requirements of this article and the applicable regulatory codes.
   (c)   Stop orders. Whenever any building or structure or part thereof is
being demolished, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in a
hazardous manner, or in violation of any provision of this article or any other
village ordinance, or in violation of any provision of any regulatory codes
adopted in this article, or in violation of the terms of the permit issued
therefor, or in such manner as to endanger life or property, the appropriate
inspector may order such work to be immediately stopped in accordance with G.S.
160A-421.
(Ord. No. 2, art. II, § 2-7, 1-27-1986)
Secs. 6-68--6-80. Reserved.
DIVISION 4.
ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 6-81. Registration of contractors.
   Every person carrying on the business of building contractor, plumbing
contractor, mechanical contractor, or electrical contractor within the village
shall register at the office of the inspection department, giving the name and
place of business.
(Ord. No. 2, art. III, § 3-1, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-82. Permit required.
   (a)   Building permit.
      (1)   No person shall commence or proceed with the construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of any building or
other structure or any part thereof without a written permit therefor from the
building inspector in accordance with G.S. 160A-417.
      (2)   In all cases of removal or demolition of a building or structure, a
good and sufficient bond may be required to be posted by the property owner or
his contractor at the time of application for a permit, to ensure complete
removal or demolition, including all rubble and debris. Failure on the part of
the property owner or his contractor to completely demolish, remove, and clear
the premises, after 30 days' notice by the building inspector, shall be cause
for forfeiture of such bond.
   (b)   Plumbing permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the
installation, extension, or general repair of any plumbing system without a
written permit therefor from the plumbing inspector; provided, however, no
permit shall be required for minor repairs or replacements on the house side of
a trap to an installed system of plumbing if such repairs or replacements do
not disrupt the original water supply or the waste or ventilating system.
   (c)   Mechanical permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the
installation, extension, alteration or general repair of any heating or cooling
equipment system without a written permit from the mechanical inspector;
provided, however, no permit shall be required for minor repairs or minor
burner services or filter replacements of warm air furnaces or cooling systems.
   (d)   Electrical permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the
installation, extension, alteration, or general repair of any electrical
wiring, devices, appliances or equipment without a written permit therefor from
the electrical inspector; provided, however, no permit shall be required for
minor repair work such as the replacement of lamps or the connection of
portable devices to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed;
provided, further, no permit shall be required for the installation,
alteration, or repair of the electrical wiring, devices, appliances, and
equipment installed by or for an electrical public utility corporation for the
use of such corporation in the generation, transmission, distribution, or
metering of electrical energy.
(Ord. No. 2, art. III, § 3-2, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-83. Application for permit.
   Written application shall be made for all permits requiredby this article
and shall be made on forms provided by the inspection department. Such
application shall be made by the owner of the building or structure affected or
by his authorized agent or representative and in addition to such other
information as may be required by the appropriate inspector to enable him to
determine whether the permit applied for should be issued, shall show the
following:
      (1)   Name, residence, and business address of owner;
      (2)   Name, residence, and business address of authorized representative
or agent, if any;
      (3)   Name and address of the contractor, if any, together with evidence
that he has obtained a certificate from the appropriate state licensing board
for such contractors, if such be required for the work involved in the permit
for which application is made.
(Ord. No. 2, art. III, § 3-4, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-84. Plans and specifications.
   Detailed plans and specifications shall accompany each application for a
permit when the estimated total cost of the building or structure is in excess
of $45,000.00 and for any other building or structure where plans and
specifications are deemed necessary by the appropriate inspector in order for
him to determine whether the proposed work complies with the appropriate
regulatory codes. Plans shall be drawn to scale with sufficient clarity to
indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed, and the plans and
specifications together shall contain information sufficient to indicate that
the work proposed will conform to the provisions of this article and the
appropriate regulatory codes. Where plans and specifications are required,
copies of them shall be kept at the work until all authorized operations have
been completed and approved by the appropriate inspector.
(Ord. No. 2, art. III, § 3-5, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-85. Limitations on issuance of permits.
   (a)   No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure, the
estimated total cost of which is more than $30,000.00, unless the work is to be
performed by a licensed general contractor, or unless the applicant furnishes
evidence that he is exempt from the provisions of the law licensing general
contractors.
   (b)   No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure
unless the plans bear the state seal of a registered architect or a registered
engineer, except the following:
      (1)   A family residence, up to eight units attached with grade level
exit, which is not part of or physically connected with any other buildings or
residential units;
      (2)   An institutional or commercial building having a total value not
exceeding $90,000.00;
      (3)   An institutional or commercial building having a gross floor area
not exceeding 2,500 square feet.
   (c)   Where any provisions of the General Statutes or of any ordinance
requires that work be done by a licensed specialty contractor of any kind, no
permit for such work shall be issued unless it is to be performed by such
licensed specialty contractor.
   (d)   Where detailed plans and specifications are required under this
article, no building permit shall be issued unless such plans and
specifications have been provided.
(Ord. No. 2, art. III, § 3-6, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-86. Issuance of permit.
   When proper application for a permit has been made, and the appropriate
inspector is satisfied that the application and the proposed work comply with
the provisions of this article and the appropriate regulatory codes, he shall
issue such permit, upon payment of the proper fee or fees as provided in
section
6-90.
(Ord. No. 2, art. III, § 3-7, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 6-87. Revocation of permits.
   The appropriate inspector may revoke and require the return of any permit by
notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason for such revocation.
Permits shall be revoked for any material departure from the approved
application, plans or specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with
proper orders of the inspector; for refusal or failure to comply with
requirements of this article and the appropriate regulatory codes; or for false
statements or misrepresentations made in securing such permit.
(Ord. No. 2, art. III, § 3-8, 1-27-1986)
   State Law References: provisions, G.S. 160A-422.
Sec. 6-88. Time limitations on validity of permits.
   All permits issued under this article shall expire by limitation six months
after the date of issuance if the work authorized by the permit has not been
commenced. If after commencement the work is discontinued for a period of
twelve months, the permit therefor shall immediately expire. No work authorized
by any permit which has expired shall thereafter be performed until a new
permit therefor has been secured.
(Ord. No. 2, art. III, § 3-9, 1-27-1986)
   State Law References: provisions, G.S. 160A-418.
Sec. 6-89. Changes in work.
   After a permit has been issued, changes or deviations from the terms of the
application and permit, or changes or deviations from the plans or
specifications involving any work under the jurisdiction of this article or of
any regulatory code adopted in this article, shall not be made until specific
written approval of such changes or deviations has been obtained from the
appropriate inspector.
(Ord. No. 2, art. III, § 3-10, 1-27-1986)
   State Law References: provisions, G.S. 160A-419.
Sec. 6-90. Permit fees; land use development review fees.
   Fees for permits shall be based upon the total estimated cost of the
proposed work, including all subcontractors, if any, but in no case shall the
total estimated cost be less than the market value of similar completed work in
the village as determined by the appropriate inspector. Fees for the review of
land use development plans shall be listed on the permit fee schedule, as may
be amended from time to time,, shall be maintained in the office of the village
clerk and is hereby incorporated by reference as part of this article.
(Ord. No. 2, art. III, § 3-11, 1-27-1986; Ord. No. 2001-018, § 3, 8-25-2001)
Secs. 6-91--6-110. Reserved.
DIVISION 5.
CONDEMNATION, REPAIR, AND DEMOLITION OF UNSAFE BUILDINGS*
*   Cross References:
ch. 10.
Sec. 6-111. Duty of inspection department.
   The inspection department shall be charged with enforcing the provisions of
G.S. 160A-426--G.S. 160A-434, relating to the condemnation, repair, and
demolition of unsafe buildings, upon the direction of the village council.
(Ord. No. 2, art. IVI, § 4-1, 1-27-1986)
Secs. 6-112--6-130. Reserved.
DIVISION 6.
ENFORCEMENT OF HOUSING CODE
Sec. 6-131. Duty of inspection department.
   The inspection department shall be responsible for the enforcement of any
ordinances or codes adopted by the village council relating to the repair,
closing, and demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation, pursuant to
G.S. 160A-411 et seq.
Secs. 6-132--6-160. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
FIRE DISTRICTS*
*   Cross References: prevention and protection,
ch. 12.
   State Law References: of fire districts required, G.S. 160A-435.
Sec. 6-161. Districts established.
   Attached and incorporated in this article by reference is a map of the
village designating the perimeter boundary of a primary fire district labeled
thereon and a secondary fire district similarly labeled thereon. The area of
the village designated on the map as the primary fire district is established
as the primary fire district pursuant to G.S. 160A-435 with and incorporating
the limits defined therefor on the map attached. The area of the village
designated on the map as the secondary fire district is hereby established as
the secondary fire district pursuant to G.S. 160A-435 with and incorporating
the limits defined therefor on the map attached.
(Ord. No. 40, § 1, 6-18-1994)
Sec. 6-162. Primary fire district.
   Within the primary fire district of the village as established in this
article, no frame or wooden building or structure or addition thereto shall be
erected, altered, repaired or moved either into the primary fire district or
from one place to another within the district except upon the permit of the
village building inspector as approved by the commissioner of insurance.
(Ord. No. 40, § 2, 6-18-1994)
Sec. 6-163. Secondary fire district.
   Within the secondary fire district and pursuant to G.S. 160A-437, no frame
or wooden building or structure or addition thereto shall be erected, altered,
repaired or moved either into the district or from one place to another within
the district except in accordance with the following requirements which shall
be in addition to all other state building code and/or fire code requirements
for the construction of such buildings:
      (1)   Monitored smoke detection systems on new structures. All newly
constructed commercial buildings or structures containing in excess of 500
square feet and all new residential buildings or structures shall be equipped
with monitored smoke detection systems in conformity with the standards and
specifications for the construction and installation thereof as shall be set
forth in the National Fire Prevention Association (referred to in this article
as "NFPA") Pamphlet 72 as applicable, as the Pamphlet shall, from time to time,
be amended by the NFPA, the terms and specifications of which are hereby
incorporated by reference.
      (2)   Monitored smoke detection systems in pre-existing commercial
structures. All pre-existing commercial buildings or commercial structures
containing in excess of 500 square feet shall be equipped, not later than
January 1, 2009, with monitored smoke detection systems in conformity with the
standards and specifications for the installation thereof as set forth in the
National Fire Prevention Association (referred to in this article as "NFPA")
Pamphlet 72, the terms and specifications of which are hereby incorporated by
reference.
      (3)   Fire sprinkling systems.
         a.   Any commercial buildings or structures which shall contain at
least 400 square feet and are composed of two or more stories or which shall
have an occupancy rating in excess of 75 persons shall be equipped with a fire
sprinkling system in conformity with the standards and specifications for
construction and installation thereof as shall be set forth in NFPA pamphlets
13R and 13D, as applicable, and as the same shall from time to time be amended
by the NFPA, the terms and specifications of which are hereby incorporated by
reference.
         b.   Any residential building or structure designed or constructed for
occupancy by more than one family unit shall be equipped with fire sprinkling
systems in conformity with the standards and specifications for construction
and installation thereof as shall be set forth in NFPA pamphlets 13R and 13D,
as applicable, and as the same shall from time to time be amended by the NFPA,
the terms and specifications of which are hereby incorporated by reference,
except for such buildings and structures as shall have been designed or
constructed for occupancy by two-family units which shall have no common
horizontal separating walls and which shall be separated by vertical separating
walls having at least a two-hour firewall rating as specified by Underwriters'
Laboratories.
      (4)   Roofing materials. All frame or wooden buildings or structures
shall be roofed with materials rated as class B materials, or better, as such
roofing materials are specified by the state building code.
      (5)   Garages. Any building or structure or portion thereof which shall
be designed, constructed or used for permanent or temporary storage of any
electrically powered vehicle shall be constructed such that any portion thereof
which is designed, constructed or used for such storage shall contain interior
wall and ceiling assemblies which shall meet one-hour firewall specifications
as defined by Underwriters' Laboratory.
(Ord. No. 40, § 3, 6-18-1994; Ord. No. 2008-0301, 3-14-2008)
Sec. 6-164. Occupancy.
   The building inspector for the village shall be empowered to enforce the
provisions of this article by and through the village ordinance providing for
building inspection and occupancy permits, and no occupancy permit shall be
issued to any structure located within the secondary fire district of the
village until the article shall be in conformity herewith.
(Ord. No. 40, § 4, 6-18-1994)
Sec. 6-165. Pre-existing usage.
   Any repair or alteration to any frame or wooden building or structure
located within the secondary fire district and pre-existing the adoption of
this article shall be in conformity herewith unless such repair or alteration
shall be occasioned by destruction or damage to such pre-existing building or
structure by fire, hurricane or other disaster which shall have damaged the
building or structure such that the proposed repair or alteration thereof shall
cost less than 50 percent of the value of the building or structure immediately
prior to such disaster.
(Ord. No. 40, § 5, 6-18-1994)
Chapter 7
RESERVED
Chapter 8
CIVIL EMERGENCIES*
*   Cross References:
ch. 2; fire prevention and protection,
ch. 12.
   State Law References: and civil disorders, G.S. 14-288.1 et seq.; North
Carolina Emergency Management Act, G.S. 166A-1 et seq.
Article I. In General
Secs. 8-1--8-30. Reserved.
Article II. State of Emergency
Sec.
8-31. Declaration.
Sec.
8-32. Proclamation imposing prohibitions and restrictions.
Sec.
8-33. Evacuation.
Sec.
8-34. Curfew.
Sec.
8-35. Restrictions on possession, consumption or transfer of alcoholic
beverages.
Sec.
8-36. Restrictions on possession, transportation and transfer of dangerous
weapons and substances.
Sec.
8-37. Restrictions on access to areas.
Sec.
8-38. Prohibitions or restrictions of movement of people, operation of
businesses.
Sec.
8-39. Removal of prohibition and restrictions.
Sec.
8-40. Superseding and amendatory proclamation.
Sec.
8-41. Termination of proclamation.
Sec.
8-42. Absence of the mayor.
Sec.
8-43. Penalty for violation of article.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 8-1--8-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
STATE OF EMERGENCY*
*   State Law References: to enact ordinances to deal with states of emergency,
G.S. 14-288.12.
Sec. 8-31. Declaration.
   (a)   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever there is a time
of public crisis, disaster, catastrophe or similar public emergency; for any
reason, public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford
adequate protection for lives, safety or property; or whenever the occurrence
of any such condition is imminent.
   (b)   In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency
endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the
village or any part thereof, or threatening damage to or destruction of
property, the mayor is hereby authorized and empowered under G.S. 14-288.12 and
166A-8 to issue a public proclamation declaring to all persons the existence of
such a state of emergency, and, in order to more effectively protect the lives
and property of people within the municipality, to place in effect any or all
of the restrictions authorized in this article.
   (c)   The mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit by the
proclamation the application of all or any part of such restrictions to any
area specifically designated or described within the municipal limits and to
specific hours of the day or night, and to exempt from all or any part of such
restrictions, while acting in the line of and within the scope of their
respective duties, public safety officers, firefighters, rescue squad members
and other public employees, on-duty public utility employees, public
transportation company employees and such other classes of persons as may be
essential to the preservation of public order and necessary to serve the
safety, health and welfare needs of the people within the village.
(Ord. No. 18, § 1, 10-15-1988)
Sec. 8-32. Proclamation imposing prohibitions and restrictions.
   (a)   The mayor or his designee, by proclamation, may impose the
prohibitions and restrictions specified in sections
8-33--
8-38 of this article in the manner described in those sections. He may impose
as many of those specified prohibitions and restrictions as he deems necessary,
because of an emergency, to maintain an acceptable level of public order and
services, and to protect lives, safety and property. The mayor or his designee
shall recite his finding in the proclamation.
   (b)   The proclamation shall be in writing. Reasonable steps shall be taken
to give notice of the terms of the proclamation to those affected by it and a
copy of it shall be posted in the town hall. Copies of the text of the
proclamation shall be retained and upon request certified copies of it used as
evidence.
(Ord. No. 18, § 2, 10-15-1988)
Sec. 8-33. Evacuation.
   The mayor or his designee may direct and compel the evacuation of all or
part of the population of the village to prescribed routes, modes of
transportation and destination in connection with evacuations, and control
ingress and egress of a disaster area, the movement of persons within the area,
and the occupancy of premises therein. Details of the evacuation may be set
forth or amended in a subsequent proclamation which shall be well publicized.
(Ord. No. 18, § 3, 10-15-1988)
Sec. 8-34. Curfew.
   (a)   The proclamation may impose a curfew prohibiting, in certain areas and
during certain periods, the appearance in public, of anyone who is not a member
of an exempted class. The proclamation shall specify the geographical area or
areas and the period during each 24-hour day to which the curfew applies. The
mayor or his designee may exempt certain classes of people whose exemption is
necessary for the preservation of public health, safety and welfare. The
proclamation shall state the exempted classes and restrictions from which each
is exempted.
   (b)   Unless otherwise specified, the proclamation shall apply during the
specified period until the proclamation removes the curfew.
(Ord. No. 18, § 4, 10-15-1988)
Sec. 8-35. Restrictions on possession, consumption or transfer of alcoholic
beverages.
   The proclamation may prohibit the possession or consumption of any alcoholic
beverage; including beer, wine and spirituous liquor other than on one's own
premises and may prohibit the transfer, transportation, sale or purchase of any
alcoholic beverage within the proclaimed area of the village.
(Ord. No. 18, § 5, 10-15-1988)
Sec. 8-36. Restrictions on possession, transportation and transfer of dangerous
weapons and substances.
   (a)   The proclamation may prohibit the transportation or possession, off
one's own premises, or sale or purchase of any dangerous weapon or substance.
   (b)   The term "dangerous weapon or substance" means:
      (1)   Any deadly weapon, ammunition, explosive, incendiary device,
radioactive material or device as defined in G. S. 14-288.8(c)(5), gasoline, or
other instrument or substance designed for a use that carries a threat of
serious bodily injury or destruction of property.
      (2)   Any other instrument or substance that is capable of being used to
inflict serious bodily injury or destruction of property, when the
circumstances indicate, that there is some probability that such instrument or
substance will be so used.
   (c)   If imposed, the restrictions shall apply throughout the jurisdiction
of the village or such part thereof, as designated in the proclamation.
(Ord. No. 18, § 6, 10-15-1988)
   Cross References: and miscellaneous provisions,
ch. 16.
Sec. 8-37. Restrictions on access to areas.
   (a)   The proclamation may prohibit obtaining access or attempting to obtain
access to any area designated in the manner described in this section, in
violation of any order, clearly posted notice or barricade indicating that
access is denied or restricted.
   (b)   Areas to which access is denied or restricted shall be designated by
the public safety officer when directed in the proclamation to do so by the
mayor. If directed to do so, the public safety officer may restrict or deny
access to any area, street or location within the village. Such restriction or
denial shall be reasonably necessary to promote efforts being made to overcome
the emergency or to prevent further aggravation of it.
(Ord. No. 18, § 7, 10-15-1988)
Sec. 8-38. Prohibitions or restrictions of movement of people, operation of
businesses.
   The proclamation may prohibit or restrict:
      (1)   Movements of people in public places;
      (2)   Operation of offices, business establishments and other places to
or from which people may travel or at which they may congregate;
      (3)   Other activities or conditions the control of which may be
reasonably necessary to maintain order and protect lives or property during the
state of emergency, within the area designated in the proclamation.
(Ord. No. 18, § 8, 10-15-1988)
Sec. 8-39. Removal of prohibition and restrictions.
   The mayor shall, by proclamation, terminate the entire declaration of
emergency or remove the prohibition and restrictions as the emergency no longer
requires them.
(Ord. No. 18, § 9, 10-15-1988)
Sec. 8-40. Superseding and amendatory proclamation.
   The mayor, in his discretion, may invoke the restrictions authorized by this
article in separate proclamations, and may amend any proclamations by means of
an superseding proclamation in accordance with the procedures set forth in
section
8-32.
(Ord. No. 18, § 10, 10-15-1988)
Sec. 8-41. Termination of proclamation.
   Any proclamation issued under this article shall expire five days after its
last imposition unless sooner terminated, in writing, under the same procedures
set forth in section
8-32 for proclamations.
(Ord. No. 18, § 11, 10-15-1988)
Sec. 8-42. Absence of the mayor.
   In case of absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore, or such other person
as may be designated by the village council, shall have and exercise all of the
powers given the mayor by this article.
(Ord. No. 18, § 12, 10-15-1988)
Sec. 8-43. Penalty for violation of article.
   A violation of this article shall subject the offender to a civil fine of
$50.00 per offense. Any individual cited for violation of this article shall
pay the civil penalty at the office of the village clerk within 48 hours of the
issuance thereof.
(Ord. No. 18, § 13, 10-15-1988; Ord. No. 2001-022, § 1, 10-26-2001; Ord. No.
2011-0402, 4-15-2011)
Chapter 9
COMMERCIAL DESIGN STANDARDS
Article I. In General
Sec.
9-1.   Purpose and intent.
Sec.
9-2.   Concept: Bald Head Island character.
Sec.
9-3.   Form-based design.
Sec.
9-4.   Definitions.
Secs. 9-5—9-20. Reserved.
Article II. Applicability and Administration
Sec.
9-21.   Applicability of design standards.
Sec.
9-22.   Commercial review board.
Sec.
9-23.   Amendments.
Sec.
9-24.   Effect on nonconforming structures.
Sec.
9-25.   Commercial area overlays.
Secs. 9-26—9-40. Reserved.
Article III. Review Process
Sec.
9-41.   Purpose.
Sec.
9-42.   Review requirements.
Sec.
9-43.   Decision review meeting.
Sec.
9-44.   Appeal.
Sec.
9-45.   Enforcement.
Sec.
9-46.   Variances.
Sec.
9-47.   Appeal to superior court.
Secs. 9-48—9-59. Reserved.
Article IV. General Site Design
Sec.
9-60.   District standards.
Sec.
9-61.   Building location and orientation.
Sec.
9-62.   Relation to grade.
Sec.
9-63.   Setbacks.
Sec.
9-64.   Parking.
Sec.
9-65.   Loading and delivery; service areas; mechanical; utilities.
Sec.
9-66.   Open/public space.
Secs. 9-67—9-79. Reserved.
Article V. General Building Design
Sec.
9-80.   Form and massing.
Sec.
9-81.   Scale.
Sec.
9-82.   Context.
Sec.
9-83.   Composition.
Secs. 9-84—9-100. Reserved.
Article VI. Specific Building Requirements
Sec.
9-101.   Materials.
Sec.
9-102.   Components.
Sec.
9-103.   Commercial lot: usage/building typology.
Sec.
9-104.   Specific site requirements.
Sec.
9-105.   Landscaping.
 
Appendix A
A.1.   Parking space requirements.
A.2.   Setback requirements.
A.3.   Submission requirements.
A.4.   Submission forms.
A.5.   Schedule of commercial construction review fees.
A.6.   Landscape material.
 
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 9-1. Purpose and intent.
   (a)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide physical standards and
guidelines for commercial site and building design that seek to preserve Bald
Head Island's ecosystem and maintain the natural beauty that defines Bald Head
Island. The design standards are intended to allow for creative development of
commercial areas that respects Bald Head Island's character while responding to
the immediate context of the proposed construction. The specific intention is
to ensure:
   (1)   Proposed development that minimizes disruption of the natural
environment.
   (2)   Architectural planning and design in concert with and reinforcing of
existing Bald Head Island character and scale.
   (3)   Creation or enhancement of connectivity of existing development and
resources.
   (4)   Orientation and siting to establish public space and community
welfare.
   (b)   The design standards established by this chapter are intended to
complement and enhance, not supersede, the village zoning ordinance. While
there may be overlap between the concepts expressed in this chapter and the
village zoning ordinance, each constitutes a separate review and approval
process required for commercial development on Bald Head Island.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-2. Concept: Bald Head Island character.
   Buildings on Bald Head Island are typically a blend of "low country coastal
vernacular" and "shingle style" architecture. Massing, materials, and
architectural detailing are incorporated to create a homogeneous informal
impression with a personal pedestrian scale. Bald Head Island's character is
exemplified by an orderly, well-proportioned composition of buildings
integrated into the natural environment.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-3. Form based design.
   Form based codes are the rules that define each building's physical form,
its relationships to its neighbors and to the public realm. Each building
typology has its own set of requirements that uniquely address the
environmental and architectural context of its location. Each building is part
of collective architectural order to create public ways, streets, and common
spaces.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-4. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   Applicant means the property owner and any authorized agent submitting an
application for review pursuant to this chapter.
   Arbor means an area shaded by trees, shrubs or vines on a latticework
structure – see trellis.
   Authorized agent means a person authorized by a property owner to act on
their behalf. All authorizations must be in writing and submitted to the
village prior to or contemporaneous with an application.
   Caliper means the diameter of a living tree at breast height or
approximately 4.5 feet from ground level.
   Conceal means to hide behind grade-level screening within the footprint of a
structure, as specified within these design standards, or to keep completely
from sight of any public road or fairway view by vegetation, natural terrain or
other solution approved by the CRB.
   CRB means the commercial review board established by this chapter and
appointed by the village council.
   CRB administrator means the person charged with supporting the work of the
CRB and administration of this chapter as shall from time to time be designated
by the village manager.
   Exotic plant means any plant not native to Bald Head Island or North
Carolina as listed in appendix
A.6.
   Grade, average means the sum of the varying elevations of the ground around
the perimeter of the building including, but not limited to decks, staircases,
porches and the like divided by the number of elevation changes included in the
calculations.
   Impervious surface means the area of the property covered by structures or
materials that do not allow water to penetrate or percolate into the ground.
For example, this would include any covered structures, paved or graveled
walkways/driveways or decking without sufficient spacing between the boards
(less than one-fourth inch). It would also include marl, for though water can
penetrate marl, it does not percolate into the spaces of the ground beneath
quickly enough to earn a pervious rating. However, a surface of number 57
stone, as designated by the American Society for Testing and Materials, laid at
least four inches thick over a geotextile fabric is considered pervious. These
standards include the building footprint (with cantilevered elements), not the
roof overhangs.
   Invasive plants mean exotic plants not native to Bald Head Island that have
the potential to spread. Invasive species are a major threat to our environment
because they (1) can change habitats and alter ecosystem function and ecosystem
services and (2) crowd out or replace native species.
   Limited common area means those portions of the common area that serve only
a limited number of units and which may include, but specifically is not
limited to, walkways, parking, buildings or areas serving only specified lots
and such other similar areas as designated by the village. The limited common
area will be managed and maintained by the village at the expense of only the
owners of units served.
   Massing means the composition of building forms.
   Muntin means a strip separating panes of glass in a sash.
   Native plant means a plant that occurs naturally in a particular location
without direct or indirect human intervention. The distinction between native
and non-native species is important because native species have generally
adapted and evolved with the competing species, predators, and diseases of an
area over many centuries or longer. Bald Head Island native plants support
indigenous wildlife, habitats, ecosystem function and ecosystem services.
   Naturalized area means an area of native vegetation that consists of
undisturbed understory and ground cover. Removal of understory and ground cover
in naturalized areas on building sites is prohibited. New construction projects
must avoid damaging naturalized areas outside the limits of construction
fencing.
   New construction means the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement,
replacement, repair, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and
demolition of every building, structure or any appurtenances connected with or
attached to such buildings or structures on Bald Head Island.
   Rake means the sloped sides at the end of a gable roof forming a triangle.
   Renovation, major means any renovation of heated space within a building or
non-heated space greater than 250 sq. ft. Major renovations are further divided
into categories as set out in appendix
A.5.
   Renovation, minor means any renovation that is not a major renovation. Minor
renovations are further divided into categories as set out in appendix
A.5.
   Service area means portions of the common area located within the property
reserved for the exclusive use of one or more, but fewer than all, of the
owners.
   Shed means the secondary roof form.
   Understory means an underlying layer of vegetation, especially the plants
that grow beneath a forest's canopy.
   Unit means property, whether improved or unimproved, which may be
independently owned and conveyed and which is intended for development, use and
occupancy. The term will refer to the land, if any, which is part of the unit
as well as any improvements thereon.
   Unit, improved means a unit with a completed structure built upon it for
which the village has issued a certificate of occupancy.
   Unit, unimproved means a vacant lot with no completed structure built upon
it.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Secs. 9-5—9-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. APPLICABILITY ANDADMINISTRATION.
Sec. 9-21. Applicability of design standards.
   (a)   The provisions of the design standards shall apply to development,
including, but not limited to the construction, alteration, movement,
enlargement, replacement, repair, use and occupancy, location, maintenance,
removal and demolition of every building, structure or any appurtenances
connected with or attached to such buildings or structures on Bald Head Island
for either non-residential or mixed commercial/residential use, and located in
an area or on a lot or parcel of land designated for nonresidential development
by zoning district or overlay regulation, planned unit development, or other
land use restriction.
   (b)   The standards of this section shall:
      (1)   Establish the criteria for application review.
      (2)   Set grounds to approve, deny, or approve with conditions.
      (3)   Set grounds for appeal.
      (4)   Establish a schedule for and stages of submissions.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-22. Commercial review board.
   (a)   The commercial review board (CRB) is established by the Village of
Bald Head Island to administer the design standards and to review all
applications for new construction and renovations on any properties in
commercially zoned districts.
   (b)   The CRB is composed of a five-person voting board, with two alternates
who may replace any absent or disqualified member at any meeting. Members of
the CRB are appointed by the village council. Council should give priority to
persons with backgrounds in planning, development, design, architecture,
landscape architecture, or construction. Board members sit for staggered three-
year terms with two members and one alternate being appointed in odd-numbered
years and three members and one alternate being appointed in even numbered
years. In appointing the initial CRB, council shall appoint two regular members
and one alternate to an initial term that expires June 30, 2025, and three
regular members and one alternate to an initial term that expires June 30,
2026, in order to create staggered terms. Council may fill vacancies for
unexpired terms only.
   (c)   The CRB will be advised by the CRB administrator and an architect and/
or landscape architect under contract with the village. Both are non-voting
positions.
   (d)   The CRB will hold an organizing meeting annually in the month of
August. At that meeting, the CRB will elect one of its members to serve as
chair and preside over the board's meetings and one member to serve as vice-
chair to serve as acting chair in the absence of the chair. The persons so
designated will serve in these capacities for one year and are eligible for
reelection.
   (e)   Other than the organizing meeting, meetings of the CRB will be held
pursuant to a regular schedule set at the organizing meeting or adopted at any
properly noticed meeting thereafter or at the call of the chair within 60 days
of submittal of a complete application, as determined by the CRB administrator.
All meetings of the CRB are open to the public. The board will keep minutes of
its procedures, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if
absent or failing to vote, an indication of such fact and final disposition of
all matters before the board, all of which shall be of public record.
   (f)   A quorum shall consist of more than one-half of the appointed members
of the CRB eligible to vote, including any alternate seated to replace an
absent or disqualified member, present for any meeting. Once the existence of a
quorum is established, votes may proceed by simple majority of the members
present at the meeting.
   (g)   CRB approval is required prior to undertaking any new construction,
exterior renovations, or site work. When reviewing a submitted set of plans,
the CRB may require compliance with requirements that, although not itemized
specifically, are supported by sections of the design standards, or agreed upon
by the applicant.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-23. Amendments.
   The CRB may periodically consider and determine that there is a need to
amend the design standards. Any design standard amendment must be considered
and adopted as an ordinance by the village council before implementation. If a
design standard amendment is adopted after an application is submitted, but
before a CRB approval is granted, the applicant may choose which version of the
design standard will apply to consideration of the application.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-24. Effect on nonconforming structures.
   It is recognized that lawful nonconforming structures may currently exist at
the adoption of these design standards or may develop as a result of either
future amendments of these design standards or amendment of the Bald Head
Island zoning map. Such nonconformities may continue, but generally should not
be changed, expanded or enlarged in such a manner as to increase the extent of
the nonconformity with the then existing design standards. It is the purpose of
this section to encourage the eventual cessation of nonconformities, but to
provide that such structures may be reasonably repaired and maintained.
   (a)   Any nonconforming structure in existence at the time of the adoption
of this chapter or subsequent amendment to this chapter or the Bald Head Island
zoning map that creates a nonconforming structure shall not be subject to these
design standards at the time of adoption. Use of the structure may be continued
without the need for alteration to conform with these design standards. Such
use includes performing normal repair and maintenance updates to the structure,
except that where an exterior feature of a structure is to be repainted or
reclad, such work must be done in conformance with the color and siding
requirements of these design standards. Additionally, replacement of features
such as doors, windows, roof materials, or decorative items on a nonconforming
structure should, as far as possible, be done in a way that conforms with the
spirit of these design standards. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it is the
intent of this section to permit nonconforming structures to be repaired or
maintained in the normal course even if a conforming feature cannot reasonably
be used.
   (b)   The square footage of a nonconforming structure shall not be expanded
or enlarged except (1) to comply with the requirements of federal or state laws
or a local ordinance of general applicability, including a zoning ordinance
where use of the structure is changed, or (2) to make such structure conform
with these design standards.
   (c)   Any nonconforming structure which, at any time, is not in use for an
180 day period following the adoption of this chapter or subsequent amendment
that creates a nonconforming structure shall be considered to have discontinued
operations and, therefore, regardless of the reason or intent of such
discontinuance, will no longer be permitted for any use without alteration to
substantially comply with these design standards as determined by the CRB. The
initial decision as to whether an existing nonconforming structure has been
abandoned shall be made by the CRB administrator.
   (d)   The reconstruction or renovation of a nonconforming structure that is
damaged or destroyed as a result of fire, storm, or other natural/
uncontrollable factor such that more than 50% of the structure would need to be
reconstructed in order for the structure to continue being used shall be
subject to the new construction design standards of this chapter, and shall be
permitted only upon securing all approvals required for a new construction
project.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
9-25. Commercial area overlays.
   The design standards are written for all commercially zoned districts. There
are three primary commercial areas. Specific site guidelines exist for the
overlay districts within commercial areas. The commercial areas and related
overlay districts are identified as follows.
   (a)   Marina/ Harbour District (PD-3C, 3-C1).
      (1)   Ferry landing operations.
      (2)   River front development/transportation expansion area.
      (3)   Marina development/transportation expansion area.
      (4)   Bridge-lot development.
      (5)   Old Baldy Historic District.
      (6)   Public service areas.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1850.png]
 
   (b)   Mid Island District (PD-2C-2-3).
      (1)   Muscadine corridor.
      (2)   Edward Teach Wynd District.
      (3)   Public service areas.
      (4)   Maritime Way District.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1852.png]
   (c)   East Beach District (PD-2C-2-3-4).
      (1)   Conservancy campus development.
      (2)   Federal Road/Shoals Alley development.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1854.png]
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Secs. 9-26—9-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. REVIEW PROCESS.
Sec. 9-41. Purpose.
   The primary purpose of all CRB reviews is: (a) to assess and confirm
conformance with these design standards and any other applicable village
ordinance, and (b) to assess the impact of requested deviations and approve or
disapprove such in the context of the stated objectives of these design
standards. The property owner or the owner's designated agent is solely
responsible for compliance with the design standards and assuring compliance
fulfillment by their designer of the approved plan.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-42. Review requirements.
   (a)   Review stages. The CRB review procedure allows for a multi-stage
process wherein the property owner receives optional draft reviews, a
preliminary review, and a final review as described in this section. The CRB,
with agreement of the applicant, may determine that an application for a minor
renovation is appropriate for a one stage review process during preliminary
review. All new construction and major renovations are expected to go through
at least a two-stage review process that includes preliminary review and final
review.
      (1)   Draft review(s). A draft plan review is optional, but strongly
encouraged. This supplemental step enables the CRB to consider the design
aspects of the building and site prior to the formal submission process. Submit
one full-size printed copy and one emailed PDF. No appeal is available from
recommendations issued following a draft review.
      (2)   Preliminary review. This is a formal submittal and required stage
in the review process. All submission requirements identified in appendix
A.3 apply. Submit one full-size printed copy and one emailed PDF copy. No
appeal is available from recommendations issued following a preliminary review.
      (3)   Final review. Applicant should revise their preliminary submission
as required by CRB and indicate each change with a "revision cloud" and a
written description attached to the final application. Include a scaled
landscape plan and paint application. Submit one full size printed copy and one
emailed PDF copy. Village technical review must be complete and incorporated in
the submittal.
   (b)   Drawings required. Preliminary and final review submittals for
projects with a total value above $300,000 and a total project area greater
than 3,000 square feet must include drawings that are signed by and that carry
the seal of a North Carolina licensed professional engineer or licensed
architect responsible for their preparation. This assures the review process of
appropriate and desirable levels of competency and aesthetic to maintain
compatibility in Bald Head Island's unique building environment and is
invaluable in planning a compliant and lasting structure on Bald Head Island.
   (c)   Fees. Fees related to the submittal process may be found in appendix
A.5. Any submittal requiring a fee must include the fee to be considered
complete. All fees are subject to annual review and update by the village
council.
   (d)   Final approval required. Construction activity, including, but not
limited to, pile driving and material deliveries are not permitted without
written final approval by the CRB, a site management meeting with the CRB
administrator or designated agent, and an executed preconstruction site
management compliance form. The applicant will be notified in writing of all
review decisions of the CRB as soon as possible following each meeting, but no
later than 14 days following the meeting. For convenience and to speed
delivery, email notification to an email or emails provided in the application
will be used unless mail notice is requested.
   (e)   Administrative decision. A CRB review decision is administrative in
nature. The CRB applies the objective standards set forth in this chapter when
issuing a decision.
   (f)   Vesting. Unless a longer period is approved during the application
process, project approval by the CRB is valid for 24 months from the date of
written notification to the property owner. If the Village of Bald Head Island
building permit has not been issued and on-site construction has not begun
within 24 months from CRB issuance of written approval, the CRB approval
expires.
   (g)   Expired approvals. If an owner wishes to proceed with a previously
approved project for which the approval has expired, the project will be
subject to the current construction review design process based upon current
design standards and fees.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
9-43. Decision review meeting.
   Any applicant disagreeing with a review decision of the CRB may, but is not
required to, contact the CRB administrator to request a further meeting to
review the reasons for the decision. This request may be made at any time
within 15 days after the date of the CRB letter notifying the applicant in
writing of the review decision. The CRB will hold a meeting with the applicant
no later than the next scheduled CRB meeting or within 60 days, whichever is
sooner. The designer and the applicant must be present at this meeting. Any
appeal deadlines established by this chapter shall be tolled until the
conclusion of the decision review meeting.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
9-44. Appeal.
   The applicant or other party with standing may appeal a CRB final review
decision by notifying the CRB administrator in writing of this intent within 30
days of receipt of notification of the CRB final review decision. Such appeal
will be referred to the village planning board for a hearing following the
quasi-judicial procedures set forth in Sec.
32-102(c). The CRB administrator shall represent the CRB at the hearing.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-45.   Enforcement.
   CRB approval is required for all new construction and for any
reconstruction, alteration, or improvement that qualifies as a major or minor
renovation within the commercially zoned districts. The requirements of these
design standards are enforceable in accordance with Secs.
32-61 through
32-66 of the Village of Bald Head Island Code of Ordinances. Applicants or
their representatives must bring any deviations from exterior approved plans to
the attention of the CRB immediately upon discovery for the CRB to review the
deviation and determine if it may be permissible or if other action will be
recommended. Applicants must not assume automatic approval of a construction
detail because it currently exists on Bald Head Island. In addition to the
remedies set forth in Secs.
32-61 through
32-66 of the Village of Bald Head Island Code of Ordinances, the CRB is
authorized to assess civil penalties for violations of this chapter of up to
$500 per day on a project-wide basis.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-46.   Variances.
   (a)   Upon a finding of unnecessary hardship following an evidentiary public
hearing held pursuant to the procedures set forth in Sec.
32-104(c) of the Village of Bald Head Island Code of Ordinances, the CRB may
authorize reasonable variances from compliance with any of the standards set in
this chapter.
   (b)   Variances are permitted to alleviate practical difficulties and
hardships in the strict enforcement of the design standards. Such variances may
only be granted, however, when unique circumstances dictate, and no variance
shall (a) be effective unless in writing; or (b) preclude the CRB from denying
a variance in other circumstances.
   (c)   The CRB shall determine whether a variance to the design standards
will be granted following the procedures set forth in Sec.
32-104(c) of the Village of Bald Head Island Code of Ordinances. The concurring
vote of four-fifths of the CRB shall be necessary to grant a variance. A final
decision on a variance will be sent to the applicant in writing. Any variance
granted by the CRB expires simultaneously with CRB project approval expiration.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-47.   Appeal to superior court.
   Any appeal from a final review decision of the Planning Board regarding
application of the design standards or a CRB variance decision may be made by
an aggrieved party and shall be made to the Superior Court of Brunswick County
in the nature of certiorari. Any such petition shall be filed with the clerk of
the superior court within 30 days after the written decision is filed with the
village clerk, or after a written copy thereof is delivered to every aggrieved
party who has filed a written request for such copy with the village at the
time of its hearing of the case, whichever is later.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Secs. 9-48—9-59. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. GENERAL SITE DESIGN.
Sec. 9-60.   District standards.
   Each of the three districts to which these design standards apply has
distinct characteristics, both programmatic/user requirements and
environmental/natural resource concerns, demanding subtle differences in site
and building design approach. These design standards are established to ensure
that the long-term interests, health, and natural environment of the community
are protected. Key issues of concern include:
   (a)   Marina/Harbour District. Functions as the entrance to the community
both figuratively and practically. The site design must consider:
      (1)   Pedestrian, cart and tram traffic and parking related to ferry
service.
      (2)   Service/delivery activity related to barge service.
      (3)   Flexibility and protection in recognizing environmental changes of
riverfront and marina location.
      (4)   Focus on natural resources and views.
      (5)   "Gateway" program, enhancing the "entrance" to the village and link
to the community historic district.
   (b)   Mid-Island District. Functions as the primary commercial/service
district. The site design must consider:
      (1)   Context and scale of adjacent development, commercial and
residential.
      (2)   Increased traffic to support proposed use, services, deliveries,
trash, and vehicle storage.
      (3)   Pedestrian/cart access and parking.
      (4)   Protection of the existing natural environment.
   (c)   East Beach District. Functions as a low-density mixed-use and/or
commercial development area. The site design must consider:
      (1)   Alleviating existing disruption of the East Beach residential area.
      (2)   Minimal impact of natural setting.
      (3)   Scale and density to respond to residential surroundings.
      (4)   Restriction of vehicular traffic.
      (5)   Promotion of pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-61. Building location and orientation.
   The building design and location must address the following concerns and
issues:
   (a)   Buildings, parking, access, and ancillary requirements must minimize
and protect existing natural environment.
   (b)   Buildings must front and be parallel to streets, public spaces, and/or
pedestrian thoroughfares.
   (c)   Building siting must respond to and "anchor" significant vistas and
nodal points.
   (d)   Building locations should support and create public spaces.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-62. Relation to grade.
   Public accessibility requirements encourage the placement of the finish
floor as close as possible to the finish grade unless specific site conditions
or flood zones require otherwise. First floor elevation and elevation of
related exterior spaces must consider connectivity to adjacent developments
when appropriate to promote through-district accessibility.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-63. Setbacks.
   Setback requirements vary with location, district overlay zones, and
proposed use. The building setbacks requirements for each property are found in
the deed restrictions, recorded covenants (if any), these design standards and
the Village of Bald Head Island Code of Ordinances. Zoning requirements are
also found in the Village of Bald Head Island Code of Ordinances. Proposed
designs must adhere to the most restrictive of the setback and zoning
requirements applicable to a particular property. Reference
appendix A.2. Mechanical equipment, and storm water control measures shall be
allowed in rear and side setbacks.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-64. Parking.
   Parking layout design must meet the following requirements:
   (a)   Parking requirements are to be met on proposed development property or
met by a dedicated approved alternate location.
   (b)   Parking is to be located behind the front façade of buildings unless a
component of the overall streetscape.
   (c)   Parking layouts are to be interrupted to accommodate preservation of
existing trees.
   (d)   Parking and loading for buildings located at an intersection are not
allowed on lot corners.
   (e)   Parking and/or vehicular use areas shall maintain a minimum of six
feet distance from property lines (excluding driveways) to allow for screening.
Refer to Sec.
9-105 Landscape E.3.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-65. Loading and delivery; service areas; mechanical equipment;
utilities.
   No loading, service areas, mechanical equipment or utilities should be
located along primary streets or visible from public areas. Screening is to
match or complement the related building. Natural screening may be allowed in
certain circumstances. Each application will be considered on a case-by-case
basis.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1856.png]
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023 ; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-66.   Open/public space.
   Five percent of commercial parcels shall be designated open/public space and
enhance the pedestrian environment. Orientation, building placement, protection
of natural setting, hardscape elements, and pedestrian access should consider
and enhance:
   (a)   Pedestrian environment.
      (1)   Promoting connectivity between commercial areas and the residential
community.
      (2)   Open areas visible from the street, fronting the building, and
encouraging use.
      (3)   Connected walkways.
      (4)   Garden walls establishing court areas.
      (5)   Porches, decks, patios or terraces that are used for more than
access to the project, including seating areas for restaurants, dog-walk areas,
merchandise display areas, and court areas.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1858.png]
   (b)   Landscape requirements. Existing natural growth, including forest
undergrowth, is part of the public domain and must be preserved to maintain the
character of Bald Head Island. Special care for and inclusion of specimen trees
as focal points to the design is encouraged.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Secs. 9-67—9-79. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. GENERAL BUILDING DESIGN.
Sec. 9-80.   Form and massing.
   Overall building mass should be broken down to prevent a "box like" design
or the appearance of a three-story structure. Large buildings should be
modulated using repetitive bays, patterns of architectural components (i.e.
windows, doors, balconies), or recesses in the façade itself.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1860.png]
Sec. 9-81. Scale.
   Buildings should incorporate two scales of architectural definition
simultaneously. At the ground level and along pedestrian paths the building
should respond to the scale of the people using the building. From the street
or at a greater distance, architectural detailing and the overall form of the
building should combine to create a coherent image.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-82. Context.
   Building forms should consider adjacent buildings and districts to
facilitate a smooth transition that reinforces a sense of neighborhood.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-83. Composition.
   Incorporating a building form comprised of a distinct base, body, and roof
is important to reinforce the horizontal and traditional character of Bald Head
Island structures.
   (a)   Rhythm. There is a recognizable rhythm to structures on Bald Head
Island. The restrictions on height, roof slope and proportions tend to generate
repeating architectural forms. The number of different forms and the frequency
with which they are repeated creates the building's rhythm.
   (b)   Height restrictions. Except as permitted by the Village of Bald Head
Island Code of Ordinances or the Urban Code, a building may be no higher than
45 feet, unless noted otherwise herein.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1984.png]
 
   (c)   Relation to grade. Every effort should be made to keep the base and
finish floor in scale and harmony with surrounding existing architecture unless
site conditions dictate otherwise. Stairs, ramps, terraces, and other
connective elements providing access to the finished grade must be integrated
into the articulation of the building's base.
   (d)   Façade development. Articulation of the building façade must consider
the following:
      (1)   Building at corners or terminating axial focal points should
incorporate additional embellishment or distinct composition to emphasize the
location.
      (2)    Consistent use of materials and level of detail on the primary
elevation shall continue to all publicly visible sides of the building.
      (3)    Porches are an integra l part of the style and archite cture on
Bald Head Island. The use of porches is encouraged as a tool to establish scale
and break down continuous vertical surfaces of the building's body.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1864.png]
   (e)   Roof forms. Roof design should be simple with limited roof types
incorporated into the composition. Repetition of forms is often used to reduce
the scale of the overall form and reinforce the rhythm of the building.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Secs. 9-84—9-100. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. SPECIFIC BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
Sec. 9-101.   Materials.
   (a)   Base. The base of a building should be distinct from the main body of
the building. Approved base materials include painted wood, stucco finished
concrete or block, and painted brick.
   (b)   Body. The body of the building should be clad consistent with the
following standards:
      (1)   Exterior siding. The most common exterior material used in the main
building façade on Bald Head Island is cedar shingles or shakes, either painted
or left natural. Horizontal wood or cement siding, vertical board and batten
patterns and other siding materials will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
      (2)   Metal siding. Metal siding may be approved if it evokes a
traditional aesthetic and is incorporated into an overall architectural theme.
Metal siding that looks like a prefabricated metal building will be reviewed on
a case-by-case basis.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1866.png]
 
      (3)   Vinyl siding. Not allowed under any circumstances.
   (c)   Street level glass. Commercial buildings typically have large amounts
of glass on the street level. The design must integrate this need for glass
with the requirement under "proportion" for the glass to be taller than it is
wide. The most common solution is to gang several residential style windows
together to create a large area of glass. The use of metal "storefront" glass
is not encouraged.
   (d)    Windows. Windows should reflect the architectural style of the
project. Projects with a traditional design should use traditional window types
such as double-hung or casement windows. When large areas of glass are
required, multiple windows should be ganged together. Using an odd number of
windows in a grouping is recommended. If a grouping of windows exceeds four
windows, the window trim should be varied to create rhythm within the window
grouping. Windows with divided lights are required to use simulated divided
lights with mullions on the outside and inside of the glass. Decorative glass
or applied glass film must be approved by the CRB. Dark tinted or reflective
glass will not be approved.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1868.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1870.png]
   (e)   Window requirements.
      (1)   75% or more of the window shapes must be vertical /rectangular.
      (2)   Single and double hung windows must have a minimum height to width
ratio of 1.5 to 1.
      (3)   Accent windows should be used sparingly.
      (4)   Trapezoidal windows are not allowed.
      (5)   Window and door trim. Traditional window trim is designed with a
head larger than the jambs and sill. The head, jambs or sills often extend
beyond the adjacent joints to create "horns." "Picture frame" window trim is
not recommended.
   (f)   Doors. Wood doors are preferred. Fiberglass and metal doors are
approved where required because of flood requirements and in secondary
locations with heavy traffic. Aluminum storefront doors are not approved unless
consistent with adjacent windows.
   (g)   Fascia and soffits. Material quality and finish shall be comparable to
typical trim application on a building. Allowable materials include wood,
cementitious fiber boards or divided panels.
   (h)   Roof design. Roof materials shall include standing seam metal, cedar,
and fiberglass shingles. Pitched roof designs are encouraged. Directly adhered
membrane or industrial metal roofs can be approved if the roof is not visible
from the exterior of the building. Parapet walls are an approved method of
concealing membrane or industrial metal roofs.
   (i)   Roof style. Primary roofs shall be gable, hip or gambrel. Commercial
buildings should be seen as an extension of the residential character and scale
of Bald Head Island. Plate height for primary roofs should be kept as low as
possible, integrating the top inhabited story into the roof mass and reducing
the scale of the building. Flat roofs are only allowed when: (1) used to
accentuate a building element as a focal point or an element establishing
building rhythm, and (2) architecturally integrated as an attached shed or room
to a principal pitched roof. Flat roofs must be bordered by parapet or
balustrade or trimmed with prominent cornice capping the wall. Rooftop decks
must be architecturally integrated into the overall roof design and not
contribute to a three-story appearance.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1872.png]
   (j)   Roof pitch and overhang. Principal eave overhangs of all structures
shall be 24 inches minimum and rake overhangs of all structures shall be 12
inches minimum. This minimum standard for overhangs may not be sufficient for
every design. The overall massing should be considered when designing
overhangs. Gable roof pitch should be a minimum of 8:12. The pitch of hip roofs
shall be a minimum of 6:12. Secondary roofs shall be pitched a minimum of 4:12.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-102.   Components.
   (a)   Entry. A commercial building may have several "front doors." Primary
entry-doors should reflect the architectural style of the project and be
distinct in prominence from standard access units.
   (b)   Column trim-enclosure. Scale and level of detail shall be consistent
with overall design and length of the column. Patterns and size may vary to
establish patterns and rhythm in elevations.
   (c)   Rafters. Barge and exposed rafters should be sized in proportion to
the structure. Larger projects are encouraged to use rafter sizes and spacing
bigger than the typical sizes used on a smaller structure.
   (d)   Beams and brackets. Where exposed beams and brackets are used with
rafters, these members should be sized proportionally with the rafters and the
overall scale of the project.
   (e)   Decks. Decks more than four feet deep or four feet high must be
supported on dedicated deck pilings rather than braced from the building
pilings. These deck support pilings must be a minimum of eight inches by eight
inches. Cantilevered decks, balconies and other heated space must be bracketed
or braced from the building pilings or walls.
   (f)   Porches. The use of porches is encouraged. The designer is responsible
for ensuring that a porch used for exit access or as a seating area meets
local, state and federal requirements. Porch ceilings should be tongue and
groove or panels with a pattern of baton strips.
   (g)   Elevators. Every effort should be made to keep elevators inside the
building. However, if this is not possible, exterior elevators may be allowed,
provided they are concealed or incorporated into the overall pattern/scale of
the building elevations.
   (h)   Exterior lighting. Light pollution is avoidable. Building and site
design should be frugal with exterior lighting.
      (1)   All exterior lighting fixtures, regardless of design, are subject
to approval.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1874.png]
      (2)   All lighting will be baffled to prevent direct visualization of the
light source.
      (3)   All exterior wall lighting shall have a baffle-to-light source
relationship that creates a maximum spread of light of 90 degrees from the
bottom of the baffle. All fixture lenses and bulb covers must maintain the
source-to-baffle relationship indicated in the diagrams and examples of the
baffle-to-light source relationship calculations per figure 13.
      (4)   All pathway low-luminary lighting shall have a baffle-to-light
source relationship that creates a maximum spread of light of 120 degrees from
the bottom of the baffle. All pathway lighting shall be no higher than 18
inches above grade as measured from the top of the light fixture.
      (5)   All hooded exterior wall fixture bulbs will be from the white
family and no bulb shall be brighter than 450 lumens. (Approximat ely 40 watts
incandescent, ix watts LED, ten watts CFL). The bulb/light color temperature
must be 3,000 kelvins or less, which is warm white in color.
      (6)   Pathway or stairway lighting fixtures must utilize a maximum
equivalent of 100 lumens or less. This light style must be reviewed and
approved by the CRB and must be used sparingly.
      (7)    Placing television sets or other electro nic equipm ent on
exterior decks, porches , and the like is not permitted, unless it is possible
to shield from horizon tal view by neighbors and from the street/alley and the
like. Special note should be made of the Village of Bald Head Island Noise
Ordinance.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1876.png]
   (i)   Interior lighting. The design standards encourage window treatment,
light fixture design, timers, switching configurations, and other options that
limit light pollution caused by interior lighting. It is also important to
limit the projection of interior lighting to the exterior of the structure. All
buildings should utilize shades/blinds as appropriate to limit light emanating
from within the structure to the outdoors, and interior lights must be turned
off after business hours except those required for safety/security purposes.
   (j)   Color and texture. The design standards encourage traditional color
schemes that emphasize gray and neutral color for the main body of the project
and off-whites for the trim and decoration.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-103.   Commercial lot: usage/building typology.
   Within the three commercial districts: Marina/ Harbour District, Mid-Island
District, and the East Beach District, specific site and building requirements
are established to protect the public domain and overall community character.
The "condition types" in these design standards respond to the uniqueness of
each area and allowable uses. See appendix A for building type setbacks and
parking requirements.
   (a)   Type A: Mixed use-residential/commercial. Federal Road/Shoals Alley
development and Bridge-Lot development: to maintain the "Street character" of
lots bordering residential neighborhoods, designs are required to meet building
setback, coverage, and design requirements of immediately adjacent
neighborhoods (reference Bald Head Association Design Guidelines, which may be
available online from the Bald Head Association) excepting as follows:
      (1)    Height. Maximum height of the primary roof structure is 45 feet
above virgin grade at the building perimeter. "Usable space" located above a
height of 30 feet is to be accommodated within the roof mass (reference
composition).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1989.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1880.png]
   (b)    Type B: Commercial/service/storage/warehousing. These buildings and
related service yards require increased setbacks with protected natural
screening to preserve the natural character of the access street. Additional
considerations:
   (1)   Minimize width of curb cut to 16 feet and clearing of drive ROW to 12
feet.
   (2)   Require exterior storage of vehicles and materials to be located
behind the front line of the street elevation of the building.
   (3)    Provide screening for exterior storage of materials.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1882.png]
   (c)   Type C: Mid-Island & Marina/Harbour District; commercial/residential.
Special considerations include:
      (1)   Primary massing and elevation datums to relate to existing/
neighboring structures.
      (2)   Separation of residential parking and service facilities from
commercial requirements.
      (3)   Minimize exterior lighting at upper levels.
   (d)   Type D: high density; Mixed use residential/commercial. Muscadine
corridor: To maintain the “street character” of lots bordering residential
neighborhoods, designs are required to meet building setback, coverage, and
design requirements of immediately adjacent neighborhoods (reference Bald Head
Association Design Guidelines, which may be available online from Bald Head
Association) excepting as follows:
      (1)   Height. Maximum height of the primary roof structure is 45' above
virgin grade at the building perimeter. “Usable space” located above a height
of 30' is to be accommodated within the roof mass (reference composition).
   (e)   Type E: institutional campus/public service buildings. Special
consideration should consider:
      (1)   Primary massing and elevation datums to relate to existing/
neighboring structures.
      (2)   Defined pedestrian access points to promote continuity of campus
program.
      (3)   Special use permitting.
      (4)   Safety: adjacency to primary streets, address heavy traffic passing
through campus areas, designate pedestrian "drop off” areas.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1991.png]
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-104.   Specific site requirements.
   (a)   Storm water management. Allowable impervious surface area is based on
storm water permits issued by the North Carolina Department of Environmental
Health and Natural Resources (NCDEHNR). Different sites are subject to
different storm water requirements depending on the location, grade, existing
detention or retention structures, and the terms of the specific storm water
plan filed with and approved by NCDEHNR. The designer is responsible for
determining the storm water requirements, designing the project within the
impervious surface available, and securing all required permits.
   (b)   Hardscape paving. Exterior walkways may be paved with concrete pavers,
wood boardwalks or concrete. Loose gravel, rock or landscaped paving is not
approved for required building access. Asphalt paving is only approved for
passenger vehicle parking. Pervious paving and "honeycomb" paving is encouraged
in parking areas. Gravel, rock or landscaped paving can be used on ornamental
paths in a landscape plan.
   (c)   Signage. Building and overall project signage is regulated by the
Village of Bald Head Island Code of Ordinances and these design standards. All
signs must be submitted to the CRB for approval. CRB approval is required for,
but not limited to, the color, shape, graphic design, font style, and message
to the extent necessary to preclude offensive or derogatory language. Provided
that a business logo is consistent with existing architecture and in compliance
with the requirements of the Village of Bald Head Island Code of Ordinances and
these design standards, such logo may be used as or incorporated into project
signage. Except as otherwise set forth in these design standards, Village of
Bald Head Island Code of Ordinances, Sec.
32-403 regulates attachment methods for signs, the sign size, location and
other criteria.
   (d)   Landscape. Landscape plans are required and must show the type, size
and number of plants and the irrigation system, walkways or ornamental areas
incorporated into the landscaping. Details of any landscape accessories such as
benches, pergolas, trellises, or other permanent or semi-permanent structures
must be provided. Approved plant types and drawing requirements are listed in
appendix
A.6.
   (e)   Accessories. Flags/ flagpoles: the request to install a ground-mounted
flagpole must be submitted for approval and must include a site plan with
dimensions and specifications for the proposed pole location. Only one ground-
mounted flagpole may be installed on a property. Any ground-mounted flagpole
must be made of wood or high-quality metal. The flagpole must be no taller than
25 feet and no taller than the primary structure. A bracket-mounted flag kit is
allowed on main structures and does not require approval. The maximum flag size
allowed is four feet by six feet and does require approval. United States flags
shall be in good condition and displayed in a respectful manner in accordance
with the United States flag code of 1976.
   (f)   Parking and space requirements. The number of required parking spaces
for each project is identified in appendix
A.1.
   (g)   Trellis. When a trellis is to be installed, the following standards
must be met:
      (1)   Material: dimensional lumber.
      (2)   Maximum footprint of detached trellis: 120 square feet.
      (3)   Height: maximum ten feet, minimum eight feet measured from finish
elevation to lowest horizontal member
      (4)   Proportion to complement other structures on the lot.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
Sec. 9-105. Landscaping.
   (a)   General considerations. When designing a landscape plan, please be
aware of the following:
      (1)   Disturbance of wetland areas and vegetation is to be avoided when
possible.
      (2)   Village approval is required for removal of any tree of three-inch
caliper or greater at 48 inches above grade.
      (3)   A plot plan showing trees of three inches or greater diameter is
required before proceeding, or those trees should be marked on the tree survey
if part of new construction. (See Tree Mitigation and Review Process sections
of the design standards.)
   (b)   Clearing, trimming and maintenance, special conditions.
      (1)   Vegetation salvaging. Prior to any clearing, the CRB administrator
must be contacted to schedule the tagging and salvaging of critical Bald Head
Island vegetation from the proposed construction area.
      (2)   Lot clearing for sale of property. Clearing of the entire
understory or clearing for the sole purpose of selling a lot is not permitted.
However, to provide ease of access, a path of 36 inches in width may be cleared
as long as no trees, tree limbs or clustered growth, subject to village
approval, are disturbed. Any violation due to more extensive clearing will be
subject to fines and/or mitigation.
      (3)   Lot clearing for survey or staking. Some clearing of understory
trees and shrubs may be required to prepare a site for survey or to stake the
proposed building site. Permission to clear such understory trees and shrubs
shall not be required by the CRB for the purpose of surveying but clearing
shall be limited to vegetation less than three inches in diameter at 48 inches
as measured along the trunk from ground level or any tree limb less than three
inches in diameter. Any vegetation larger than this, or any vegetation that
exists as clustered growth or having horizontal branching habits, must be
approved for removal regardless of diameter size. Exception: it is understood
that when surveying to establish the property lines of a lot, vegetation may
impede the ability of the surveyor to establish a sight line. Any vegetation
directly in the sight line that is less than three inches in diameter at 48
inches, as measured from the base at ground level, may be removed. CRB approval
must be granted to remove any vegetation three inches or greater in the sight
line. Violations of this requirement are subject to mitigation and fines.
      (4)   Lot clearing for any construction. All construction sites must
adhere to provisions in other sections of the design standards. The intent when
clearing for construction or renovation projects should be to disturb as small
an area as possible. An approved site plan is required prior to any vegetation
removal for construction.
      (5)   Understory removal. Understory should be removed only in the
designated building area as shown on the approved site plan. Building materials
or equipment should not be allowed to destroy remaining areas of understory or
be placed near trees. All trees should be protected with fencing and this
fencing must remain in place for the entire construction process.
      (6)   Canopy and understory trimming. Cutting and thinning should be kept
to an absolute minimum.
      (7)   Dune vegetation. The removal of vegetation from any dune area is a
critical issue. This vegetation (shrubs, grasses, or vines) holds the dunes in
place preventing erosion and storm damage. Due to the wind and salt
environment, most of these plants never grow large enough to be subject to
approvals for trees. However, they may be covered by additional CRB approval
requirements regarding limbs, clustered growth or understory.
      (8)   Mulch. If available, mulch used should come from the Bald Head
Island mulch site or be a pre-bagged product to help control pests.
      (9)   Synthetic/artificial plants. Synthetic and artificial plants are
not allowed.
      (10)   Pine straw. Pine straw is not allowed.
      (11)   Nothing may be affixed to a tree or vegetation.
      (12)   Grass. Installation of turf grass lawns is not permitted. Use of
native grasses that are naturally maintained are permitted (see plant lists).
      (13)   Herbicides. Herbicides can damage the root zones of desirable
trees and shrubs. The need for and use of herbicides may best be determined by
landscape professionals.
      (14)   Avoid using bush-hogs when removing vegetation since it is very
easy to scrape and damage desirable trees and shrubs with heavy equipment and
to increase undesirable compaction and root system damage.
      (15)   Maintenance. All reasonable means shall be taken during and after
construction to protect and preserve existing and newly installed landscape
material. Maintenance, irrigation, and replacement programs are to be in place
at completion of construction to ensure established landscapes.
   (c)   Tree and vegetation removal/mitigation.
      (1)   All existing trees three inches or greater in diameter, at 48
inches as measured along the trunk from the base of the tree at ground level,
shall be entered on a tree survey and submitted to the CRB with proposed site
plans. This survey shall depict the exact location, size and drip line or
canopy line of the trees and clearly identify the trees that will be removed
and the trees that will remain, along with a description of steps that will be
taken to protect them. Additionally, for dune lot tree surveys, vegetation,
(classified as two square feet or more of clustered growth at ground level
regardless of branching habits or branch diameter) shall also be noted on the
survey and if any of this type of vegetation is to be removed, it should be
clearly identified.
      (2)   Existing trees and vegetation must be protected during construction
with fencing. The fencing must remain in place throughout the entire
construction process. This fencing shall be wood snow fence and protect the
extents of the drip line where practicable (See Figure 21).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1993.png]
 
      (3)   The CRB may require a mitigation rate of up to 100% for each inch
of diameter of trees or vegetation to be removed. A mitigation response needs
to be determined by the CRB.
      (4)   All specimen trees shown on the tree survey outside of the building
envelope shall be carefully protected from construction activities in any
manner deemed appropriate by the CRB, including protective fencing. This
fencing shall remain in place throughout the construction process (see
construction/site standards).
   (d)   Unauthorized removal of trees and vegetation.
      (1)   The unauthorized removal of trees or clustered growth on any
property is considered a serious event and violation. The Village of Bald Head
Island Code of Ordinances restricts removal of trees and clustered growth.
Failure to obtain CRB approval prior to removal may result in fines and
mitigation.
      (2)   The Village of Bald Head Island Code of Ordinances provides that
removal of any tree or trees three inches or greater in diameter at 48 inches
above grade requires permission and/or a landscape permit from the village
building inspector, even if the tree is determined to be dead or diseased.
      (3)   Per the Village of Bald Head Island Code of Ordinances, removal of
branches of five inches or more in diameter also requires village approval.
      (4)   CRB approval is required for the removal of trees three inches in
diameter; understory vegetation one inch or greater in diameter, measured 48
inches along the trunk from ground level; tree limbs of three inches or more in
diameter; and clustered growth vegetation two square feet or more at ground
level regardless of branching habits or diameter.
      (5)   Removing trees or branches without first obtaining CRB approval
will result in a fine, and mitigation of the loss of trees or limbs. The
Village of Bald Head Island Code of Ordinances allows the village to assess
fines of $500 per inch of diameter at 48 inches above grade of the cut tree.
      (6)   If mitigation is required, the property owner may be required to
plant a tree(s) of like kind and of the same size as the cut tree(s) within 180
days of the fine, guaranteeing the tree to survive for one year after the
planting date.
      (7)   The building inspector must approve the location(s) of the planted
tree(s). The CRB also has the discretion to require submittal of a landscaping
plan.
      (8)   In the case of "competing trees," the building inspector shall
decide which tree(s) will be removed. The removal of dead trees requires the
same CRB approvals as live trees but does not require a village contractor
permit. If a decision by the building inspector is disputed, the property owner
must provide sufficient evidence to show the tree is dead, represents a danger
to individuals or property or that the tree is diseased and will not live.
   (e)   Landscaping requirements for new construction and major renovation.
      (1)   Engage a trained landscape design professional.
      (2)   New construction landscape plans should utilize the proposed site
plan with topographical information provided by the survey/site plan that is
required for a draft level submittal.
      (3)   Parking and vehicular use areas shall be screened from adjacent
properties and public right-of-way with existing/protected vegetation or a
continuous solid row of evergreen plantings that will reach a minimum height of
four feet at maturity as set out in the latest edition of “American Standard
for Nursery Stock,” by the American Horticulture Industry Association, Inc.
(ANSI Z60.0).
      (4)   Commercial uses must be screened from abutting residential zoning
using either existing or planted vegetation. The screening shall be evergreen,
continuous, and a minimum of six feet in height at planting and of a variety
that reaches a minimum height of 25' at maturity as set out in the latest
edition of “American Standard for Nursery Stock,” by the American Horticulture
Industry Association, Inc. (ANSI Z60.1). Plants shall be spaced accordingly to
achieve this performance requirement.
      (5)   Existing built sites planning a major renovation should utilize a
site plan that includes all existing improvements, remaining existing
landscaping, hardscape and illustrate the proposed changes.
      (6)   Verify setbacks of the property as determined by the design
standards and the Village of Bald Head Island Code of Ordinances, as well as
government waterfront setback controls and maximum allowable impervious.
      (7)   Plants indigenous to Bald Head Island (identified as "native" on
the plant list) should be the predominant source for landscape plans. It is
required that a minimum of 70% of the new plant material be native to Bald Head
Island. The use of non-native plants (see glossary for definition) is limited
to a maximum of 10% of the plan. Up to 30% of the plant material may be N.C.
native. The plant lists are subject to change and plants not on these lists may
be considered.
      (8)   No known invasive plants may be planted (see plant lists, appendix
A.6.).
      (9)   Artificial plants are not allowed.
      (10)   During construction, naturalized areas of the property that are
not within the CRB approved building area (denoted by the limits of
construction fencing) must not be disturbed. Any areas outside the limits of
construction fencing that are disturbed must be restored to their original
natural character.
      (11)   The clearing of understory is not permitted in setbacks except as
permitted in these design standards within six feet of the structure, or as
necessary for an approved site plan or landscape plan and as reflected in the
approved site plan or landscape plan. For example, some clearing within a
setback may be required for driveway access. All clearing for new construction
must be reflected in the CRB approved plan.
      (12)   Water conservation is an important Bald Head Island issue. Drip
irrigation to maximize water effectiveness is strongly recommended. The plant
selection should consider limiting use of drip irrigation to the first year for
the establishment of new plantings.
   (f)   Recommended plant list. The lists are based upon plants that have been
found to be native to Bald Head Island, native to North Carolina and examples
of some of the non-native plants that have been planted on Bald Head Island.
The distinction between native and non-native species is important because
native species have generally adapted and evolved with the competing species,
predators, and diseases of an area over many centuries or longer. Bald Head
Island native plants support indigenous wildlife, habitats, ecosystem function
and ecosystem services. There are suggestions for which plants typically do
well in the various micro-island environments. The "please don't plant me" list
(found in appendix A.6.(g)) also includes common non-native invasive plants.
Lawns are not allowed. In reviewing landscape plans, the CRB will consider
plants not on these lists provided they are not considered invasive or
aggressive. Reference plant list in appendix
A.6.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
APPENDIX A.
A.1. Parking space requirements.
   (a)   Size.
      (1)   7 feet by 13 feet area should be allocated to accommodate six seat
carts.
   (b)   Count.
      (1)   All developments in all zoning districts shall provide enough
parking spaces to accommodate the number of vehicles attracted to the intended
use.
      (2)   The table of parking requirements cannot and does not cover every
possible situation that may arise. In cases not specifically covered, the CRB
has the authority to determine the parking requirements using the table as a
guide.
Building Type Type of Use Parking Space Requirement
Building Type Type of Use                      Parking Space Requirement
Type A & D    Mixed use dwelling unit          2 per dwelling unit
             Residential                      1 per bedroom unit
             Commercial/office with little or 1 per 400 gross sf commercial/
              no client traffic                office
             Commercial/office designed to    1 per 200 gross sf
              serve clients on the premises
           Commercial/retail                1 per 400 gross sf
             Hospitality                      2 per six seats in venue
              Single use: service/storage/     2 per min. dedicated private
Type B        warehousing                      spaces
                                               4 per designated customer
           Single use: commercial/office    1 per 400 gross sf
Type C        High density: mixed use          2 per dwelling unit
             Residential                      1 per bedroom unit
             Commercial/retail                1 per 400 gross sf
             Hospitality                      2 per six seats in venue
Type E        Institutional/public service     Special use permit designation
 
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
A.2. Setback Requirements.
 
Building Type        Location              Front                 Side   Rear
Type A               Federal Road/Shoals   25 ft. setback
Mixed use            Alley Development     Parking/planting (10  10 ft  10 ft
residential &        Bridge-Lot            ft. - 17 ft.)
commercial                                 Sidewalk (8 ft.)
Type B                                     50 ft. setback
Commercial ,         Edward Teach Wynd     20 ft. planted buffer 25 ft. 35 ft.*
service, storage,                          30 ft. parking,
warehousing                                storage, etc.
Type C                                     35 ft. setback
Mid Island,          Edward Teach Wynd     15 ft. parking,
commercial &         Maritime Way ***      planting, trees       8 ft.  10 ft.*
residential, Marina, Marina/Transportation 20 ft. planting,
Harbour commercial & Expansion Area        sidewalk, seating
residential
Type D                                     35 ft. setback
Mixed use                                  15 ft. parking, trees
residential &        Muscadine Corridor    20 ft. planting (12   10 ft. 10 ft.
commercial                                 ft.), sidewalk (8
                                           ft.)
Type E               Old Baldy Historic
Institutional,       District
Campus, Public       Conservancy           Special Use Permit
Service Buildings    Riverfront
                     Public Service Areas
New Streets: Building type, setback, and yard standards shall be determined by
the Commercial Review Board.
 
*   Additional buffer may be required on properties bordering residential
areas. Verify with CRB administrator for all special conditions.
**   Corner lots: Front setback applies to both streets.
***   Access to Development in the Maritime Way District must be from Maritime
Way, a 35 ft. rear setback is required along North Bald Head Wynd.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
A.3. Submission requirements.
   Note: All required drawings, forms, and fees must be submitted two weeks
prior to scheduling a preliminary or final review date.
   Draft review: It is recommended that applicants utilize the Preliminary
Review requirements as a check list when preparing a plan for Draft Review.
   (a)   Preliminary review.
      (1)   CRB questionnaire. See form in appendix
A.4 and applicable fees.
      (2)   Topographic survey. Must be sealed by a registered North Carolina
surveyor. It must provide:
         a.   Property lines with dimensions and bearings.
         b.   All easements.
         c.   Existing contours at one-foot maximum intervals shown at MSL.
         d.   Existing locations of all trees over three inch caliper at 48
inch height above grade and approximate canopy.
         e.   North arrow.
      (3)   Schematic drawings.
         a.   Tree removal; material storage; site access plan.
            1.   Survey.
            2.   Context map indicating everything within 100 ft. of the site.
            3.   Building outline/footprint.
            4.   Identify trees to be removed by marking and/or labeling them.
            5.   Table identifying species and caliper inches of trees being
removed.
            6.   Notes and details on how tree protection will be handled on
site.
            7.   Material delivery storage/laydown area.
            8.   Contractor access point, parking.
            9.   Dumpster location.
            10.   Port-a-John location.
            11.   Signage location.
         b.   Site plan.
            1.   North arrow.
            2.   Site data summary:
               (A)   Building data;
               (B)   Building type (based on design standards);
               (C)   Parking calculations;
               (D)   Use data;
               (E)   Setbacks:
               (F)   Buffers;
               (G)   Impervious data; and
               (H)   Any other applicable information.
            3.   Property lines with dimensions and bearings.
            4.   Existing and proposed contours.
            5.   Roof plan shown to side at same scale.
            6.   Roof overhang dashed.
            7.   Mechanical and service equipment location(s).
            8.   Conceptual site lighting.
            9.   Conceptual landscaping.
            10.   Signage location(s).
            11.   First floor elevation (FFE).
            12.   Setback limits shown.
            13.   Drives and walks.
            14.   FEMA zone designation and base flood elevation.
            15.   Limits of constrnction line (sand fence line).
            16.   Building signage (location) per the Village of Bald Head
Island Code of Ordinances.
            17.   Parking and paving, extent, and material.
            18.   Loading zones and fire lanes.
            19.   Footprint of adjacent development.
            20.   Storm water retention area and size.
         c.   Floor plans.
            1.   Room identification.
            2.   All walls, windows and doors with swings identified.
            3.   All overhangs of floors or roofs above shown as dashed lines.
            4.   Dimension overall limits of plans.
            5.   Ground level plan to indicate pilings, enclosures, driveway
and parking locations, stairways, garage, garbage/trash/dumpster enclosure/
screening plan and HVAC enclosure/screening plan.
         d.   Elevations.
            1.   Show finish grades.
            2.   Show screening type and location (this includes screening
utilized for the HVAC and garbage/trash/dumpster enclosures).
            3.   Indicate overall height from virgin grade and finished grade
to high point of roof.
   (b)   Final review. The final review application should include all items
required in the preliminary review as well as the additional items listed
below. The final design drawings may be presented in a variety of formats, but
must contain the following:
      (1)   CRB questionnaire, in final form.
      (2)   CRB paint/color application (See form in appendix A.5).
      (3)   Final drawings.
         a.   Architectural site plan.
            1.   Revised as required by preliminary review.
            2.   Date of plan preparation, project name, address, property
owner, north arrow, and graphic scale.
            3.   All impervious calculations.
            4.   Ground floor plan (or first floor plan if less than six ft
above grade) with entry area and all stairs delineated and roof and deck lines
shown as dashed lines.
            5.   First floor elevation (FFE).
            6.   HVAC units and garbage/trash/dumpster enclosures.
            7.   Locate electric meter locations (including any necessary
platforms or steps).
            8.   Limits of construction line (sand fence line) and location for
storage of construction materials.
            9.   Parking, loading zones, fire lanes and paving, including
dimensions and materials.
            10.   Exterior light locations, lighting architectural cut sheets
or specifications, and number of fixtures, per the Village of Bald Head Island
Code of Ordinances.
            11.   Details for all site signage.
         b.   Floor plans.
            1.   Revised as required by preliminary review.
            2.   Include foundation plan.
            3.   All walls and wall thicknesses.
            4.   Dimension overall limits of plans.
         c.   Elevations.
            1.   Revised as required by preliminary review.
            2.   Show finish grades.
            3.   Show screening type and location (this includes screening
utilized for the HVAC, electric meters, and garbage/trash/dumpster enclosures).
            4.   Indicate overall height from ground to ridge of roof.
            5.   Indicate overall height from virgin low point under the
building to ridge of roof.
            6.   Provide details for all building and site signage.
         d.   Sections.
            1.   Scaled as required to understand the details.
            2.   Typical building section from ground to roof ridge.
            3.   Typical wall section at minimum three-fourths inch to one
foot, zero inches scale.
            4.   Typical decks and railings details.
            5.   Typical porch details.
            6.   Typical lattice or grade screening details.
         e.   Engineering drawings.
            1.   Provide civil site plans as required for storm water and
utilities, with details for roads, paving, curbing, drains and site features.
         f.   Landscape plan.
            1.   Indicate the variety, size, location and number of all plant
material.
            2.   Indicate the number, types and limits of seeded/sprigged
areas.
            3.   Notation of irrigation components and a layout of the zones.
            4.   Include plans and details for any permanent project features
not shown on the civil or architectural plans.
      (4)   Village building inspector technical review.
(Ord. No. 2023-1102, 11-17-2023; Ord. No. 2024-0702, 7-19-2024)
A.4. Submission forms
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1958.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1960.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1962.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1964.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1966.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1997.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/f6add39ce2225046c15fd22f01c0e09c9c8f7ae1/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1999.png]
A.5. Schedule of commercial construction review fees.
   (a)   Application review fees.
New construction
New construction
                       New construction review fee for up to three reviews
$5,000                 (this includes any combination of draft, preliminary or
                       final review submittals).
$1,500                 New construction review fee for additional reviews
                       beyond those mentioned above.
Major renovations
                       Category I means a renovation to heated spaced of 1,000-
                       1,599 sq. ft. or non-heated space 1,200 sq. ft. or
$4,000                 greater. Note that major renovations affecting 1,600
                       heat sq. ft. and over, or renovations involving 50% of
                       the existing structure to be removed or revised, are
                       subject to new construction fees and guidelines.
$3,000                 Category II means a renovation to heated space of 250-
                       999 sq. ft. or non-heated space of 500-1,199 sq. ft.
$2,000                 Category III means a renovation to heated space of less
                       than 250 sq. ft. or non-heated space of 250-499 sq. ft.
Minor renovations
                       Category I means a renovation to non-heated space of
$600                   less than 250 sq. ft., hardscape changes to landscape,
                       or any other renovation not otherwise categorized.
                       Category II means a renovation that changes an existing
                       feature, such as a door, window, roof materials, or
                       decorative item. Note that repair or replacement of an
$400                   existing feature with the same or substantially the same
                       feature does not constitute a renovation. For example,
                       this Category II minor renovation does not include
                       repainting a feature of a conforming structure with the
                       same color.
                       No charge for plant material change. However, landscape
                       change plans including hardscape material such as
Plant materia l change gravel, exterior lighting, pavers, decking, and the like
                       must fill out a minor change application and include a
                       $300 non-refundable review fee.
 
   (b)   CRB approval is required for all of the above situations, even if a
fee is not required. For new construction and major renovations, the review fee
is due at or before the preliminary submittal. A submittal will not be placed
on the meeting agenda for preliminary review if the fee is not timely received.
   (c)   The fees for new construction and major renovations cover a
preliminary and final review of the project. If another formal review is
needed, an additional review fee must be paid. This requirement is intended to
encourage the investment of appropriate preparation in the original submittal
and to simplify and expedite the approval process.
   (d)   For a submittal to be treated as a re-submittal, there can be no
changes to the building or project other than those required by changes, if
any, in the standards. All re-submittals will be subject to the standards in
effect as of the re-submittal date. Any changes other than those necessary to
meet current design standard requirements will be considered new construction,
subject to a new construction fee.
   (e)   Please make checks payable to:
      VILLAGE OF BALD HEAD ISLAND
      Mail payment to: Stephen Boyett, Development Services Administrator
      P.O. Box 3009, Bald Head Island, North Carolina 28461
A.6. Landscape material.
   (a)   Native to Bald Head Island.
PLANT LIST
                           EASILY SOURCED      EDGES of DUNE,
COMMON NAME BOTANICAL NAME LOCALLY        DUNE MARITIME FOREST MARITIME FOREST
                                               OR MARSH
PLANT LIST
                                                   EDGES of DUNE,
COMMON NAME    BOTANICAL NAME  EASILY SOURCED DUNE MARITIME       MARITIME
                               LOCALLY             FOREST OR      FOREST
                                                   MARSH
TREES
American       Ilex opaca and  X                                X
holly**        its cultivars
Cabbage
palmetto/      Sabal palmetto  X                  X              X
Sabal palm(*)
(**)
Carolina       Prunus          X                                X
laurel cherry  caroliniana
Coastal        Carpinus
American       caroliniana     X                                X
hornbeam/ironw var.
ood            caroliniana
Coastal red    Juniperus
cedar/red      silicicola and  X              X    X              X
cedar**        its cultivars
Dogwood/flower Cornus florida/
ing dogwood    Benthamidia     X                                X
               florida
Eastern red    Juniperus
cedar          virginiana and  X              X                  X
               its cultivars
Live oak**     Quercus         X                  X              X
               virginiana
Loblolly pine  Pinus taeda     X                  X              X
Pignut hickory Carya glabra    X                  X              X
Red bay        Persea borbonia                   X              X
Red mulberry   Morus rubra                                     X
Sand laurel    Quercus
oak**          hemisphaerica/  X                                X
               laurifolia
Sand live oak  Quercus         X                  X               
(tree-form)    geminata
Southern
toothache      Zanthoxylum                   X    X               
tree/Hercules' clava-herculis
club
Wax-myrtle     Morella
(tree-form)    cerifera/Myrica X              X    X               
               cerifera
Wild olive/    Cartrema
devilwood      americanum/     X                  X              X
(tree-form)    osmanthus
               americanus
Yaupon/yaupon  Ilex vomitoria
holly** (tree- and its         X              X    X              X
form)          cultivars
SHRUBS
Beautyberry/   Callicarpa
American       americanum      X                  X              X
beautyberry
Dune marsh-    Iva imbricata                 X                   
elder
Dune prickly-  Opuntia                       X    X               
pear cactus    drummondii
               Ilex vomitoria
Dwarf Yaupon   "Schillings     X              X    X              X
               Dwarf" and
               "Nana"
Farkleberry/   Vaccinium       X                  X               
Sparkleberry   arboreum
Eastern winged Rhus copallinum X                  X               
sumac          var. copallinum
Maritime       Iva frutscens                     X               
marsh-elder    var. frutescens
Mound-lily
yucca/ Spanish Yucca gloriosa                X    X               
bayonet*
Prickly-pear   Opuntia
cactus         mesacantha spp. X              X    X               
               mesacantha
Sand live oak  Quercus         X              X    X               
(multi-trunk)  geminate
Silverling/    Baccharis       X                  X               
mullet bush    halimifolia
Spanish dagger Yucca aloifolia               X    X               
yucca
               Morella
Wax-myrtle     cerifera/Myrica X              X    X               
               cerifera
Weeping yaupon Ilex vomitoria  X              X    X              X
               Pendula
               Cartrema
Wild olive/    americanum/     X                  X              X
devilwood      Osmanthus
               americanus
VINES
Beach morning- Ipomoea                       X                   
glory*         imperati
Carolina       Gelsemium       X                  X              X
jessamine      sempervirens
Carolina       Berchemia                                       X
supplejack     scandens
Coastal        Ipomoea
morning-glory/ cordatotriloba/ X              X    X               
ti e vine      var.
               cordatotriloba
               Lonicera
Coral          sempervirens    X                  X              X
honeysuckle    and its
               cultivars
               Nekemias
Peppervine     arborea/                          X              X
               ampelopsis
               arborea
Saltmarsh      Ipomoea                           X              X
morning-glory  sagittata
Swallow-wort/  Pattalias                         X               
sand-vine      palustre
Yellow         Passiflora      X                  X              X
passionflower  lutea
ANNUALS, PERENNIALS AND FERNS                                      
Annual sand    Strophostyles                 X    X               
bean           helvola
Annual sea-    Sabatia                           X               
pink           stellaris
Beach blanket- Gaillardia
flower         pulchella var.                X    X               
               drummondii
Camphorweed    Heterotheca                   X    X               
               subaxillaris
Carolina sea-  Limonium                          X               
lavender       carolinianum
Common         Teucrium                          X              X
germander      canadense
Creeping       Phyla nodiflora
frogfruit/     var. nodiflora  X                  X               
turkey tangle
               Trichostema
Dune blue      nesophilum/                   X    X               
curls*         trichostema sp.
               1
Dwarf palmetto Sabal minor     X                  X              X
Eastern horse- Monarda
mint           punctata var.   X                  X               
               punctata
Ebony          Asplenium
spleenwort     platyneuron     X                                X
fern
Elephant s     Elephantopus                                    X
foot           sp.
Northern
seaside        Euphorbia
spurge/        polygonifolia                 X                   
northern
sandmat
Partridge-     Mitchella       X                                X
berry          repens
Robins-        Erigeron                          X              X
plantain       pulchellus
Salt-marsh     Symphytrichum                     X               
aster          tenuifolium
Samphire/      Salicornia                        X               
glasswort      virginica
Seabeach       Amaranthus                    X                   
amaranth*      pumilus
Silverleaf     Croton
croton/beach-  punctatus                     X    X               
tea
Silver seaside Borrichia                         X               
oxeye          frutescens
Southern       Solidago
seaside        mexicana        X              X    X               
goldenrod
Southern
seaside        Euphorbia                     X    X               
spurge/dixie   bombensis
sandmat*
St. Andrew s   Hypericum                         X               
cross          hypericoides
GRASSES, SEDGES AND RUSHES
Bitter         Panicum amarum
seabeach grass and its         X              X    X               
               cultivars
Black needle   Juncus                            X               
rush           roemerianus
Dune hair      Muhlenbergia
grass/ sweet   sericea         X              X    X               
grass
Elliott s      Eragrostis      X                  X               
lovegrass      elliottii
Hairgrass/     Muhlenbergia    X              X    X               
purple muhly   capillaris
Maritime bushy Andropogon      X                  X               
bluestem       tenuispatheus
Narrowleaf
whitetop       Rhychospora     X                  X               
sedge/         colorata
starrush
Saltmarsh
cordgrass/     Spartina        X                  X               
smoot h        alterniflora
cordgrass
               Elymus
Saltmarsh      halophilus/E.   X                  X              X
wild-rye       virginicus var.
               halophilus
Sea oats**     Uniola          X              X                   
               paniculata
Seaside little Schizachyricum  X              X    X               
bluestem       littorale
Small
saltmeadow     Spartina patens                   X               
cordgrass/salt
hay
Two-flower     Melica mutica                     X               
melic
Woods-grass/   Oplismenus                                      X
basket-grass*  setarius
 
   (b)   Native to North Carolina (not native to Bald Head Island).
                           EASILY SOURCED      EDGES of DUNE,
COMMON NAME BOTANICAL NAME LOCALLY        DUNE MARITIME FOREST MARITIME FOREST
                                               OR MARSH
                                                  EDGES of DUNE,
COMMON NAME    BOTANICAL NAME EASILY SOURCED DUNE MARITIME       MARITIME
                              LOCALLY             FOREST OR      FOREST
                                                  MARSH
American       Diospyros                                      X
persimmon      virginiana
Chickasaw plum Prunus                                         X
               angustifolia
Eastern red    Acer rubrum    X                                X
maple          var.
               Cercis
Eastern redbud canadensis and                                 X
               its cultivars
Fringe-tree    Chionanthus                                    X
               virginicus
               Magnolia
Southern       grandiflora                                    X
magnolia       and its
               cultivars
               Magnolia
Sweet bay      virginiana
magnolia       var.                                           X
               virginiana and
               its cultivars
Water oak      Quercus nigra                                  X
Wild black     Prunus                                         X
cherry         serotina
SHRUBS
Coastal sweet- Clethra
pepperbus h/   alnifolia                        X               
summersweet
Curlyleaf      Yucca
yucca/ Adam s  filamentosa                  X    X              X
needle
Southern black Viburnum                                       X
haw            rufidulum
Southern wild
raisin/        Viburnum nudum                   X              X
possumha w
Sweet-shrub/   Claycanthus
Carolina       floridus                                       X
allspice
Sweetspire/
Virginia       Itea virginica                   X              X
willow
VINES
               Bignonia
Cross-vine     capreolata and X                  X               
               its cultivars
Maypops/purple Passiflora     X                  X               
passionflower  incarnata
ANNUALS, PERENNIALS AND FERNS
Coral bean/    Erythrina                        X              X
cardinal spear herbacea
Black-eyed     Rudbeckia                        X               
Susan          hirta
Eastern        Asclepias
butterflyweed  tuberosa var.                    X               
               tuberosa
Seashore-      Kosteletzkya                     X               
mallow         pentacarpos
GRASSES, SEDGES AND RUSHES
               Calamagrostis
American       breviligulata/ X              X                   
beachgrass**   ammophilia
               breviligulata
Bottlebrush    Elymus hystrix                   X              X
grass
               Andropogon
Broomsedge     virginicus     X                  X               
               var.
               virginicus
Eastern wild-  Elymus                           X               
rye            virginicus
Little         Schizachyrium
bluestem       scoparium and                    X               
               its cultivars
Purple         Eragrostis     X                  X               
lovegrass      spectabilis
Soft rush      Juncus effusus                   X               
               Panicum
Switchgrass    virgatum var.  X                  X               
               virgatum and
               its cultivars
 
   (c)   Non-native plants (not native to Bald Head Island or North Carolina).
 
                           EASILY SOURCED      EDGES of DUNE,
COMMON NAME BOTANICAL NAME LOCALLY        DUNE MARITIME FOREST MARITIME FOREST
                                               OR MARSH
                                                   EDGES of DUNE,
COMMON NAME    BOTANICAL NAME  EASILY SOURCED DUNE MARITIME       MARITIME
                               LOCALLY             FOREST OR      FOREST
                                                   MARSH
TREES
California fan Washingtonia                      X               
palm           filifera
Canary date    Phoenix                           X               
palm           canariensis
Edible fig     Ficus carica                      X               
Needle palm    Rhapidophyllum                    X               
               hystrix
Windmill palm  Trachycarpus                      X               
               fortunei
SHRUBS
Chinese fringe Loropetlam                        X               
flower         chinense
Chinese        Juniperus
juniper        chinensis and                 X    X               
               its cultivars
Indian         Rhaphiolepis
hawthorn       spp. and its                  X    X               
               cultivars
Loquat         Eriobotrya                        X               
               japonica
Oleander
(Mediterranean Nerium oleander                   X               
native)
               Pittosporum
Pittosporum    tobira and its                    X              X
               cultivars
Rosemary       Rosmarinus                        X               
               officinalis
Sago palm      Cycas revoluta                    X              X
VINES
Confederate    Trachelospermum                   X               
jasmine        jasminoides
GRASSES, ANNUALS, PERENNIALS, AND FERNS
Blue wild      Baptista                          X               
indigo         australis
Coreopsis      Coreopsis                         X               
               lanceolata
Florida gama
grass/dwarf
fakahatchee
(while native
to Florida, it Tripsacum
is used in     floridanum                        X               
golf course
communities
along the
eastern
seaboard)
East Florida
beach          Helianthus
sunflower      debilis                           X               
(Florida
native)
Gaura          Gaura                             X               
               lindheimeri
Japanese holly Crytomium                                       X
fern           falcatum
Lantana
(Central and   Lantana camara                    X               
South America
native)
Mexican bush   Salvia                            X               
sage           leucantha
Plains
coreopsis/     Coreopsis
calliopsis     tinctoria var.                    X               
(Midwest       tinctoria
native)
Prairie        Sporobolus                        X               
dropseed       heterolepsis
Russian sage   Perovskia                         X               
               atriplicifolia
Silverleaf     Helianthus
sunflower      argophyllus                       X               
(Texas native)
Weeping love   Eragrostis
grass (South   curvula                           X               
Africa native)
 
   (d)   Invasive, not native (DON’T PLANT ME!”).
 
                           EASILY SOURCED      EDGES of DUNE,
COMMON NAME BOTANICAL NAME LOCALLY        DUNE MARITIME FOREST MARITIME FOREST
                                               OR MARSH
                                                    EDGES of DUNE,
COMMON NAME    BOTANICAL NAME   EASILY SOURCED DUNE MARITIME       MARITIME
                                LOCALLY             FOREST OR      FOREST
                                                    MARSH
Callery pear/  Pyrus calleryana
Bradford pear, and its                                           
and the like   cultivars
Chinaberry     Melia azedarach                                   
tree
Chinese tallow Triadica
tree/ popcorn  sebifera                                          
tree
Mimosa/silk    Albizia                                           
tree           julibrissin
Princess tree  Paulownia                                         
               tomentosa
Tree of heaven Ailanthus                                         
               altissima
White mulberry Morus alba                                        
White poplar   Populus alba                                      
SHRUBS
Amur           Lonicera maackii                                  
honeysuckle
Autumn olive   Elaegnus                                          
               umbellata
Burning bush   Euonymus alata                                    
               Buddleia davidii
Butterfly bush and its                                           
               cultivars
               Ligustrum
Chinese privet sinense and its                                   
               cultivars
Fragrant       Lonicera                                          
honeysuckle    fragrantissima
Hardy orange/  Poncirus                                          
wild orange    trifoliata
Japanese       Berberis
barberry       thunbergii and                                    
               its cultivars
Japanese       Ligustrum
privet         japonicum and                                     
               its cultivars
Japanese       Spiraea japonica
spiraea        and its                                           
               cultivars
Leatherleaf    Mahonia bealei
mahonia        and its                                           
               cultivars
Morrow         Lonicera                                          
honeysuckle    morrowii
Multiflora     Rosa multiflora                                   
rose
Nandina (Asia  Nandina
native)        domestica and                                     
               its cultivars
Russian olive  Elaeagnus                                         
               angustifolia
Salt-cedar     Tamarix spp.                                      
Thorny-olive   Elaeagnus                                         
               pungens
VINES
Beach vitex    Vitex                                             
               rotundifolia
Chinese        Wisteria
wisteria       sinensis and its                                  
               cultivars
Chocolate vine Akebia quinate                                    
English ivy    Hedera helix and                                  
               its cultivars
Japanese       Lonicera
honeysuckle    japonica and its                                  
               cultivars
Japanese       Wisteria
wisteria       floribunda and                                    
               its cultivars
Kudzu          Pueraria montana                                  
Mile-a-minute  Persicaria                                        
vine           perfoliata
Oriental       Celastrus                                         
bittersweet    orbiculatus
               Ampelopsis
Porcelain-     brevipedunculata                                  
berry          and its
               cultivars
Sweet autumn   Clematis
clematis (Asia terniflora                                        
native)
               Euonymus
Wintercreeper  fortunei and its                                  
               cultivars
ANNUALS, PERENNIALS, AND FERNS
Bicolor        Lespedeza                                         
lespedeza      bicolor
Common         Stellia media                                     
chickweed
Gill-over-the- Glechoma
ground/ground  hederacea                                         
ivy
Henbit         Lamium purpureum                                  
Hydrilla       Hydrilla                                          
               verticillata
Ivyleaf        Veronica                                          
speedwell      hederifolia
Japanese       Polygonum                                         
knotweed       cuspidatum
Parrotfeather  Myriophyllum                                      
               aquaticum
Purple         Lythrum                                           
loosestrife    salicaria
Sericea
lespedeza/     Lespedeza                                         
Chinese        cuneata
bushclover
Water-hyacinth Eichhornia                                        
               crassipes
Yellow flag    Iris                                              
iris           pseudoacrous
GRASSES, SEDGES AND RUSHES
Bamboo         Phyllostachys                                     
running/exotic spp.
Chinese silver Miscanthus
grass/maiden   sinensis and its                                  
grass          cultivars
               Phragmites
Common reed    australis spp.                                    
               australis
Japanese       Microstegium                                      
stilt-grass    vimineum
Johnson grass  Sorghum                                           
               halepense
Pampas grass   Cortaderia
(South America selloana or                                       
native)        cortaderia
               jubata
Torpedograss   Panicum repens                                    
Wayleaf        Oplismenus
basketgrass    hirtellus ssp.                                    
               undulatifolius
GROUND COVER                                                    
Bigleaf        Vinca major and                                   
periwinkle     its cultivars
Common         Vinca minor and                                   
periwinkle     its cultivars
 
Chapter 10
ENVIRONMENT*
*   Cross References: Animals,
ch. 4; buildings and building regulations,
ch. 6; condemnation, repair, and demolition of unsafe buildings, §
6-111 et seq.; floods,
ch. 14; parks and recreation,
ch. 18; solid waste management,
ch. 20; stormwater management,
ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places,
ch. 24; subdivisions,
ch. 26; utilities,
ch. 30; zoning,
ch. 32.
   State Law References: Environmental Policy Act, G.S. 113A-1--113A-7.
Article I. In General
Secs. 10-1--10-30. Reserved.
Article II. Nuisances
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
10-31. Beach Vitex (Vitex rotundifolia).
Secs. 10-32--10-50. Reserved.
Division 2. Junk Vehicles
Sec.
10-51. Definitions.
Sec.
10-52. Responsibility of removal.
Sec.
10-53. Authority of removal.
Sec.
10-54. Cost of removal and notice.
Sec.
10-55. Refusal to pay or owner identity unknown.
Sec.
10-56. Disposition of sale proceeds.
Sec.
10-57. Disposition of junked motor vehicles.
Sec.
10-58. Disposition of unidentified vehicles.
Sec.
10-59. Sale proceeds.
Sec.
10-60. Immunity.
Sec.
10-61. Exempt vehicles.
Secs. 10-62--10-80. Reserved.
Article III. Artificial Lighting
Sec.
10-81. Definitions.
Sec.
10-82. Purpose.
Sec.
10-83. Beaches; new developments; exterior lighting.
Sec.
10-84. Existing homes; exemptions.
Sec.
10-85. Building permits.
Sec.
10-86. Penalty for violation of article.
Secs. 10-87--10-120. Reserved.
Article IV. Dunes Protection
Sec.
10-121. Definitions.
Sec.
10-122. Beach access points.
Sec.
10-123. Private accesses--Permit required.
Sec.
10-124. Same--Construction requirements.
Sec.
10-125. Same--Application for permit.
Sec.
10-126. Nonconforming private accesses.
Sec.
10-127. Penalty for violation of article.
Sec.
10-128. Private accesses on village owned properties.
Secs. 10-129--10-160. Reserved.
Article V. Groinfield Protection
Sec.
10-161. Definitions.
Sec.
10-162. Walking on or damaging tubes prohibited.
Sec.
10-163. Penalty for violation of this article.
Article VI. Beach Equipment
Sec.
10-164. Definitions.
Sec.
10-165. Placement and storage of beach equipment.
Sec.
10-166. Penalty for violation of article.
Secs. 10-167-10-185. Reserved.
Article VII. Tree City USA
Sec.
10-186. Arbor Day celebration.
Sec.
10-187. Development of annual tree program.
Sec.
10-188. Maintenance fo public trees and public tree projects.
Sec.
10-189. Tree City USA advisory board.
Secs. 10-190 - 10-221. Reserved.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 10-1--10-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
NUISANCES*
*   State Law References: Authority to define and abate nuisances, G.S. 160A-
193.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 10-31. Beach Vitex (Vitex rotundifolia).
   (a)   Declaration of public nuisance. The plant known as Beach Vitex (Vitex
rotundifolia), is hereby found and declared to be a public nuisance due to the
significant negative impacts this plant has upon the public beaches and sand
dunes and loggerhead turtles, piping plovers, and native vegetative noted
above. It is estimated that there are five acres of Beach Vitex on Bald Head
Island located in at least 32 different locations.
   (b)   Planting of Beach Vitex prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to plant or cause to be planted Beach Vitex (Vitex rotundifolia) on any
property located on Bald Head Island in the County of Brunswick.
   (c)   Eradication and restoration. In cooperation with the following
organizations (others may be added) Bald Head Island Conservancy, U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service, N.C. Cooperative Extension, South Carolina Beach Vitex
Taskforce, North Carolina Beach Vitex Taskforce, N.C. State University, a
program(s)will be developed to eradicate Beach Vitex from Bald Head Island. As
eradication precedes restoration of these areas with native plants and other
appropriate plants will be accomplished. The village will cooperate with
private land owners in this task but reserves the right to proceed with the
eradication and restoration project even if the land owner objects.
   (d)   Disposal. Since Beach Vitex has the ability to generate new plants
from seeds, stem sections and root sections, the proper disposal of plants and
plant parts is important. The village will collect Vitex separately from other
yard waste and will treat it appropriately. Beach Vitex clippings will not be
chipped and shredded into mulch and distributed around the island.
   (e)   Financing of this project. The Village of Bald Head Island will
provide funding for this project with the expectation that grants will be made
available at a later date to provide cost sharing and/or reimbursement for the
cost of this project. It is anticipated that it will take three to five years
to completely eradicate Beach Vitex from Bald Head Island. Estimated cost is
$5,000.00 per acre over this period of three to five years. It is recognized
that future programs of education and/or eradication may be necessary and the
village may undertake such as the council may from time to time approve.
(Ord. No. 2005-014, §§ 1--5, 10-21-2005)
Secs. 10-32--10-50. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
JUNK VEHICLES*
*   Cross References: Traffic and vehicles,
ch. 28.
   State Law References: Authority to remove and dispose of junked and
abandoned vehicles, G.S. 160A-303.
Sec. 10-51. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Abandoned motor vehicle means any motor vehicle located within the confines
of the village, including but not limited to, motorized golf carts, and which
is:
      (1)   Left unattended upon a street or right-of-way within the village
for longer than 12 hours;
      (2)   Left unattended on property owned or operated by the village other
than a street or right-of-way for a period of more than 24 hours; or
      (3)   Left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant
or lessee thereof for a period in excess of 12 hours.
   Junked motor vehicle means any abandoned motor vehicle which has no current
license plate or displays no village sticker and is also found to be:
      (1)   Inoperable;
      (2)   Partially dismantled or wrecked; or
      (3)   More than five years old and worth less than $100.00.
   Registration certificate means the certificate issued by the village
department of public safety upon registration of the motor vehicle with the
village department of public safety.
(Ord. No. 37, § 1, 9-18-1993; Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013)
   Cross References: Definitions generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 10-52. Responsibility of removal.
   Whenever any motor vehicle is abandoned or junked upon the public streets or
highways of the village or any property owned by the village, it shall be the
duty and responsibility of the owner of such motor vehicle to cause the removal
thereof immediately and to pay for all costs incidental thereto. It shall be
unlawful for any person to allow a motor vehicle owned by that person to remain
abandoned upon a public street or highway or upon any property owned by the
village after notice has been given to such person for the removal of the
vehicle.
(Ord. No. 37, § 2, 9-18-1993)
Sec. 10-53. Authority of removal.
   Any motor vehicle which is abandoned or junked upon the public streets or
highways of the village or on property owned by the village or on private
property owned by individuals other than the owner of such vehicle may be
removed by or under the direction of the village building inspector or the
department of public safety to a storage garage or other area, provided no such
vehicle shall be removed from private property without the written request or
permission of the owner, lessee or occupant of such property unless the council
or a duly authorized city official shall find in writing that the aesthetic
benefits of removing a vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed upon the owner of
such property. Such finding shall be based upon a balancing of the monetary
loss of the apparent owner against the corresponding gain to the public by
promoting or enhancing community appearances. The following factors shall be
considered in making such a determination:
      (1)   Protection of property values;
      (2)   Promotion of tourism and other economic development and
opportunities;
      (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;
      (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and
      (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of area
residents.
(Ord. No. 37, § 3, 9-18-1993; Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013)
Sec. 10-54. Cost of removal and notice.
   (a)   When an abandoned or junked motor vehicle is removed by village agents
or officers or their agents from private property at the request of the owner,
lessee or occupant thereof, the person at whose request such vehicle is removed
shall be required to pay or otherwise indemnify the village for any expenses
incurred by reason of the removal and/or storage of such vehicle.
   (b)   The owner of any vehicle removed pursuant to this division from any
public street or highway or from any property owned by the village or any
private property shall pay to the village all reasonable costs incidental to
the removal and storage of such vehicle and the location of the owner thereof
and if such costs have already been paid by a property owner, the costs may be
reimbursed to the property owner by the village upon receipt.
   (c)   Written notice of each removal of any abandoned or junked vehicle and
of the possible sale or disposition thereof shall be given as promptly as
possible to the owner thereof at the owner's last known address according to
the latest registration certificate of title on file with the state division of
motor vehicles or the village police office and shall describe the vehicle,
place of storage and procedure for recovery thereof.
   (d)   Notice need not be given to the registered owner when the vehicle does
not display a license plate or a valid village registration certificate.
   (e)   Any time that an abandoned or junked vehicle shall be removed to a
place of storage, the village shall collect the currently required towing fee
and the currently required daily storage fee. Any owner shall have the right to
a prompt hearing to determine whether the vehicle was abandoned or junked
within the village in order to contest the towing and/or storage. The hearing
shall be heard by the village manager who shall determine by preponderance of
the evidence as to whether the same was in fact abandoned or junked. The right
of appeal from such decision shall be to the district county for the county. At
the conclusion of the hearing the village manager shall render his decision.
The decision shall be further reduced to writing and forwarded to the owner or
other individual seeking such hearing. Upon the mailing of the notice of
decision by the village council, the owner or other individual seeking a
hearing shall be entitled to appeal to the district court for the county by
giving due notice of appeal within ten days of the date that the notice of the
village manager's decision shall have been mailed to the individual appealing.
Pending any hearing or appeal in this division, the owner or other individual
may obtain a release of the vehicle at any time after the towing and/or storage
fee is paid or by posting a bond with the village in the form of cash in the
amount of the towing and/or storage fees. Unless the cash bond shall be paid,
storage fees shall continue to accrue pending resolution of the appeal.
Ord. No. 37, § 4, 9-18-1993; Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013)
Sec. 10-55. Refusal to pay or owner identity unknown.
   If an abandoned motor vehicle is worth $100.00 or more and should the owner
thereof refuse to pay the costs referenced in section
10-54(b) above or should the identity or the whereabouts of such owner be
unknown and unascertainable after a diligent search, it shall, after being held
by the village for 30 days and after seven days' advertisement in a local
newspaper and after 20 days' written notice to the registered owner at the last
known address, if his identity is known, and to the holders of any liens of
record against the vehicle and to the state division of motor vehicles, be sold
by the department of public safety at public auction; provided, however, that
any person having an interest in the vehicle may redeem it at any time prior to
the sale by paying all costs accrued to date. Such costs shall include
advertisement fees.
(Ord. No. 37, § 5, 9-18-1993; Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013)
Sec. 10-56. Disposition of sale proceeds.
   The proceeds of the sale of any abandoned motor vehicle shall be paid to the
village treasurer who shall, from such proceeds, pay the costs of removal,
storage, investigation, sales and liens, in that order. The remainder of the
proceeds of sale, if any, shall be paid over to the registered owner or held by
the village clerk for 60 days if the registered owner cannot be located with
due diligence. If the owner does not claim the remainder of the proceeds within
60 days after the sale, the funds shall be deposited into the village general
fund and the owner's rights therein shall be forever extinguished.
(Ord. No. 37, § 6, 9-18-1993)
Sec. 10-57. Disposition of junked motor vehicles.
   (a)    With the consent of the owner, the director of public safety may
dispose of any vehicle as a junked motor vehicle without holding it for any
prescribed period of time. If an unclaimed abandoned motor vehicle appears to
be worth less than $100.00, then the director of public safety may dispose of
the vehicle as a junked vehicle.
   (b)    Any unclaimed junked motor vehicles as defined by this division shall
be held for a period of at least 15 days and the owner of such vehicle may
claim the vehicle during the 15 day retention period by exhibiting proof of
ownership to the director of public safety and after paying all reasonable
costs incidental to the removal and storage of the vehicle plus administrative
expenses. If, after the vehicle has been held for 15 days, it shall remain
unclaimed, the vehicle may be destroyed,or sold at private sales as junk.
Within 15 days after disposition of a junked motor vehicle, the written notice
thereof shall be given to the division of motor vehicles that the vehicle has
been determined to be a junked motor vehicle and accordingly disposed of. The
notice shall contain as full and accurate description of the vehicle as can be
reasonably determined.
(Ord. No. 37, § 7, 9-18-1993; Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013)
Sec. 10-58. Disposition of unidentified vehicles.
   Vehicles not displaying a registration plate or other identification numbers
or current village registration certificate and having no reasonable means of
identification of the owners thereof may be destroyed or sold at private sale
without regard to value, after being held for a period of 48 hours.
(Ord. No. 37, § 8, 9-18-1993)
Sec. 10-59. Sale proceeds.
   The proceeds of the sale of a junked motor vehicle, after all costs of
removal, storage, investigation and sale, and satisfaction of any liens of
record on the vehicle, shall be held by the village clerk for 30 days and paid
to the registered owner upon demand. If the owner does not appear to claim the
net proceeds within 30 days after disposition of the vehicle, the funds shall
be deposited into the village general fund and the owner's rights therein shall
be forever extinguished.
(Ord. No. 37, § 9, 9-18-1993)
Sec. 10-60. Immunity.
   Neither the village nor any employee, agent, officer or other individual
acting pursuant to village authority under this division shall be held to
answer in any civil or criminal action to any owner or other person legally
entitled to the possession of any abandoned, lost or stolen vehicles for
disposing of such vehicle as provided in this division.
(Ord. No, 37, § 10, 9-18-1993)
Sec. 10-61. Exempt vehicles.
   Nothing in this division shall apply to any vehicle in any enclosed building
or any vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a
lawful place and manner if the vehicle is regularly used in the operation of
the enterprise or for personal use or for any vehicle in any appropriate
storage place or depository maintained in a lawful place and manner by or
within the village.
(Ord. No. 37, § 11, 9-18-1993)
Secs. 10-62--10-80. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
ARTIFICIAL LIGHTING
Sec. 10-81. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Artificial light means any source of light emanating from a manmade device,
including but not limited to incandescent, mercury vapor, metal halide, sodium
lamps, flashlights, spotlights, streetlights, vehicular lights, construction or
security lights.
   Baffled lights means any artificial light which is attached directly to a
building and is shielded from horizontal view.
   Beach means that area extending landward from the mean lowwater line to the
stable line of natural vegetation.
   Floodlight means any reflector-type light fixture which is attached directly
to a building and is unshielded.
   Low profile luminaries means any light fixture set on a base which raises
the source of the light no higher than 48 inches off the ground and designed in
such a way that light is directed downward from a hooded light source.
   New development means construction of buildings or other sources of
artificial light undertaken after June 15, 1996, and shall include remodeling
of existing structures.
   Pole light means any light fixture set on a base or pole where the point of
light is higher than 48 inches off the ground.
(Ord. No. 42, § 1, 6-15-1996)
   Cross References: Definitions generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 10-82. Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide regulations for outdoor lighting
that will:
   (a)   Curtail light pollution, reduce skyglow, and improve the nighttime
environment for viewing and enjoying the night sky;
   (b)   Protect the natural environment, including but not limited to the use
of our beaches by sea turtles, from the adverse effects of night lighting from
gas or electric sources;
   (c)   Protect the viewshed of historic Old Baldy, listed in the National
Register of Historic Places as Bald Head Island Lighthouse;
   (d)   Minimize adverse offsite impacts of lighting such as light trespass
and obtrusive light;
   (e)   Permit the use of outdoor lighting that does not exceed the minimum
night-time levels needed; and
   (f)   Conserve energy and resources.
(Ord. No. 42, § 2, 6-15-1996; Ord. No. 2015-1205, § 1, 12-11-2015)
Sec. 10-83. Beaches; new developments; exterior lighting.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any individual to illuminate, by artificial
light, any portion of the beach within the confines of the village between the
hours of sunset and sunrise from May 1 through October 31 except by such
frequencies of red light as do not disturb nesting or hatchling sea turtles.
   (b)   No new development within the village shall be undertaken except that
which includes exterior lighting which shall conform to the requirements set
forth in this article.
   (c)   No exterior lighting of any kind shall be permitted except the
following: low profile luminaries and baffled lights, except that pole lights
shall be permitted in commercial areas; marinas, lighthouses, fire stations,
the public rights-of-way or multi-family areas located more than 100 feet
landward of the stable line of natural vegetation. The lighting standard shall
be approved by the village council. In addition, low voltage up-lights are
permitted in commercial areas, lighthouses, fire stations, the public right-of-
way and multi-family areas located more than 600 feet landward of the stable
line of vegetation along beach and turtle habitats. Such lights are also
permitted in the marina area if located more than 150 feet landward of the
stable line of vegetation. These low-voltage up-lights shall be rated at a
maximum of 50 watt/850 CP (candle power) and shall be oriented such that the
thrown light is reflected against the natural vegetation. Non-reflected light
is not allowed.
(Ord. No. 42, § 3, 6-15-1996; Ord. No. 2009-0501, 5-15-2009)
Sec. 10-84. Existing homes; exemptions.
   (a)   Existing homes located within the village shall, within one year of
June 15, 1996, have exterior lighting which conforms to the requirements of
section
10-83 hereof.
   (b)   Old Baldy is specifically exempted from this article.
(Ord. No. 42, § 4, 6-15-1996)
Sec. 10-85. Building permits.
   No building permit shall be issued by the building inspection department nor
shall any certificate of occupancy be issued for any structure which shall, in
any manner, fail to conform to the requirements for exterior lighting contained
in this article.
(Ord. No. 42, § 5, 6-15-1996)
Sec. 10-86. Penalty for violation of article.
   A violation of this article shall subject the offender to a civil fine in
the amount of $100.00 per offense. Subsequent to the initial civil fine, the
offender shall be provided with 30 days to correct the violation. Each
additional day following the 30 day period, during or on which the violation is
not corrected, shall be deemed a separate violation. Following the initial 30
day period for correction, a continuing offender shall not be afforded an
additional 30 day period to correct the violation. Nothing contained in this
article shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. No. 42, § 6, 6-15-1996; Ord. No. 2001-027, § 1, 10-26-2001; Ord. No.
2011-0402, 4-15-2011)
Secs. 10-87--10-120. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
DUNES PROTECTION*
   *Charter References— Sand dunes, §
8.2.
   State Law References— Coastal area management, G.S. 113A-100 et seq.
   Cross References—Definitions generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 10-121. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   Access means those artificial walkways designated as the means of entry to
the beach over the sand dunes.
   Buildable lot means a lot where a dwelling unit may be constructed.
   Dune or Dunes means the mounds of sand located landward of the ocean beach
with sufficient vegetation, height, and configuration to offer protection from
ocean storms.
   Owner means the corporation, or other entity owning the real estate on or
from which the access is to be located.
   Private access means an access constructed in part or in full with private
funds.
   Public access means an access intended for use by the public.
   Street means any public thoroughfare or privately owned street, which
affords a means of access to abutting property.
   Vegetation means any significant plant growth, both naturally occurring and
planted, on or along the dune such that the plant growth affords stabilization
to the dune.
   Waterfront lot means a buildable lot from which a perpendicular line drawn
from the midpoint of the water-facing property line will reach the mean low
tide line without crossing any portion of any buildable lot.
(Ord. No. 2001-047, § 1, 10-27-2001; Ord. No. 2006-1103, 11-17-2006; Ord. No.
2015-0601, 6-19-2015)
Sec. 10-122. Beach access points.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to traverse or walk upon, over or
across or to damage, in any manner whatsoever, the dune at any point within the
corporate limits of the village other than at a public access or a duly
permitted private access. There shall be maintained at the office of the
village clerk a schedule of points designated for use by the public and which
shall be duly marked as to be readily identifiable as public access points.
   (b)   No private access shall hereafter be constructed, erected, remodeled,
refaced, relocated, expanded or otherwise altered until such time as a building
permit and CAMA permit thereof have been obtained from the building inspector
in accordance with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 2001-047, § 2, 10-27-2001; Ord. No. 2015-0601, 6-19-2015)
Sec. 10-123.   Private accesses--Permit required.
   Any person desiring to construct, erect, remodel, reface, relocate, expand
or otherwise alter any private access shall make application to the village
inspection department for a permit therefor. Applications for permits shall
contain or have attached to them the following information:
    (1)   The street address, lot number, and tax parcel number of the property
from which the private access will be located.
    (2)   Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the applicant, owner of
the property, and the person or contractor constructing the access.
    (3)   A site or plat plan of the property, showing accurate location of the
proposed access in relation to existing structures, property lines and
setbacks.
    (4)   Two detailed scaled drawings of the plans and specifications of the
private access to be constructed. Such plans shall include but shall not be
limited to details of dimensions, materials to be used and topographical
information.
    (5)   Other information as the building inspector may require to determine
compliance with this and other applicable local, state or federal regulations
affecting the construction, erection, remodeling, refacing, relocating,
expansion or other alteration thereof.
(Ord. No. 2001-047, § 3, 10-27-2001)
Sec. 10-124.   Same--Construction requirements.
   Private accesses shall be constructed in accordance with the following
standards and any permit therefor shall require conformity to the following:
   (1)   Width shall be no more than 48 inches;
   (2)   Height above grade shall be at least 18 inches, but no more than 24
inches;
   (3)   Pilings shall be installed at least three feet deep, but no more than
five feet in depth;
   (4)   Stairs shall be used only when necessary to protect the integrity of
the dune system and shall be allowed in the discretion of the building
inspector for such purpose only;
   (5)   Construction of any private access shall be in accordance with the
state building code;
   (6)   Handrails on any private access shall be prohibited unless otherwise
required by the state building code;
   (7)   Permitted private accesses shall be constructed to follow the natural
contour of the frontal dune; and
   (8)   Private accesses shall be permitted only from waterfront properties.
(Ord. No. 2001-047, § 4, 10-27-2001)
Sec. 10-125.   Same--Application for permit.
   The building inspector shall review any applications for construction,
erection, remodeling, refacing, relocation, expansion or other alteration of
any private access. Any application for such permit which lacks any of the
requirements of section
10-123 or which shows nonconformity to the construction standards set forth in
section
10-124 shall be rejected as either incomplete or nonconforming. Complete and
conforming applications shall be reviewed and a permit issued therefor unless
the building inspector shall determine that the proposed access shall diminish
the affected frontal dune's capacity to serve as a protective barrier. Any
permit issued shall require conformity to the construction criteria set forth
in section
10-124, shall be conditioned upon conformity to plans and specifications of the
application and shall permit no alterations to the frontal dune other than
those permitted by regulations promulgated pursuant to the Coastal Area
Management Act. Any such alterations shall require that the affected portions
of the frontal dune be returned to its condition prior to construction within
21 days of such alteration or other disruption.
(Ord. No. 2001-047, § 5, 10-27-2001)
Sec. 10-126.   Nonconforming private accesses.
   (a)   Any private access existing on the date of the adoption of this
article and which is for any reason noncompliant herewith or any private access
which, subsequent to the adoption of this article, becomes noncompliant
herewith is hereby determined to be a nonconforming beach access
("nonconforming access"). Owners with a nonconforming access should bring the
access into compliance with the specifications herein within six months
following the date of adoption of this article or six months following that
date the access becomes noncompliant subsequent to the adoption of this
article. A nonconforming access may continue to be used during said six-month
period. Following the expiration of this six-month period, a nonconforming
access may no longer be used and access to the beach will only be permitted
through an access that complies with this article. Use of any nonconforming
access following this six-month period shall be a violation of this article,
and subject to the civil and/or criminal penalties set forth herein.
   (b)   Any owner who fails to bring a private access into compliance with the
regulations of this article shall have a period of two years from the date of
adoption of this article or the date the access becomes noncompliant subsequent
to the adoption of this article either to bring such private access into
compliance or completely remove the nonconforming access. This two-year period
in no way permits the continued use of a nonconforming access beyond the six-
month period referenced herein.
   (c)    Any and all improvements, repairs, remodeling, relocation, expansion
or other alteration of any private access shall be subject to the provisions of
this article. Any expenses to bring a nonconforming access into compliance
herewith shall be the sole responsibility of the owner. Any expensesto remove a
nonconforming access shall be the sole responsibility of the owner.
(Ord. No. 2006-1103, 11-17-2006; Ord. No. 2015-0601, 6-19-2015)
   Editors Note—Ord. No. 2006-1103, adopted Nov. 17, 2006, repealed § 10-126,
in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to
amendment, § 10-126 pertained to existing private accesses. See Code
Comparative Table for derivation.
Sec. 10-127.   Penalty for violation of article.
   A violation of this article shall subject the offender to a civil fine in
the amount of $500.00 per offense and any continuing violation thereof shall be
deemed a separate offense for each day during or on which the violation shall
continue. Any civil penalty shall be paid at the office of the village clerk
within 48 hours of issuance of a civil citation. Additionally, this article may
be enforced by injunction and orders of abatement, together with all other
remedies available to the village under G.S. 160A-175(e) or other state law.
(Ord. No. 2001-047, § 7, 10-27-2001; Ord. No. 2005-003, § 1, 3-15-2005; Ord.
No. 2011-0402, 4-15-2011)
Sec. 10-128.   Private accesses on village owned properties.
   (a)   The construction and maintenance of an access on a village-owned
property must comply with the provisions of this article and with applicable
law. The portion of any access constructed on village-owned property is and
shall remain for the benefit of the public and shall be village property.
Permission from the building inspector to construct or maintain the portion of
any access on village-owned property constitutes a nonexclusive, revocable
license and shall not convey, transfer, assign, or create any ownership or
other substantial property right in or to the village property in favor of any
private property owner. The village may revoke such license at any time, in its
discretion.
   (b)   Unless otherwise agreed in writing by the village, maintenance and
modifications, such as extensions or repairs, to the portion of any access on
village-owned property constructed pursuant to a permit by the building
inspector, shall be the responsibility of the private property owner(s) holding
such license. If the access is not maintained in conformity with this article
and applicable law by the private property owner(s) responsible for such
maintenance, the access may be maintained, modified or removed by the village,
in its discretion. The cost of removal shall be due and payable by the private
property owner(s). Upon obtaining a license from the building inspector, owners
of waterfront lots adjacent to village-owned property may connect to an
existing access on village property, unless such connection would violate an
ordinance or other law, interfere with public uses of the village property,
interfere with village plans or uses of the property or constitute a public
nuisance.
(Ord. No. 2015-0601, passed 6-19-2015)
Secs. 10-129--10-160. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
GROINFIELD PROTECTION
Sec. 10-161.   Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Geo-textile tube shall mean and include any of those sand-filled tubes
purchased and installed by the Village of Bald Head Island upon the beaches of
the island and/or extending along such beaches out into the Atlantic Ocean or
Cape Fear River and installed for stabilization of the said beaches.
(Ord. No. 48, § 1, 10-12-1996; Ord. No. 2005-013, § 1, 7-15-2005)
   Cross References—Definitions generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 10-162.   Walking on or damaging tubes prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to walk upon, traverse, come in
contact with, or conduct any activity from any geo-textile tube below the mean
high-water mark thereof.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, in any manner
whatsoever, any geo-textile tube or portion thereof.
(Ord. No. 48, §§ 2, 3, 10-12-1996)
Sec. 10-163.   Penalty for violation of this article.
   Any person who shall violate this article shall be guilty of a class 3
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 pursuant to G.S. 14-4
(a).
(Ord. No. 48, § 4, 10-12-1996; Ord. No. 2005-013, § 2, 7-15-2005)
ARTICLE VI.
BEACH EQUIPMENT*
   *Charter reference—Beach regulation, §
8.3.
Sec. 10-164.   Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
   Beach means the area of sand that extends landward from the mean low water
line to the stable line of natural vegetation.
   Beach equipment means any apparatus or paraphernalia that is designed or
manufactured for use, or actually used, on the beach, or in the adjacent tidal
waters. Examples include, without limitation: chairs, tables, lounges,
umbrellas, tents, boats or sailboats, personal watercraft, trailers, canoes,
kayaks, paddle vessels, sailboards, surfboards, fishing gear, sporting
equipment, rafts, flotation devices, beach toys, baskets, bags, towels,
coolers, other personal effects, vehicles allowed on the beach (see section
28-34), and equipment used by concessionaires, such as tables, podiums, booths,
or storage boxes. Beach equipment shall not include municipal trash containers,
signage or structures, or items placed by a bona fide nature conservation
agency or organization, such as signs or turtle nest protection.
(Ord. of 4-20-2007)
Sec. 10-165. Placement and storage of beach equipment.
   (a)   Unless allowed by a specific provision of this Code, or unless it is
in the active use and personal presence of the owner or a permitted user, beach
equipment must be removed by its owner or permitted user from the beach between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m., year around, and placed in a lawful
location.
   (b)   Vehicular traffic on the beach is regulated by section
28-34. Vehicles that are not in use may not be stored on the beach at any time.
   (c)   A business that rents beach furniture may place one freestanding
structure on the beach during its regular business hours only. This structure
may be a table, podium, booth, or storage box and it must be removed by its
owner from the beach after business hours to a lawful location.
   (d)   All beach equipment shall be set at least ten feet from any sea turtle
nest or dune vegetation.
   (e)   The village manager, upon advance request, may grant a variance from
section
10-165 in appropriate cases for bona fide recreational, scientific,
environmental or educational purposes.
(Ord. of 4-20-2007)
Sec. 10-166. Penalty for violation of article.
   Any person who shall violate this article shall be subject to a civil
penalty in an amount of $500.00 for each offense. Any civil penalty shall be
payable to the village within 24 hours of issuance of a civil citation.
(Ord. of 4-20-2007)
Secs. 10-167--10-185. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. TREE CITY USA
Sec. 10-186. Arbor Day celebration.
   The village shall annually hold an Arbor Day celebration that focuses
attention on the value of trees in the urban environment.
(Ord. No. 2012-0601, 6-15-2012)
Sec. 10-187. Development of annual tree program.
   The village shall annually review its tree installation needs, including new
projects and replacement of diseased or damaged trees, in conjunction with
development of the village's annual budget.
(Ord. No. 2012-0601, 6-15-2012)
Sec. 10-188. Maintenance of public trees and public tree projects.
   (a)   The public works department shall be responsible for the care and
maintenance of trees on municipal property.
   (b)   The village shall have the right to prune, maintain, and remove any
tree on public grounds which interferes with the safe flow of traffic, any
traffic control device or sign.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to top or cut back to stubs the
crown of any tree on public grounds, without village approval.
   (d)   Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes where the aforesaid
pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this section including
dead, dying, or diseased trees, which pose a threat to the safety of the
community.
   (e)   All other village departments shall cooperate fully with the public
works department in carrying out the responsibilities of this section.
   (f)   Planting, maintenance, and removal activities of village trees shall
meet current accepted arboricultural practices for tree care operations.
Village departments, contractors, community organizations and individuals
performing tree related activities on village property are required to adhere
to those standards.
(Ord. No. 2012-0601, 6-15-2012)
10-189. Tree City USA advisory board.
   The members of the parks and recreation committee shall also serve as the
Tree City USA advisory board and shall have the following duties and
responsibilities:
   (a)   Write and implement an annual village forestry plan regarding desired
planting, maintenance, removal, fertilization, pruning, bracing and other
actions with respect to village trees.
   (b)   Develop and periodically update arboricultural specifications and
standards of practice regarding the planting, maintenance, removal,
fertilization, pruning, and bracing of trees and shrubs on public property.
Arboricultural specifications and standards of practice shall be based on the
accepted standards for tree care operations in the arboricultural field.
   (c)   Review all development plans submitted by the village to ensure
compliance with village ordinances, master plans, and standards with respect to
trees.
   (d)   Design, implement and provide maintenance specifications for all
landscaping on village property.
(Ord. No. 2012-0601, 6-15-2012)
Secs. 10-190-10-221.   Reserved.
Chapter 11
RESERVED
Chapter 12
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION*
*   Cross References: and building regulations,
ch. 6; fire districts, §
6-161 et seq.; civil emergencies,
ch. 8.
   State Law References: protection in municipalities, G.S. 160A-291--160A-293.
Article I. In General
Secs. 12-1--12-30. Reserved.
Article II. Open Burning
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
12-31.   Use of combustible landscaping materials.
Secs. 12-32--12-50. Reserved.
Division 2. Permit
Sec.
12-51. Required; tidal waters.
Sec.
12-52. Penalty for violation of division; commercial entities.
Sec.
12-53. Exemptions.
Sec.
12-54. Contents of application.
Sec.
12-55. Application review
Sec.
12-56. Conditions.
Sec.
12-57. Revocation.
Sec.
12-58. Beach bonfire permits.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 12-1--12-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
OPEN BURNING*
*   State Law References: to abate public health nuisances, G.S. 160A-193.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 12-31.   Use of combustible landscaping materials.
   No pine straw or any other landscape cover material with a fire rate of
spread more than twenty-four (24) inches per minute shall be placed, kept, or
stored within twenty-five (25) feet of any building or other structure with a
combustible exterior.
(Ord. No. 2022-0401, § 1, 4-14-2022)
Secs. 12-32--12-50. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
PERMIT
Sec. 12-51. Required; tidal waters.
   Except as noted in section
12-53 of this division, no burning shall be allowed without the specified
permit, nor shall any burning be permitted between the low-water mark of any
tidal waters adjacent to the village and the high-water mark of the waters.
(Ord. No. 31, § 5, 11-16-1991; Ord. No. 2001-040, § 3, 10-26-2001; Ord. No.
2017-06-16, 6-16-2017)
Sec. 12-52. Penalty for violation of division; commercial entities.
   A violation of this division or failure to comply with any of its
requirements, including violation of conditions, special exceptions, and
safeguards included in an approval permit shall subject the offender to a civil
fine in the amount of $500.00 per offense. Any individual or entity cited for
violation of this division shall pay said civil penalty at the Office of the
Village Clerk within 48 hours of the issuance thereof. Nothing herein shall
prevent the village from taking such other lawful action as necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
   As used in this division, “commercial entity” is defined as a corporation,
limited liability company, partnership, or other business entity or
association, that sells goods or services (excluding house rentals) to the
public.
(Ord. No. 31, § 7, 11-16-1991; Ord. No. 2001-040, § 4, 10-26-2001; Ord. No.
2005-005, § 2, 5-20-2005; Ord. No. 2011-0402, 4-15-2011; Ord. No. 2017-06-16,
6-16-2017)
Sec. 12-53. Exemptions.
   It shall be unlawful for any individual or entity to start, maintain, or
permit any fire to exist in the Village of Bald Head Island except as shall be
specifically permitted by the director of public safety pursuant to section 12-
54 and only to the extent and under the conditions set forth on the permit. The
following fires shall be exempt from the provisions of this division:
   (1)   Cooking fires contained within a commercially available, solid-fuel
burning, portable, outdoor cooking appliance, but only to the extent that such
portable appliance shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any structure
and within twenty-five (25) feet of a permanent water source connected to a
hose that is able to reach the location of the appliance, and shall not be
located upon any wood or composite deck or balcony attached to such structure
or underneath any roofed structure, including any porch, awning, or balcony
overhang of a structure;
   (2)   Fires, including those used for cooking and warmth, that burn
liquefied petroleum gas (LP), but only to the extent that such fires are not
located underneath any roofed structure, including any porch, awning, or
balcony overhang of a structure;
   (3)   Cooking fires contained within a stationary, solid-fuel burning,
outdoor cooking appliance that is installed as part of an outdoor living or
recreational space constructed in conformance with the requirements of the
Building Code, or that was constructed in conformance with the Building Code on
the date of construction if such date was prior to June 27, 2018;
   (4)   Fires that are primarily for the purpose of generating warmth that are
contained within a commercially available, solid-fuel burning, portable fire
pit, table, or similar appliance that has a solid or screened enclosure that
can be placed over the top of the appliance to prevent embers or other burning
material from escaping while the appliance is in use, but only to the extent
that such appliance shall be located at least ten (10) feet from any structure
and within twenty-five (25) feet of a permanent water source connected to a
hose that is able to reach the location of the appliance, and shall not be
located upon any wood or composite deck or balcony or underneath any roofed
structure, including any porch, awning, or balcony overhang of a structure; and
   (5)   Fires that are primarily for the purpose of generating warmth within
or on an outdoor living or recreational space attached to a residential or
commercial structure that are constructed and contained entirely within a
stationary fireplace or fireplace stove that conforms with the requirements of
the Building Code, or that was in conformance with the Building Code on the
date of construction or installation if such date was prior to June 27, 2018.
   All fires permitted under Section 12-54 or exempted from the provisions of
this division pursuant to this section shall be attended by a person eighteen
(18) years of age or older while in use. No fire may be left unattended at any
time. All fires must be fully extinguished with water, sand or another
appropriate material, or if fueled by flammable gases or liquids, turned off or
the fuel source disconnected, when not in use.
(Ord. No. 31, § 1, 11-16-1991; Ord. No. 2001-040, § 1, 10-26-2001; Ord. No.
2001-048, § 1, 11-17-2001; Ord. No. 2005-005, § 1, 5-20-2005; Ord. No. 2013-
0501, 5-17-2013; Ord. No. 2017-06-16, 6-16-2017; Ord. No. 2018-0603, 6-27-2018)
___________
   *State Law Reference—Authority to abate public health nuisances, G.S. 160A-
193.
Sec. 12-54. Contents of application.
   The director of public safety is authorized and directed to issue permits
for any fire for which a permit is required pursuant to section
12-53 of this division. The director of public safety shall be authorized to
receive applications for a permit to burn from citizens, residents or other
individuals or commercial entities seeking to burn objects within the village.
The director of public safety shall create a form for application for the
issuance of such permits, which form shall be completed by the applicant and
which shall contain at least the following information and such additional
information as the director of public safety shall require:
      (1)   The date of the proposed burning;
      (2)   The location thereof, including street address and lot number, if
any;
      (3)   Material to be burned and approximate amount in cubic yards;
      (4)   Owner of the land on which the proposed burning shall take place;
      (5)   Means of fire control which shall be present at the time of
burning;
      (6)   Closest proximity to any structures; and
      (7)   Means of access for firefighting apparatus.
(Ord. No. 31, § 2, 11-16-1991; Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013; Ord. No. 2017-06-
16, 6-16-2017)
Sec. 12-55. Application review
   Upon receipt of an application as set forth in section
12-54, the director of public safety shall examine the application in order to
determine that the same shall be fully answered and in order to determine
whether any further information shall be necessary. Upon determination that the
application is complete in all respects, including any additional inquiry that
the director of public safety shall make, the director of public safety shall
review the circumstances and conditions under which the proposed burning shall
take place, the materials of which the applicant shall seek disposal by
burning, proximity to structures, firefighting apparatus which shall be at
hand, existing and forecast weather conditions, and any and all other
conditions which the director of public safety shall find to be relevant and
may issue the burning permit if the director of public safety finds, from all
of the conditions and circumstances then existing, that the proposed burning
shall not present an undue risk of danger to persons or property as a result
thereof.
(Ord. No. 31, § 3, 11-16-1991; Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013; Ord. No. 2017-06-
16, 6-16-2017; Ord. No. 2025-0303, § 1, 3-21-2025)
Sec. 12-56. Conditions.
   Any permit issued by the director of public safety pursuant to this division
shall be subject to the following conditions which shall appear on the face of
the permit:
      (1)   Permits shall be valid only for the date issued during those hours
specified on the permit by the director of public safety.
      (2)   The applicant shall maintain a reliable means of communication with
the department of public safety at all times during the course of the burning.
      (3)   An operable means of control of the fire shall be on site and ready
for immediate use at any time that the fire shall exist.
      (4)   The fire shall be extinguished and any and all burning is to cease
if constant wind velocity shall reach or exceed ten miles per hour as measured
from the Bald Head Island Conservancy Weather Station.
      (5)   No burning shall be conducted within 50 feet of any structure. In
the case of a hardship, the director of public safety will consider a closer
distance.
      (6)   The applicant shall, at all times, maintain clear access to enable
any firefighting equipment to gain immediate access to the fire.
      (7)   At no time during the permitted burning shall the fire exceed size
or intensity which shall render the fire beyond the control of the applicant
and the applicant shall be and remain at the site of the fire constantly during
the duration thereof and shall be solely responsible for maintaining complete
control thereof during the course of the burn. The applicant shall maintain a
signed copy of the permit at the burning site for so long as the fire shall
exist and shall exhibit the permit to any member of the department of public
safety or employee of the village who shall request to view the permit.
      (8)   The fire shall be safely extinguished by 11:59 PM on the day on
which the permit for the first is issued.
      (9)   Any other conditions which the director of public safety shall find
to be necessary to promote the reasonable safety and welfare of persons and
property within the village.
(Ord. No. 31, § 4, 11-16-1991; Ord. No. 2001-040, § 2, 10-26-2001; Ord. No.
2013-0501, 5-17-2013; Ord. No. 2017-06-16, 6-16-2017)
Sec. 12-57. Revocation.
   Upon determination by the director of public safety that any of the matters
contained in the application for a fire permit are inaccurate or upon a
determination by the department of public safety that conditions are such that
a previously permitted fire represents an unreasonable risk of danger to
persons or property located within the village, the director of public safety
may immediately revoke the previously issued permit; and upon revocation
thereof, the applicant shall immediately extinguish any existing fire and shall
not resume burning until specifically permitted to do so.
(Ord. No. 31, § 6, 11-16-1991; Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013; Ord. No. 2017-06-
16, 6-16-2017)
Sec. 12-58.   Beach bonfire permits.
   Beach bonfire permits are issued to enhance public enjoyment of the island
beaches, while prioritizing public safety, environmental preservation, and
equitable access. The issuance of a beach bonfire permit is a privilege granted
at the discretion of the village and the department of public safety, not a
right. All permits are subject to the conditions and limitations outlined in
this section, as well as any additional rules or restrictions deemed necessary
by the department of public safety. The village, via the director of public
safety, reserves the right to deny, revoke, or limit permits based on
environmental conditions, safety concerns, or other factors in the public
interest. Recreational burn permits may be issued for fires at beach accesses
#5, 24, 35 and 39, subject to the conditions set forth in Sec.
12-56 and the following additional requirements and limitations specific to
beach bonfire permits:
   (1)   All fires must be located within two-hundred (200) linear feet of the
terminus of the permitted beach access.
   (2)   No fire may be set within fifty (50) linear feet of any dune
vegetation.
   (3)   Only untreated, natural wood and other vegetation with a diameter not
greater than thirty (30) inches may be burned on the beach. Burning of
materials such as plastics, treated wood, or any substance that produces toxic
fumes is strictly prohibited.
   (4)   Seasonal permits may be issued to any persons between a date
determined and set by the village manager, with consultation from the director
of Bald Head Island Conservancy, after which fires in the vicinity of the
permitted beach accesses are not likely to disturb nesting or hatching sea
turtles and May 1. The starting date for seasonal permits is subject to change
from year-to-year at the discretion of the village manager.
   (5)   No more than one (1) burn permit shall be issued per beach access in a
single day.
   (6)   Permits for events hosted or sponsored by commercial entities,
including non-profit organizations, shall only be issued at beach accesses #5
and 39.
   (7)   All permit applications will be submitted, processed and allocated
using a process developed by the director of public safety. The public interest
in ensuring equitable and broad access to the enjoyment of beach bonfires will
guide permit allocation. No person shall be permitted to submit more than one
application per day of intended burning.
   (8)   Permits will be issued no earlier than twenty-four (24) hours prior to
the requested burn date, pending confirmation of suitable weather and
environmental conditions at the time of burn.
   (9)   Permits must be confirmed by and obtained from the department of
public safety before any fire on the beach is lit. All persons burning a beach
bonfire must have a copy of the permit on site and available for viewing by
department of public safety personnel at all times.
   (10)   Any violation of the conditions set forth in this section, including
failure to obtain or present a permit, lighting a fire outside designated
areas, or violating environmental protections, shall result in immediate
revocation of the beach bonfire permit, prohibition from obtaining future
permits for a one-year period, and possible fines as set forth in Sec.
12-52.
(Ord. No. 2025-0303, § 2, 3-21-2025)
Chapter 13
RESERVED
Chapter 14
FLOODS*
*   Cross References: and building regulations,
ch. 6; environment,
ch. 10; streets, sidewalks and other public places,
ch. 24; subdivisions,
ch. 26; utilities,
ch. 30; zoning,
ch. 32.
   State Law References: regulation, G.S. 143-215.51 et seq.; authority to
enact and enforce floodway regulations, G.S. 160A-458.1.
Article I. In General
Secs. 14-1--14-30. Reserved.
Article II. Flood Damage Prevention
Division 1. Generally
Subdivision 1. Coastal Regular Phase
Sec.
14-31. Statutory authorization.
Sec.
14-32. Findings of fact.
Sec.
14-33. Statement of purpose.
Sec.
14-34. Objectives.
Sec.
14-35. Definitions.
Subdivision 2. General Provisions
Sec.
14-36. Lands to which this article applies.
Sec.
14-37. Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas.
Sec.
14-38. Establishment of floodplain development permit.
Sec.
14-39. Compliance.
Sec.
14-40. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
Sec.
14-41. Interpretation.
Sec.
14-42. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
Sec.
14-43. Penalties for violation.
Secs. 14-44--14-60. Reserved.
Division 2. Administration
Sec.
14-61. Designation of floodplain administrator.
Sec.
14-62. Floodplain development application, permit and certification
requirements.
Sec.
14-63. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
Sec.
14-64. Corrective procedures.
Sec.
14-65. Variance procedures.
Secs. 14-66--14-80. Reserved.
Division 3. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Sec.
14-81. General standards.
Sec.
14-82. Specific standards.
Sec.
14-83. Reserved.
Sec.
14-84. Coastal high hazard areas (zone VE).
Sec.
14-85. Standards for coastal A zones (Zone CAZ) LiMWA.
Secs. 14-86--14-100. Reserved.
Article III. Minor Developments
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
14-101. Administrative policy.
Secs. 14-102--14-120. Reserved.
Division 2. Permits
Sec.
14-121. Purposes.
Sec.
14-122. Definition.
Sec.
14-123. Requirements.
Sec.
14-124. Permit application.
Sec.
14-125. Appeal procedures.
Sec.
14-126. Injunctive relief and penalties.
Sec.
14-127. Amendment procedures.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 14-1--14-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
*   Editors Note: ordinance adopted Sep. 26, 2008, repealed art. II, divs. 1--
3, §§ 14-31--14-43, 14-61--14-65, 14-81--14-84, in its entirety and enacted new
provisions to read as herein set out.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Subdivision 1.
Coastal Regular Phase
Sec. 14-31. Statutory authorization.
   The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in Part 6, Article 21 of
Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5, and 8 of Article 19 of Chapter 160A; and Article 8 of
Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, delegated to local
governmental units the responsibility to adopt regulations designed to promote
the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 1, § A; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-32. Findings of fact.
   (a)    The floodprone areas within the jurisdiction of Bald Head Island are
subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
   (b)    These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities
and by the occupancy in floodprone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other
hazards.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 1, § B; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-33. Statement of purpose.
   It is the purpose of this article to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within floodprone areas by provisions designed to:
      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights or velocities;
      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
      (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that
may increase erosion or flood damage; and
      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 1, § C; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-34. Objectives.
   The objectives of this article are to:
    (1)   Protect human life, safety, and health;
    (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
    (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
    (4)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
    (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e. water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and bridges)
that are located in floodprone areas;
    (6)   Minimize damage to private and public property due to flooding;
   (7)   Make flood insurance available to the community through the National
Flood Insurance Program;
   (8)   Maintain the natural and beneficial functions of floodplains;
   (9)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of floodprone areas; and
    (10)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a special
flood hazard area.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 1, § D; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-35. Definitions.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this article its most reasonable application.
   Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) means a structure, located on
the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage
sheds are common urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like
qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or may not be located on the
same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
   Addition (to an existing building) means an extension or increase in the
floor area or height of a building or structure.
   Alteration of a watercourse means a dam, impoundment, channel relocation,
change in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area
of the channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which
may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the
riverine flow of water during conditions of the base flood.
   Appeal means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this article.
   Area of shallow flooding means a designated zone AO or AH on a community's
flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths determined to be from
one to three feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel does
not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and
where velocity flow may be evident.
   Area of special flood hazard  See "Special flood hazard area (SFHA)."
   Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
   Base flood elevation (BFE) means a determination of the water surface
elevations of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. When
the BFE has not been provided in a "special flood hazard area", it may be
obtained from engineering studies available from a federal, state, or other
source using FEMA approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when
combined with the "freeboard", establishes the "regulatory flood protection
elevation".
   Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   Building  see "Structure".
   Chemical storage facility means a building, portion of a building, or
exterior area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or
chemically reactive products.
   Coastal area management act (CAMA) means North Carolina's Coastal Area
Management Act, this act, along with the Dredge and Fill Law and the Federal
Coastal Zone Management Act, is managed through North Carolina Department of
Environment and Natural Resources' (NCDENR's) Division of Coastal Management
(DCM).
   Coastal A Zone (CAZ) means an area within a special flood hazard area,
landward of a V zone or landward of an open coast without mapped V zones; in a
Coastal A Zone, the principal source of flooding must be astronomical tides,
storm surges, seiches, or tsunamis, not riverine flooding. During the base
flood conditions, the potential for wave heights shall be greater than or equal
to 1.5 feet. Coastal A Zones are not normally designated on FIRMs. (see Limit
of Moderate Wave Action (LiMWA))
   Coastal barrier resources system (CBRS) consists of undeveloped portions of
coastal and adjoining areas established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act
(CoBRA) of 1982, the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act (CBIA) of 1990, and
subsequent revisions, and includes areas owned by federal or state governments
or private conservation organizations identified as otherwise protected areas
(OPA).
   Coastal high hazard area means a special flood hazard area extending from
offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and
any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic
sources. The area is designated on a FIRM, or other adopted flood map as
determined in section
14-37, of this article, as zone VE.
   Design flood see "Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation."
   Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   Development activity means any activity defined as development which will
necessitate a floodplain development permit. This includes buildings,
structures, and non-structural items, including (but not limited to) fill,
bulkheads, piers, pools, docks, landings, ramps, and erosion control/
stabilization measures.
   Digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM) means the digital official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), on which
both the Special Flood Hazard Areas and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community are delineated.
   Disposal means, as defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on
any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part or the solid
waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into
any waters, including groundwaters.
   Elevated building means a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated
floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers,
pilings, or columns.
   Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures or development into a special flood hazard area, which
may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   Existing building and existing structure means any building and/or structure
for which the "start of construction" commenced before January 27, 1986.
   Flood or Flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
    (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means an official map of a community,
issued by the FEMA, on which the special flood hazard areas and the floodways
are delineated. This official map is a supplement to and shall be used in
conjunction with the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
   Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community,
issued by the FEMA, where the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas have
been defined as zone A.
   Flood insurance means the insurance coverage provided under the National
Flood Insurance Program.
   Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued
by the FEMA, on which both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community are delineated. (see also DFIRM)
   Flood insurance study (FIS) means an examination, evaluation, and
determination of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if
appropriate), flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community
issued by the FEMA. The flood insurance study report includes flood insurance
rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs), if published.
   Floodprone area  see "Floodplain".
   Flood zone means a geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or
flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the
area.
   Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from
any source.
   Floodplain administrator is the individual appointed to administer and
enforce the floodplain management regulations.
   Floodplain development permit means any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this article, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
   Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and
enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but
not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain
management regulations, and open space plans.
   Floodplain management regulations means this article and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power. This term
describes federal, state or local regulations, in any combination thereof,
which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, structures, and their contents.
   Flood-resistant material means any building product [material, component or
system] capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact (minimum 72 hours)
with floodwaters without sustaining damage that requires more than low-cost
cosmetic repair. Any material that is water-soluble or is not resistant to
alkali or acid in water, including normal adhesives for above-grade use, is not
flood-resistant. Pressure-treated lumber or naturally decay-resistant lumbers
are acceptable flooring materials. Sheet-type flooring coverings that restrict
evaporation from below and materials that are impervious, but dimensionally
unstable are not acceptable. Materials that absorb or retain water excessively
after submergence are not flood-resistant. Please refer to Technical Bulletin
2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, and available from the FEMA.
Class 4 and 5 materials, referenced therein, are acceptable flood-resistant
materials.
   Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse, including the
area above a bridge or culvert when applicable, and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   Floodway encroachment analysis means an engineering analysis of the impact
that a proposed encroachment into a floodway or non-encroachment area is
expected to have on the floodway boundaries and flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge. The evaluation shall be prepared by a
qualified North Carolina licensed engineer using standard engineering methods
and models.
   Freeboard means the height added to the BFE to account for the many unknown
factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height
calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave
action, blockage of bridge or culvert openings, and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed. The BFE plus the freeboard establishes the
"regulatory flood protection elevation".
   Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for
its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, limited
to a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo
or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-
term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   Hazardous waste management facility means, as defined in G.S. ch. 130A, art.
9, a facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling,
recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste.
   Highest adjacent grade (HAG) means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls
of the structure.
   Historic structure means any structure that is:
   (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
    (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior as
contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district
or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a
registered historic district;
    (3)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks in
communities with a "certified local government (CLG) program"; or
    (4)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a
historic district designated by a community with a "certified local government
(CLG) program".
Certified local government (CLG) programs are approved by the U.S. Department
of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina Department of Cultural
Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having met the
requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as amended in
1980.
   Letter of map change (LOMC) means an official determination issued by FEMA
that amends or revises an effective flood insurance rate map or flood insurance
study. Letters of map change include:
   (1)   Letter of map amendment (LOMA): An official amendment, by letter, to
an effective National Flood Insurance Program map. A LOMA is based on technical
data showing that a property had been inadvertently mapped as being in the
floodplain, but is actually on natural high ground above the base flood
elevation. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and
establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is
not located in a special flood hazard area.
   (2)   Letter of map revision (LOMR): A revision based on technical data that
may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard area
boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features.
   (3)   Letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F): A determination that a
structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the BFE and is,
therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to
qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in
accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations.
   (4)   Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR): A formal review and
comment as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum NFIP
requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood
hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective flood insurance rate map or
flood insurance study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built
documentation, a letter of map revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the
effective FIRM.
   Light duty truck means any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds gross
vehicular weight rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000
pounds or less and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or
less as defined in 40 CFR 86.082-2 and is:
   (1)   Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is a
derivation of such a vehicle, or
   (2)   Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity of
more than 12 persons; or
   (3)   Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway
operation and use.
   Limit of moderate wave action (LiMWA) means the boundary line given by FEMA
on coastal map studies marking the extents of Coastal A Zones (CAZ).
   Lowest adjacent grade (LAG) means the elevation of the ground, sidewalk or
patio slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion
of the building.
   Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than
a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this article.
   Market value means the building value, not including the land value and that
of any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may
be established by independent certified appraisal, replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value), or
adjusted tax assessed values.
   New construction means structures for which the "start of construction"
commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management
regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   Non-encroachment area (NEA) means the channel of a river or other
watercourse, including the area above a bridge or culvert when applicable, and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot as designated in the Flood Insurance Study report.
   Otherwise protected area (OPA) see "Coastal Barrier Resources System
(CBRS)".
   Post-FIRM means construction or other development for which the "start of
construction" occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map.
   Pre-FIRM means construction or other development for which the "start of
construction" occurred before the effective date of the initial flood insurance
rate map.
   Primary frontal dune (PFD) for purposes of this article only means a
continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep
seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and
subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during major
coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the
point where there is a distinct change from a relatively steep slope to a
relatively mild slope.
   Principally above ground means that at least 51 percent of the actual cash
value of the structure is above ground.
   Public safety and/or nuisance means anything which is injurious to the
safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable
number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the
customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or
basin.
   Reference level is the top of the lowest floor for structures within special
flood hazard areas designated as zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99. The reference level
is the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
for structures within special flood hazard areas designated as zone VE.
   Regulatory flood protection elevation means the "base flood elevation" plus
the "freeboard". In "special flood hazard areas" where base flood elevations
(BFEs) have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus one (1) foot
of freeboard). In "special flood hazard areas" where no BFE has been
established, this elevation shall be at least one (1) foot above the highest
adjacent grade.
   Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the
ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
   Salvage yard means any nonresidential property used for the storage,
collection, and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not
limited to vehicles, appliances and related machinery.
   Sand dunes means naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or
mounds landward of the beach.
   Shear wall means walls used for structural support but not structurally
joined or enclosed at the end (except by breakaway walls). Shear walls are
parallel or nearly parallel to the flow of water.
   Solid waste disposal facility means any facility involved in the disposal of
solid waste, as defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(35).
   Solid waste disposal site means, as defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(36), any
place at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill,
or any other method.
   Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means the land in the floodplain subject to
a one percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year as
determined in section
14-37, of this article.
   Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   Structure means a walled and roofed building, or a gas, liquid, or liquefied
gas storage tank that is principally above ground.
   Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
during any one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred. See definition of "substantial
improvement". Substantial damage also means flood-related damage sustained by a
structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
   Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place
during any one year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of
the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
   (1)   Any correction of existing violations of state or community health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
    (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure
and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant to section
14-65.
   Technical Bulletin and Technical Fact Sheet means a FEMA publication that
provides guidance concerning the building performance standards of the NFIP,
which are contained in Title 44 of the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations at
Section 60.3. The bulletins and fact sheets are intended for use primarily by
state and local officials responsible for interpreting and enforcing NFIP
regulations and by members of the development community, such as design
professionals and builders. New bulletins, as well as updates of existing
bulletins, are issued periodically as needed. The bulletins do not create
regulations; rather they provide specific guidance for complying with the
minimum requirements of existing NFIP regulations.
   It should be noted that Technical Bulletins and Technical Fact Sheets
provide guidance on the minimum requirements of the NFIP regulations. State or
community requirements that exceed those of the NFIP take precedence. Design
professionals should contact the community officials to determine whether more
restrictive state or local regulations apply to the building or site in
question. All applicable standards of the state or local building code must
also be met for any building in a flood hazard area.
   Temperature controlled means having the temperature regulated by a heating
and/or cooling system, built-in or appliance.
   Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article.
   Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in divisions 2 and 3, of this article,
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
   Water surface elevation (WSE) means the height, in relation to NAVD 1988, of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
   Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 2; Ord. of 3-20-2018; Ord. No. 2019- , 12-13-2019)
Subdivision 2.
General Provisions
Sec. 14-36. Lands to which this article applies.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction, including extra-territorial jurisdictions (ETJs),[if applicable]
of Bald Head Island.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 3, § A; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-37. Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas.
   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the Cooperating
Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North Carolina and FEMA in
its FIS dated August 28, 2018 for Brunswick County and associated DFIRM panels,
including any digital data developed as part of the FIS, which are adopted by
reference and declared a part of this article. Future revisions to the FIS and
DFIRM panels that do not change flood hazard data within the jurisdictional
authority of Bald Head Island are also adopted by reference and declared a part
of this article. Subsequent letter of map revisions (LOMRs) and/or physical map
revisions (PMRs) shall be adopted within three months.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 3, § B; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-38. Establishment of floodplain development permit.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the
provisions of section
14-37.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 3, § C; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-39. Compliance.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
article and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 3, § D; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-40. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 3, § E; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-41. Interpretation.
   In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall
be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 3, § F; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-42. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
   The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land
outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will
be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability
on the part of the village or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 3, § G; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-43. Penalties for violation.
   Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall subject the
offender to a civil fine in the amount of $100.00 per offense. Each day such
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 3, § H; Ord. No. 2011-0402, 4-15-2011; Ord. of 3-20-
2018)
Secs. 14-44--14-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 14-61. Designation of floodplain administrator.
   The development services director, hereinafter referred to as the
"floodplain administrator", is hereby appointed to administer and implement the
provisions of this article. In instances where the floodplain administrator
receives assistance from others to complete tasks to administer and implement
this article, the floodplain administrator shall be responsible for the
coordination and community's overall compliance with the National Flood
Insurance Program and the provisions of this article.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 4, § A; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-62. Floodplain development application, permit and certification
requirements.
   (a)   Application requirements. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the floodplain administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall
be presented to the floodplain administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
       (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
          a.   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and
other development;
          b.   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map (DFIRM) as determined in section
14-37, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard
area;
          c.   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map (DFIRM) as determined in section
14-37;
          d.   The boundary of the floodway(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as
determined in section
14-37;
         e.   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in
section
14-37 or section
14-63;
          f.   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
         g.   The boundary and designation date of the Coastal Barrier Resource
System (CBRS) area or otherwise protected areas (OPA), if applicable.
       (2)   Proposed elevation and method thereof, of all development within a
special flood hazard area including but not limited to:
          a.   Elevation in relation to NAVD 1988 of the proposed reference
level (including basement) of all structures;
          b.   Elevation in relation to NAVD 1988 to which any nonresidential
structure in zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99 will be floodproofed; and
          c.   Elevation in relation to NAVD 1988 to which any proposed utility
systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
      (3)   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34)
with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance
plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise, and
maintenance of floodproofing measures.
       (4)   A foundation plan drawn to scale which shall include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this article are
met. These details include but are not limited to:
          a.   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation
on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
         b.   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with section
14-82(3)(d) when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in zones A, AE, AH,
AO, A99.
         c.   The following, in coastal high hazard areas, in accordance with
the provisions of section
14-82(3)(e) and section
14-84 (and section
14-85 if applicable):
            i.   V-zone certification with accompanying plans and
specifications verifying the engineered structure and any breakaway wall
designs;
            ii.   Plans for open wood latticework or insect screening, if
applicable; and
            iii.   Plans for non-structural fill, if applicable. If non-
structural fill is proposed, it must be demonstrated through coastal
engineering analysis that the proposed fill would not result in any increase in
the BFE or otherwise cause adverse impacts by wave ramping and deflection on to
the subject structure or adjacent properties.
       (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
       (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
      (7)   Certification that all other local, state and federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
      (8)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on
plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation.
   (b)   Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
      (1)   A complete description of all the development to be permitted under
the floodplain development permit (e.g. house, garage, pool, septic, bulkhead,
cabana, pier, bridge, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials, etc.).
      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in section
14-37.
      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
reference level and all attendant utilities.
      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
protection of all public utilities.
      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse.
      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99.
      (8)   Limitations of below BFE enclosure uses. (i.e., parking, building
access and limited storage only).
      (9)   A statement, if in zone VE, that there shall be no fill used for
structural support.
      (10)   A statement, that all materials below BFE/RFPE must be flood
resistant materials.
   (c)   Certification requirements.
      (1)   Elevation certificates: A final finished construction elevation
certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33) is required after construction is completed
and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty
of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain administrator a certification
of final as-built construction of the elevation of the reference level and all
attendant utilities. Elevation certification shall be prepared by, or under the
direct supervision of, a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and
certified by same. The floodplain administrator shall review the certificate
data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/ occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy. The finished construction elevation
certificate certifier shall provide at least two photographs showing the front
and rear of the building taken within 90 days from the date of certification.
The photographs must be taken with views confirming the building description
and diagram number provided in Section A. To the extent possible, these
photographs should show the entire building including foundation. If the
building has split-level or multi-level areas, provide at least two additional
photographs showing side views of the building. In addition, when applicable,
provide a photograph of the foundation showing a representative example of the
flood openings or vents. All photographs must be in color and measure at least
3" × 3". Digital photographs are acceptable.
      (2)   Floodproofing certificate:
         a.   If non-residential floodproofing is used to meet the regulatory
flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form
086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and
maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of any new
construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
floodplain administrator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation
of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to NAVD 1988.
Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The
floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational
plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such
review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause
to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in accordance
with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy.
         b.   A final finished construction floodproofing certificate (FEMA
Form 086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection
and maintenance plan are required prior to the issuance of a certificate of
compliance/occupancy. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to
the floodplain administrator a certification of the floodproofed design
elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to
NAVD 1988. Floodproofing certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The
floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational
plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such
review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to certificate of occupancy.
Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections
shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in
accordance with the certified design shall be cause to deny a certificate of
compliance/occupancy.
      (3)   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of
the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a professional engineer's
certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying
capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream
and downstream; and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior
to issuance of a floodplain development permit.
      (4)   Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located
within zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing
certification requirements specified in items (a) and (b) of this subsection:
         i.   Temporary structures; and
         ii.   Accessory structures that are 150 square feet or less or $5,000
or less and meeting requirements of section
14-82(5).
       (5)   A V-zone certification with accompanying design plans and
specifications is required prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit
within coastal high hazard areas. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant
to submit to the floodplain administrator said certification to ensure the
design standards of this article are met. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall develop or review the structural design, plans, and
specifications for construction and certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice
for meeting the provisions of this article. This certification is not a
substitute for an elevation certificate.
   (d)   Determinations for existing buildings and structures. For applications
for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including
alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy,
additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of
substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and
structures, the floodplain administrator, in coordination with the building
official, shall:
      (1)   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed
work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure
shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are
made;
      (2)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or
structure;
      (3)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
      (4)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood resistant construction requirements of the NC Building Code and
this article is required.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 4, § B; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-63. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
   The floodplain administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:
   (1)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the
requirements of this article have been satisfied.
    (2)   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been received,
including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
    (3)   Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of
Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the
National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
    (4)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained.
    (5)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment areas.
   (6)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to NAVD 1988) of the reference
level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of section
14-62(c).
   (7)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to NAVD 1988) to which all new
and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed, in
accordance with the provisions of section
14-62(c).
   (8)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to NAVD 1988) of all public
utilities in accordance with the provisions of section
14-62(c).
   (9)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of section
14-62(c) and section
14-82(2).
   (10)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the special flood hazard areas, floodways, or non-encroachment areas (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article.
   (11)   When BFE data has not been provided in accordance with the provisions
of section
14-37, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with floodway
data or non-encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other
source in order to administer the provisions of this article.
   (12)   When BFE data is provided but no floodway or non-encroachment area
data has been provided in accordance with the provisions of section
14-37, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-
encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source in
order to administer the provisions of this article.
   (13)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or
the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood hazard area is above
the BFE, advise the property owner of the option to apply for a letter of map
amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain a copy of the LOMA issued by FEMA in the
floodplain development permit file.
   (14)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration
of this article and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as
amended.
   (15)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to
a floodplain development permit progresses, the floodplain administrator shall
make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the
work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the
terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the floodplain administrator has
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
   (16)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation
of this article, the floodplain administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor.
   (17)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The floodplain
administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked.
   (18)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The floodplain administrator and each
member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
   (19)   Follow through with corrective procedures of section
14-64.
   (20)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance
requests.
   (21)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to,
historical and effective FIS report, historical and effective FIRM and other
official flood maps and studies adopted in accordance with the provisions of
section
14-37, including any revisions thereto including letters of map change, issued
by FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of mapping needs.
   (22)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including letters of
map revision based on fill (LOMR-Fs) and letters of map revision (LOMRs).
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 4, § B; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-64. Corrective procedures.
   (a)   Violations to be corrected. When the floodplain administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws; it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
   (b)    Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner
of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
floodplain administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal service,
stating:
      (1)   That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
      (2)   That a hearing will be held before the floodplain administrator at
a designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      (3)   That following the hearing, the floodplain administrator may issue
an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
   (c)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the floodplain administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of the flood damage prevention
ordinance, he or she shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring
the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period, not less than
60 calendar days, nor more than least 180 calendar days. Where the floodplain
administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he
or she may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may
be feasible.
   (d)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the floodplain administrator and the clerk within ten days
following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order
of the floodplain administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall
hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or
revoke the order.
   (e)   Failure to comply with order: If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor pursuant to G.S.
143-215.58 and shall be punished at the discretion of the court.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 4, § C; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-65. Variance procedures.
   (a)   The planning board as established by Bald Head Island, hereinafter
referred to as the "appeal board", shall hear and decide requests for variances
from the requirements of this article.
   (b)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal
such decision to the court, as provided in G.S. ch. 7A.
   (c)   Variances may be issued for:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the
definition as stated in section
14-35, provided provisions of section
14-65(i)2, 3, and 5 have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by
methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no
additional threats to public safety; or
      (3)   Any other type of development provided it meets the requirements of
this section.
   (d)   In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this article, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under section
14-35 as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (e)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.
   (f)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
article.
   (g)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the BFE and the elevation to which the
structure is to be built and that such construction below the BFE increases
risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the BFE may result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance.
   (h)   The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the FEMA and the State of North Carolina
upon request.
   (i)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or
non-encroachment area if the variance would result in any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit
approval.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (j)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas provided that all of
the following conditions are met.
      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community.
      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood
hazard area.
      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to
at least the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local
laws.
      (5)   Bald Head Island has notified the Secretary of the North Carolina
Department of Public Safety of its intention to grant a variance at least 30
calendar days prior to granting the variance.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 4, § D; Ord. of 3-20-2018; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 2, 6-
28-2021)
Secs. 14-66--14-80. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sec. 14-81. General standards.
   In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required:
   (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement of the structure.
   (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in accordance
with the FEMA Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials
Requirements.
   (3)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
   (4)   All new electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service equipment shall be located at or above the RFPE or
designed and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during the occurrence of the base flood. These include, but are
not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures,
ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, water heaters,
and electric outlets/switches.
      a.   Replacements part of a substantial improvement, electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service equipment
shall also meet the above provisions.
      b.   Replacements that are for maintenance and not part of a substantial
improvement, may be installed at the original location provided the addition
and/or improvements only comply with the standards for new construction
consistent with the code and requirements for the original structure.
   (5)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (6)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   (7)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (8)   Nothing in this article shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this
article and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-encroachment
area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the
regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway, non-encroachment area,
or stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or
replacement meets all of the other requirements of this article.
   (9)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in section
14-65 (j). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory
flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of
section
14-62(c).
   (10)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (11)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (12)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (13)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
   (14)   When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area,
the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
   (15)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest BFE shall apply.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 5, § A; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-82. Specific standards.
   In all special flood hazard areas where BFE data has been provided, as set
forth in section
14-37, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of section
14-81, are required:
   (1)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure shall have the reference level, including
basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory flood protection elevation, as
defined in section
14-35.
   (2)   Non-residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in section
14-35. Structures located in zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99 may be floodproofed to
the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that
all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AO zones, the floodproofing elevation
shall be in accordance with Article 5, Section I (2). A registered professional
engineer or architect shall certify that the floodproofing standards of this
subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the
floodplain administrator as set forth in section
14-62(c), along with the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance
plan.
   (3)   Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed area, of new construction and
substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor or below the
lowest horizontal structural member in VE zones:
      a.   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only
be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior
door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion
of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms,
except to enclose storage areas;
      b.   Shall not be temperature-controlled or conditioned;
      c.   Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least
to the regulatory flood protection elevation; and
      d.   Shall include, in zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99 flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
         i.   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
         ii.   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
         iii.   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit;
         iv.   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the higher of the interior or exterior adjacent grade;
         v.   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
         vi.   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
      e.   Shall, in coastal high hazard areas (zone VE), either be free of
obstruction or constructed with breakaway walls, open wood latticework or
insect screening, provided they are not part of the structural support of the
building and are designed so as to breakaway, under abnormally high tides or
wave action without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or
supporting foundation system or otherwise jeopardizing the structural integrity
of the building. The following design specifications shall be met:
         i.   Material shall consist of open wood or plastic lattice, or insect
screening; or
         ii.   Breakaway walls shall meet the following design specifications:
            1.   Breakaway walls shall have flood openings that allow for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters to minimize damage caused by
hydrostatic loads, per section
14-82(3)d.i-iv; and
            2.   Design safe loading resistance shall be not less than 10 nor
more than 20 pounds per square foot; or
            3.   Breakaway walls that exceed a design safe loading resistance
of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by state or
local codes) shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the breakaway wall will collapse from a water load less than
that which would occur during the base flood event, and the elevated portion of
the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water
loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and non-
structural). The water loading values used shall be those associated with the
base flood. The wind loading values used shall be those required by the North
Carolina State Building Code.
         iii.   Concrete pads, including patios, decks, parking pads, walkways,
driveways, pool decks, etc. the following is required:
            1.   Shall be structurally independent of the primary structural
foundation system of the structure and shall not adversely affect structures
through redirection of floodwaters or debris; and
            2.   Shall be constructed to breakaway cleanly during design flood
conditions, shall be frangible, and shall not produce debris capable of causing
damage to any structure. (The installation of concrete in small segments
(approximately 4 feet x 4 feet) that will easily break up during the base flood
event, or score concrete in 4 feet x 4 feet maximum segments is acceptable to
meet this standard); and
            3.   Reinforcing, including welded wire fabric, shall not be used
in order to minimize the potential for concreted pads being a source of debris;
and
            4.   Pad thickness shall not exceed 4 inches; or
            5.   Provide a design professional's certification stating the
design and method of construction to be used meet the applicable criteria of
this section.
      f.   Fill/Grading.
         i.   Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of
nonstructural fill may be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes
under and around buildings and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios
and walkways.
         ii.   The fill material must be similar and consistent with the
natural soils in the area.
         iii.   The placement of site-compatible, non-structural fill under or
around an elevated building is limited to two feet. Fill greater than two feet
must include an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional
demonstrating no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave
reflection that would increase damage to adjacent elevated buildings and
structures.
         iv.   Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than
five units horizontal to one unit vertical shall be permitted only if an
analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no
harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would
increase damage to adjacent elevated buildings and structures.
   (4)   Additions/improvements.
      a.   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         i.   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more non-
conforming than the existing structure.
         ii.   A substantial improvement, with modifications/rehabilitations/
improvements to the existing structure or the common wall is structurally
modified more than installing a doorway, both the existing structure and the
addition must comply with the standards for new construction.
      b.   Additions to pre-FIRM or post-FIRM structures that are a substantial
improvement with no modifications/rehabilitations/improvements to the existing
structure other than a standard door in the common wall, shall require only the
addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
      c.   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         i.   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
only must comply with the standards for new construction consistent with the
code and requirements for the original structure.
         ii.   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      d.   Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a one year
period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market
value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started must comply
with the standards for new construction. For each building or structure, the
one year period begins on the date of the first improvement or repair of that
building or structure subsequent to the effective date of this article.
Substantial damage also means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25
percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. If the
structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered
substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
requirement does not, however, include either:
         i.   Any project for improvement of a building required to correct
existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building
official and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living conditions.
         ii.   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
   (5)   Accessory structures. When accessory structures (sheds, detached
garages, etc.) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the
following criteria shall be met:
      a.   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);
      b.   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
      c.   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
      d.   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the building
site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      e.   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with the
provisions of section
14-81(1);
      f.   All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of section
14-81(4); and
      g.   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection elevation in
conformance with the provisions of section
14-82(3)d.
An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 or that is a minimal
investment of $5,000 or less and satisfies the criteria outlined above is not
required to meet the elevation or floodproofing standards of section
14-82(2). Elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all other
accessory structures in accordance with section
14-62(c).
   (6)   Tanks. When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a
special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met:
      a.   Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood,
including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty;
      b.   Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard
areas shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation
on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting
structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood
hazard area;
      c.   Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not
meet the elevation requirements of section
14-82(2) shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are
designed, constructed, installed, and anchored to resist all flood-related and
other loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of the design
flood and without release of contents in the floodwaters or infiltration by
floodwaters into the tanks. Tanks shall be designed, constructed, installed,
and anchored to resist the potential buoyant and other flood forces acting on
an empty tank during design flood conditions.
      d.   Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and vents
shall be:
         i.   At or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or fitted
with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the
contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and
         ii.   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of
the design flood.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 5, § B; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-83. Reserved.
Sec. 14-84. Coastal high hazard areas (zone VE).
   Coastal high hazard areas are special flood hazard areas established in
section
14-37, and designated as zone VE. These areas have special flood hazards
associated with high velocity waters from storm surges or seismic activity and,
therefore, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
following provisions in addition to the provisions of sections
14-81 and
14-82:
   (1)    All new construction and substantial improvements shall:
      a.   Be located landward of the reach of mean high tide;
      b.   Comply with all applicable CAMA setback requirements.
   (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated so
that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
(excluding pilings or columns) is no lower than the regulatory flood protection
elevation. Floodproofing shall not be utilized on any structures in coastal
high hazard areas to satisfy the regulatory flood protection elevation
requirements.
   (3)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space
below the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
free of obstruction so as not to impede the flow of flood waters, with the
following exceptions:
      a.   Open wood or plastic latticework or insect screening may be
permitted below the lowest floor for aesthetic purposes only and must be
designed to wash away in the event of wave impact and in accordance with the
provisions of section
14-82(3)e.i. Design plans shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions
of section
14-62(a)(4)c.ii.; or
      b.   Breakaway walls may be permitted provided they meet the criteria set
forth in section
14-82(3)a., b., c. and e.ii. Design plans shall be submitted in accordance with
the provisions of section
14-62(a)(4)c.i.
   (4)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be securely
anchored to pile or column foundations. All pilings and columns and the
structure attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water loads acting
simultaneously on all building components.
      a.   Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood.
      b.   Wind loading values used shall be those required by the current
edition of the North Carolina State Building Code.
   (5)   For concrete pads, including patios, decks, parking pads, walkways,
driveways, pool decks, etc. the following is required:
      a.   Shall be structurally independent of the primary structural
foundation system of the structure and shall not adversely affect structures
through redirection of floodwaters or debris; and
      b.   Shall be constructed to breakaway cleanly during design flood
conditions, shall be frangible, and shall not produce debris capable of causing
damage to any structure. (The installation of concrete in small segments
(approximately 4 feet x 4 feet) that will easily break up during the base flood
event, or score concrete in 4 feet x 4 feet maximum segments is acceptable to
meet this standard); and
      c.   Reinforcing, including welded wire fabric, shall not be used in
order to minimize the potential for concreted pads being a source of debris;
and
      d.   Pad thickness shall not exceed 4 inches; or
      e.   Provide a design professional's certification stating the design and
method of construction to be used to meet the applicable criteria of this
section.
   (6)   For swimming pools and spas, the following is required:
      a.   Be designed to withstand all flood-related loads and load
combinations.
      b.   Be elevated so that the lowest horizontal structural member is
elevated above the RFPE; or
      c.   Be designed and constructed to break away during design flood
conditions without producing debris capable of causing damage to any structure;
or
      d.   Be sited to remain in the ground during design flood conditions
without obstructing flow that results in damage to any structure.
      e.   Registered design professionals must certify to local officials that
a pool or spa beneath or near a VE zone building will not be subject to
flotation or displacement that will damage building foundations or elevated
portions of the building or any nearby buildings during a coastal flood.
      f.   Pool equipment shall be located above the RFPE whenever practicable.
Pool equipment shall not be located beneath an elevated structure.
   (7)   All elevators, vertical platform lifts, chair lifts, etc., the
following is required:
      a.   Elevator enclosures must be designed to resist hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic forces as well as erosion, scour, and waves.
      b.   Utility equipment in coastal high hazard areas (VE zones) must not
be mounted on, pass through, or be located along breakaway walls.
      c.   The cab, machine/equipment room, hydraulic pump, hydraulic
reservoir, counter weight and roller guides, hoist cable, limit switches,
electric hoist motor, electrical junction box, circuit panel, and electrical
control panel are all required to be above RFPE. When this equipment cannot be
located above the RFPE, it must be constructed using flood damage-resistant
components.
      d.   Elevator shafts/enclosures that extend below the RFPE shall be
constructed of reinforced masonry block or reinforced concrete walls and
located on the landward side of the building to provide increased protection
from flood damage. Drainage must be provided for the elevator pit.
      e.   Flood damage-resistant materials can also be used inside and outside
the elevator cab to reduce flood damage. Use only stainless steel doors and
door frames below the BFE. Grouting in of door frames and sills is recommended.
      f.   If an elevator is designed to provide access to areas below the BFE,
it shall be equipped with a float switch system that will activate during a
flood and send the elevator cab to a floor above the RFPE.
   (8)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the
provisions of section
14-62 and section
14-84(3) and (4), on the current version of the North Carolina V-Zone
Certification form or equivalent local version.
   (9)   Fill/grading.
      a.   Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of nonstructural
fill may be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes under and
around buildings and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios and
walkways.
      b.   The fill material must be similar and consistent with the natural
soils in the area.
      c.   The placement of site-compatible, non-structural fill under or
around an elevated building is limited to two feet. Fill greater than two feet
must include an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional
demonstrating no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave
reflection that would increase damage to adjacent elevated buildings and
structures.
      d.   Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than five
units horizontal to one unit vertical shall be permitted only if an analysis
prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful
diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase
damage to adjacent elevated buildings and structures.
   (10)   There shall be no alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands which
would increase potential flood damage.
   (11)   A deck that is structurally attached to a building or structure shall
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation and any supporting members that extend
below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall comply with the
foundation requirements that apply to the building or structure, which shall be
designed to accommodate any increased loads resulting from the attached deck.
The increased loads must be considered in the design of the primary structure
and included in the V-zone certification required under section
14-62(c)(5).
   (12)   A deck or patio that is located below the regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be structurally independent from buildings or structures and
their foundation systems, and shall be designed and constructed either to
remain intact and in place during design flood conditions or to break apart
into small pieces to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing
structural damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and
structures.
   (13)   In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than
buildings and structures shall be permitted only if also authorized by the
appropriate state or local authority; if located outside the footprint of, and
not structurally attached to, buildings and structures; and if analyses
prepared by qualified registered design professionals demonstrate no harmful
diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase
damage to adjacent buildings and structures. Such other development activities
include but are not limited to:
      a.   Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments, and similar
erosion control structures;
      b.   Solid fences and privacy walls, and fences prone to trapping debris,
unless designed and constructed to fail under flood conditions less than the
design flood or otherwise function to avoid obstruction of floodwaters.
   (14)   No more than four electrical outlets and no more than four electrical
switches may be permitted below RFPE unless required by building code.
(Ord. of 9-26-2008, Art. 5, § D; Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Sec. 14-85. Standards for coastal A zones (Zone CAZ) LiMWA (maximum 650 CRS
points)
   Structures in CAZs shall be designed and constructed to meet V zone
requirements, including requirements for breakaway walls. However, the NFIP
regulations also require flood openings in walls surrounding enclosures below
elevated buildings in CAZs (see Technical Bulletin 1, Openings in Foundation
Walls and Walls of Enclosures). Breakaway walls used in CAZs must have flood
openings that allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters to minimize
damage caused by hydrostatic loads. Openings also function during smaller
storms or if anticipated wave loading does not occur with the base flood.
   (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated so
that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
(excluding pilings or columns) is no lower than the regulatory flood protection
elevation. Floodproofing shall not be utilized on any structures in Coastal A
Zones to satisfy the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements.
   (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space
below the lowest horizontal structural member free of obstruction so as not to
impede the flow of flood waters, with the following exceptions:
      a.   Open wood latticework or insect screening may be permitted below the
lowest floor for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in
the event of wave impact and in accordance with the provisions of section
14-82(3)e.i. Design plans shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions
of section
14-62(a)(4)c.ii.; or
      b.   Breakaway walls may be permitted provided they meet the criteria set
forth in section
14-82(3)e.ii. Design plans shall be submitted in accordance with the provisions
of section
14-62(a)(4)c.i.
   (3)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall include, in
Zones CAZ, flood openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this
requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer
or architect or meet or exceed the design criteria in section
14-82(3)(d).
   (4)   Concrete pads, including patios, decks, parking pads, walkways,
driveways, etc. must meet the provisions of section
14-84(5).
   (5)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
provisions of section
14-84(3).
    (6)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with
the provisions of section
14-62 and section
14-84(3) and (4), on the current version of the North Carolina V-zone
certification form or a locally developed V-zone certification form.
   (7)   Fill/Grading must meet the provisions of section
14-84(9).
   (8)   Decks and patios must meet the provisions of section
14-84(11) and (12).
   (9)   In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than
buildings and structures must meet the provisions of section
14-84(13).
(Ord. of 3-20-2018)
Secs. 14-86--14-100. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
MINOR DEVELOPMENTS*
*   State Law References: Area Management Act, G.S. 113A-100 et seq.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 14-101. Administrative policy.
   (a)   Designation of responsible local officer.
      (1)   Appointment. A permit officer is hereby appointed and authorized to
carry out the duties described in this policy and required to implement the
provisions of division 2 of this article.
      (2)   Qualifications. The permit officer shall be required to
successfully complete, within the first 12 months of employment, the required
course of study consisting of no more than two weeks duration that shall be
developed by the department of environment and natural resources in cooperation
with one or more of the state's institutions of higher learning.
      (3)   General duties. In discharging his duties the permit officer shall:
         a.   Administer and enforce in duly designated AECs the minor
development permit process, all applicable local ordinances, and all other
guidelines and standards established by the coastal resources commission (CRC)
and the village pursuant to the CAMA.
         b.   Be familiar with existing state and federal permits required in
this jurisdiction so that he can aid potential developers in determining when a
major development permit rather than minor development permit is required, and
to aid the developers in applying to the CRC when a major development permit is
required.
         c.   Assist in identifying and assessing projects of greater than
local concern and bringing them to the attention of the CRC. Such projects of
regional, state or national concern are almost certain to require some other
state permit and, therefore, require a major development permit from the CRC.
Therefore, they will usually be brought to the attention of the CRC through the
major development permit application.
         d.   Be responsible for implementing any procedures agreed on by the
governing bodies of the jurisdictions to which this article applies for the
purpose of coordinating the CAMA minor development permit with other locally
required permits. Such locally required permits include, but are not limited
to, plumbing permits, electrical permits, building permits, septic tank
permits, sand dune permits, and certifications of compliance with zoning and
subdivision regulations.
      (4)   Records. The permit officer shall prepare a quarterly summary of
all permit applications and dispositions to be presented to the governing body
of each of the jurisdictions to which this plan applies, to the CRC and to the
secretary of the department of environment and natural resources. The permit
officer shall keep correct and comprehensive records of all transactions
related to minor development permit requests (applications, grants, denials,
other dispositions) and shall maintain such records so long as any part of the
structure or entity to which it relates remains in existence; or, in the case
of denials or other instances, for a period of ten years.
   (b)   Procedures for responding to complaints.
      (1)   Citizen complaints. Upon receiving complaints from local citizens
that the implementation and enforcement plan is not being properly administered
and enforced the village council will investigate the situation and respond to
the alleged deficiencies. If the person making the complaint is not satisfied,
then he will be advised that he may take his complaint either in writing or in
person to the CRC.
      (2)   Response to the CRC. Upon notification from the CRC concerning
deficiencies in administration and enforcement of the plan, the village council
will investigate the alleged problem and prepare a response for the CRC. If the
allegation of deficiencies is found to be valid, the village council will,
within 30 days of the original notification from the CRC, inform the CRC of its
willingness and ability to correct the deficiency and prevent similar problems
in the future. If the village council finds the CRC's allegation of
deficiencies invalid, they will so inform the CRC. If the CRC disagrees with
that finding, the village council may request a hearing before the CRC or in
some other manner attempt to reach a mutually acceptable agreement with the CRC
within a 90-day period after receipt of the CRC's original notification of the
deficiency. It is understood that if no such solution is reached within the 90-
day period, then the authority to issue permits for minor development pursuant
to this plan shall be automatically relinquished until such a time as the CRC
is convinced that the program will be properly enforced.
(Ord. No. 6, §§ 1, 2, 6-27-1986)
Secs. 14-102--14-120. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
PERMITS*
*   State Law References: for minor developments under expedited procedures,
G.S. 113A-121.
Sec. 14-121. Purposes.
   The purposes of this division are to:
      (1)   Develop procedures for discharging the responsibilities of local
permit-letting agencies as authorized by the North Carolina Coastal Area
Management Act by issuing minor development permits in Areas of Environmental
Concern (AECs) within the village;
      (2)   Insure that minor development undertaken within AECs is in
conformance with local land use plans and applicable state guidelines and
regulations; and
      (3)   Set forth the geographic extent of the jurisdiction of the local
permit-letting program.
(Ord. No. 5, § 1, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 14-122. Definition.
   For the purposes of this division, the term "minor development" is defined
as any development which does not require permission, licensing, approval,
certification, or authorization in any form from the environmental management
commission, the department of human resources, the department of environment
and natural resources, the department of administration, the state mining
commission, the state pesticides board, or the state sedimentation control
board; which occupies a land area of 20 acres or less; or which occupies on a
single parcel a structure or structures with a ground area of 60,000 square
feet or less.
(Ord. No. 5, § 2(c), 1-27-1986)
   Cross References: generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 14-123. Requirements.
   (a)   Permits required in AECs. After the date designated by the secretary
of environment and natural resources, every person shall obtain a development
permit prior to undertaking any development activity within any area of
environmental concern.
   (b)   Permit officer. For minor development within the village, the permit
shall be obtained from the designated permit officer.
   (c)   Posting requirements. The following materials shall be posted by the
permit officer on the administration building of thevillage:
      (1)   A precise description and map approximating all AECs within the
village;
      (2)   A copy of the standards for development adopted by the coastal
resources commission for each type of AEC found in the jurisdictions and the
statutory grounds on which a permit may be denied or conditioned;
      (3)   A copy of this division together with locally adopted
administrative policies for its enforcement;
      (4)   The name, location and mailing address of the permit officer
designated in subsection (b)of this section.
(Ord. No. 5, § 2(a), (b), 1-27-1986)
Sec. 14-124. Permit application.
   (a)   Required materials. An application for a minor development permit
shall consist of submitting the following to the permit officer and the
secretary of environment and natural resources:
      (1)   A completed application using a form approved and adopted by the
coastal resources commission. The application may be made in duplicate to the
permit officer who will then forward a copy to the secretary of environment and
natural resources.
      (2)   The currently required administration fee.
   (b)   Time limits. Upon receipt of a complete application for a minor
development permit, the permit officer shall have 25 calendar days to make
final disposition of the application unless the applicant is given written
notice by registered mail of one additional 25-day extension. Such extensions
may be made only in circumstances where the magnitude or complexity of the
proposed development requires additional time for proper evaluation of the
application.
   (c)   Incomplete and inappropriate applications. The permit officer shall
return incomplete, insufficient, or unauthorized applications to the applicant
within 15 calendar days. Any application received for any activity which
constitutes major development shall be returned by the permit officer with
instructions for submitting the application to the appropriate state agency.
   (d)   Coordination with other local permits. The permit officer shall
determine from the application what other local permits are required for the
development and shall inform the applicant of these other permit requirements.
   (e)   Disposition of permit application. After consideration of the evidence
submitted with the application, the permit officer shall grant, deny, or give
conditional approval to the minor development permit. The permit officer shall
maintain a record of all evidence and all matters relevant to each minor
development permit application. Such relevant information shall include, but is
not limited to, applications, correspondence, public notices, responses to
public notices, and a copy of the final disposition. Statutory grounds upon
which a permit officer bases the denial, conditioned grant, or return of
application shall be set out in writing. One copy shall be maintained by the
permit officer and one copy shall be given to the applicant, either in person
or by registered mail.
      (1)   Grant. A minor development permit shall be granted only if
consideration of the application results in none of the appropriate findings
listed in G.S. 113A-120(a).
      (2)   Conditional approval. The approval of a minor development permit
may be conditioned upon the acceptance by the applicant of certain reasonable
conditions as set out by the permit officer to protect the public interest with
respect to the appropriate findings listed in subsection (e)(1) of this
section. The applicant must sign the conditioned grant of approval as an
acceptance of the amendments of the proposed project plans in a manner
consistent with the conditions set out by the permit officer before the permit
shall become effective.
      (3)   Passive approval. Failure of the permit officer to approve or deny
a properly completed and filed application, or to give notice of an extension
beyond the initial 25-day disposition period shall result in a passive grant. A
passive approval shall have the full force and effect of an unconditioned
approval.
   (f)   Permit display. The property owner shall cause the properly granted
minor development permit to be displayed in full view on the site of the
development. This requirement shall apply to every permit no matter how it is
granted. It is, therefore, necessary that the property owner acquire a permit
received by passive approval for purposes of posting on the site before
proceeding with the development.
   (g)   Notice of permits approved. The permit officer shall give notice in a
local newspaper of general circulation at least once each month of permit
applications which have been approved either conditionally or unconditionally.
(Ord. No. 5, § 3, 1-27-1986)
   State Law References: procedures, G.S. 113A-121.
Sec. 14-125. Appeal procedures.
   (a)   Appeal to coastal resources commission. Any person directly affected
by the decision of the permit officer, including the secretary of the
department of environment and natural resources may, within 20 days after
notice of the permit officer's disposition, request a hearing before the
commission. The hearing before the commission shall be a quasi-judicial hearing
conducted in accordance with the requirements of the Coastal Area Management
Act (CAMA), any applicable rules and regulations adopted by the commission, and
any other state laws applicable to such procedures.
   (b)   Appeal to superior court. Any person directly affected by any final
decision or order of the coastal resources commission may appeal such decision
or order to the superior court of Brunswick County.
   (c)   Appeal pending. No action for which a minor development permit is
required shall be taken while appeal of the permit officer's disposition of
that permit request is pending.
(Ord. No. 5, § 4, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 14-126. Injunctive relief and penalties.
   (a)   Injunctive relief. Upon violation of this division, the permit officer
may, either before or after the institution of proceedings for the collection
of any penalty imposed by CAMA for such violation, institute a civil action in
the general court of justice in the name of the affected local government for
injunctive relief to restrain the violation and for such other or further
relief in the premises as the court shall deem proper.Neither the institution
of the action nor any of the proceedings thereon shall relieve any party to
such proceedings from any penalty prescribed by CAMA for any violation of same.
   (b)   Penalties. Any person adjudged guilty of knowingly and wilfully
undertaking any development without acquiring such a permit, or of conduct
exceeding the authority of a permit granted, or of failure to observe the
agreed modification of a conditioned grant, or of any other applicable
regulations adopted by the village or the coastal resources commission pursuant
to the CAMA shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and for each violation shall be
punished in accordance with G.S. 113A-126. In addition, if any person continues
or further commits any of the above violations after written notice from the
permit officer, the court may determine that each day during which the
violation continues or is repeated constitutes a separate violation subject to
the foregoing penalties.
(Ord. No. 5, § 5, 1-27-1986)
Sec. 14-127. Amendment procedures.
   (a)   Consistency. Amendments to this division shall be in accordance with
the provisions of the Coastal Area Management Act and with appropriate rules,
criteria, and requirements of the coastal resources commission.
   (b)   Hearing requirements. Prior to amendment of this division, a public
hearing concerning the proposed amendment shall be held. Notice of the public
hearing shall appear in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 15
calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. The permit officer shall
compile and maintain a complete record of the hearing and written comments.
   (c)   Request to waive formal amendment requirements. Whenever a proposed
amendment is deemed sufficiently insignificant by the village council, that
body may petition the commission for a waiver of formal hearing and notice
requirements.
   (d)   Coastal resources commission approval. Upon local acceptance of any
amendment, the amendment shall be submitted to the coastal resources commission
for approval. Upon coastal resources commission approval such amendment shall
be adopted by the village council as a part of the ordinances implementing this
division.
(Ord. No. 5, § 6, 1-27-1986)
Chapter 15
RESERVED
Chapter 16
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS*
*   Cross References: on possession, transportation and transfer of dangerous
weapons and substances, §
8-36; traffic and vehicles,
ch. 28.
   State Law References: criminal code, G.S. 14-1 et seq.
Article I. In General
Sec.
16-1. Designation for ABC Permit Recommendation.
Sec.
16-2. Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on Sunday mornings.
Secs. 16-3--16-30. Reserved.
Article II. Offenses Against Property
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 16-31--16-50. Reserved.
Division 2. Village Property
Sec.
16-51. Definitions.
Sec.
16-52. Penalty for violation.
Sec.
16-53. Removal prohibited; exception.
Sec.
16-54. Trespassing on shoreline stabilization structures prohibited.
Secs.16-55--16-80. Reserved.
Article III. Offenses Against the Public Safety
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
16-81. Pyrotechnics restricted.
Secs. 16-82--16-100. Reserved.
Division 2. Weapons
Sec.
16-101. Concealed handguns prohibited.
Sec.
16-102. Discharge of firearms prohibited.
Secs. 16-103--16-130. Reserved.
Article IV. Offenses Against the Public Peace
Division 1. Noise
Sec.
16-131.   Definitions.
Sec.
16-132.   Prohibited generally.
Sec.
16-133.   Specific prohibitions enumerated.
Sec.
16-134.   Exemptions.
Sec.
16-135.   Permits.
Sec.
16-136.   Enforcement and penalties.
Secs. 16-137 – 16-150. Reserved.
Division 2. False Alarms
Sec.
16-151. Definitions.
Sec.
16-152. Commercial alarm users.
Sec.
16-153. Notice to owner of false alarms; civil penalties.
Sec.
16-154. Appeals.
Division 3. Generally
Sec.
16-155. Helicopter landings.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 16-1. Designation for ABC permit recommendation.
   (a)   The director of public safety or any public safety officer that he or
she may designate is designated to make recommendations to the North Carolina
state ABC commission on behalf of the village concerning the suitability of a
person or of a location for an ABC permit when the proposed location is within
the village.
   (b)   The director of public safety or any public safety officer that he or
she may designate shall be authorized to seek access to SBI/DCI Criminal
history record information to obtain criminal history information on all
persons applying for ABC permits for proposed locations within the village.
(Ord. No. 2011-0401, 4-15-2011; Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013)
Sec. 16-2. Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages on Sunday mornings.
   The sale of malt beverages, unfortified wine, fortified wine, and mixed
beverages shall be allowed within the corporate limits of the village on Sunday
mornings beginning at 10:00 a.m. in any place that holds a permit issued
pursuant to G.S. 18B-1001. Except as provided herein, the hours of sale and
consumption of alcoholic beverages within the corporate limits of the village
shall be governed by state law, including, but not limited to, G.S. 18B-1004
and any subsequent amendments thereto.
(Ord. No. 2017-0701, 7-6-2017)
Secs. 16-3--16-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY*
*   State Law References: and other offenses to land and fixtures, G.S. 14-127
et seq.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Secs. 16-31--16-50. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
VILLAGE PROPERTY
Sec. 16-51. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Emergency flotation device means any lifesaving ring or float and any ropes
or attachments associated therewith distributed at points along the beaches of
the village for the rescue of endangered swimmers.
   Personal property means all tangible items of property which shall be
readily and immediately removable from their location and shall further include
such items as may be buried or fixed to the earth or screwed, hung or otherwise
attached to poles, posts or other support imbedded in the earth.
   Shoreline Stabilization Structures means those certain structures
constructed and maintained by the village at the marina entrance, at the beach
and adjacent waters for the purposes of navigation and reducing erosion on Bald
Head Island.
(Ord. No. 34, § 1, 9-19-1992; Ord. No. 2015-0901, 9-17-2015; Ord. No. 2017-
0801, 8-18-2017)
   Cross References: generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 16-52. Penalty for violation.
   Any person who shall violate this division shall be required to pay a civil
penalty in the amount of $250.00 pursuant to G.S. 160A-175. The civil penalty
shall be paid to the office of the village clerk within two regular business
days of issuance of the civil citation. Violation of this section shall be
exempt from prosecution pursuant to G.S. 14-4.
(Ord. No. 34, § 3, 9-19-1992; Ord. No. 2001-032, § 1, 10-26-2001; Ord. No.
2015-0901, 9-17-2015; Ord. No. 2017-0801, 8-18-2017)
Sec. 16-53. Removal prohibited; exception.
   It shall be unlawful for any individual to destroy, damage, deface or remove
from its designated location any item of personal property belonging to the
village, the item having been located at its designated site for purposes of
convenience and safety of the residents and guests of the village. It shall not
be unlawful to remove such item so long as the removal thereof is in accord
with the usage of the item for emergency purposes if the item of personal
property is an emergency flotation device and if the item shall in fact be used
and returned immediately upon completion thereof to its designated location.
Except as specified in this division, removal of such personal property shall
constitute a violation of this division, regardless of the intent to
permanently deprive the village of the possession thereof by the violator.
(Ord. No. 34, § 2, 9-19-1992)
Sec. 16-54.   Trespassing on shoreline stabilization structures prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for any person
to enter onto or remain on the shoreline stabilization structures for any
purpose, except as below provided in subsection (c).
   (b)   A conspicuous notice of the prohibition set out in subsection (a) of
this section shall be posted in a manner reasonably likely to come to the
attention of persons who are seeking to enter onto or remain on the structure.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to persons to whom the village has given
its consent to enter onto or remain on the structure, to persons who enter
thereon for emergency purposes, or to persons who are exempted under any
applicable state or federal law. Provided further, nothing in this section
shall be construed to prohibit public recreation or fishing on the wooden
walkway constructed for such purposes on the structure at the marina southern
bulkhead.
(Ord. No. 2015-0901, 9-17-2015; Ord. No. 2017-0801, 8-18-2017)
Secs. 16-55--16-80. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC SAFETY*
*   State Law References: against the public safety, G.S. 14-278 et seq.
DIVISION 1.
GENERALLY
Sec. 16-81. Pyrotechnics restricted.
   The possession and/or use within the confines of the village of pyrotechnics
by any individual except by special permit of the county is declared unlawful.
Violation of this section shall be a civil violation punishable by a civil fine
of $100.00. Any individual cited for violation of this section shall pay the
civil penalty at the office of the village clerk within 48 hours of the
issuance of the citation. In addition, violation of this section shall
constitute a class 3 misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00
and/or imprisonment pursuant to G.S. 14-4. Nothing in this section shall
prevent the village from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to
prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. No 41, § 1, 7-16-1994; Ord. No. 2001-036, § 1, 10-26-2001)
   State Law References: G.S. 14-410 et seq.
Secs. 16-82--16-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
WEAPONS*
*   State Law References: regulation, G.S. 14-409.39 et seq.; municipal
regulation of firearms, G.S. 160A-189.
Sec. 16-101. Concealed handguns prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry a concealed handgun for
which a permit has been issued pursuant to G.S. 14-415.11 into any village
owned or controlled building, or onto the appurtenant premises of such
building.
   (b)   A conspicuous notice of the prohibition set out in subsection (a) of
this section shall be posted on all village owned or controlled buildings.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to persons exempted under G.S. 14-269(b)
or any other applicable state or federal law.
   (d)   Violation of this section shall constitute a violation of G.S. 14-269
(a1) and shall be punishable pursuant to G.S. 14-269(c).
(Ord. No. 45, § 1, 1-27-1996; Ord. No. 2014-0402, 4-25-2014)
Sec. 16-102. Discharge of firearms prohibited.
   (a)   Pursuant to G.S. 160A-189, it shall be unlawful to discharge or cause
to be discharged or allow a minor child under the age of 16 to discharge any
type of firearm.
   (b)   Pursuant to G.S. 160A-190, it shall be unlawful to discharge or cause
to be discharged or allow a minor child under the age of 16 to discharge any
pellet gun, BB gun, or any other mechanism or device designed or used to
project a missile by compressed air or mechanical action with less than deadly
force.
   (c)   This section shall not apply to law enforcement personnel in the
performance of their duties. Further, this section shall not apply to any
individual who shall discharge a firearm within the village if such individual
shall have a permit issued therefor by the director of public safety pursuant
to a depredation permit issued by the North Carolina Division of Wildlife
Management to the village thereof if the discharge of such weapon shall be
pursuant to the terms and conditions of such permit.
   (d)   A violation of this section shall subject the person violating this
section to a civil fine in the amount of $50.00 per offense. Any individual
cited for a violation of this section shall pay the civil penalty at the office
of the village clerk within 48 hours of the issuance of the citation.
(Ord. No. 49, § 1, 4-19-1997; Ord. No. 2001-028, § 1, 10-26-2001; Ord. No.
2003-003, § 1, 2-5-2003; Ord. No. 2011-0402, 4-15-2011; Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-
17-2013)
Secs. 16-103--16-130. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE*
*   State Law References: against the public peace, G.S. 14-269 et seq.
DIVISION 1.
NOISE
Sec. 16-131. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Outdoor amplified sound means any sound using sound amplifying equipment
which is projected outside of a structure or vehicle whether the source of
sound is located inside or outside of a structure or vehicle and the sound is
projected to the outside by way of speakers, or through open doors, windows, or
other openings.
   Sound amplifying equipment means any device for the amplification of a human
voice, music, or any other sound of any kind. Sound amplifying equipment
includes, but is not limited to, jukeboxes, stereos and radios.
(Ord. No. 2012-0602, 6-15-2012; Ord. No. 2019-10-01, § 1, 2019)
Sec. 16-132. Prohibited generally.
   Subject to the provisions of this division, the creation of any unreasonably
loud and disturbing noise that would annoy, frighten, or disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of any reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities in the
vicinity is prohibited within the village. In determining whether a violation
of this section has occurred, the public safety department may take into
account the volume, duration, time, location, and other circumstances
surrounding the noise.
(Ord. No. 2012-0602, 6-15-2012; Ord. No. 2019-10-01, § 2, 2019)
Sec. 16-133. Specific prohibitions enumerated.
   The following activities, among others, are hereby declared unreasonably
loud and disturbing noises, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive:
   (1)   Continual yelling, shouting, or singing on the public streets or
private property to the extent it is disturbing or frightening to persons in
the vicinity.
   (2)   The playing of any musical instruments, whether the playing is done
with or without sound amplifying equipment in such a manner that the sound
level generated thereby unreasonably disturbs or frightens persons in the
vicinity where the musical instruments are being played.
   (3)   The playing of prerecorded music or other sound from jukeboxes,
stereos, radios, or other devices which results in outdoor sound, in a manner
that is unreasonably disturbing or frightening to persons in the vicinity where
the music is being played. Notwithstanding the foregoing, commercial
restaurants and facilities operated by private clubs, property owner's
associations, and not-for-profit/ tax exempt businesses are exempt from this
provision between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
   (4)   The keeping of any animal, including but not limited to a bird or dog,
which makes frequent or long continuing sounds, in a manner that is likely to
disturb persons in the vicinity outside the structure or property where the
animal sounds are generated.
   (5)   Operation or permitting the operation of any sound amplifying
equipment, in a fixed or movable position exterior to any residence. The use or
operation of any sound amplifying device located within or outside a residence
in a manner that disrupts or interferes unreasonably with an adjacent
residential property owner or resident's enjoyment of that property.
   (6)   The creation of unreasonably loud, disturbing sound levels adjacent to
a church or governmental office, during operating hours of such facility, which
does or is likely to interfere with the operation of such institution.
   (7)   The use of any sound amplifying equipment that projects outdoor
amplified sound for advertising or solicitation purposes, except with an
appropriate permit issued in accordance with this division.
(Ord. No. 2012-0602, 6-15-2012; Ord. No. 2019-10-01, § 3, 2019)
Sec. 16-134. Exemptions.
   Construction and maintenance activities shall not be in violation of this
division when performed weekdays during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. The
village manager or designee may extend this time in appropriate circumstances
for public necessity or other extenuating circumstance.
(Ord. No. 2012-0602, 6-15-2012)
Sec. 16-135. Permits.
   (a)   Persons wishing to engage in activities regulated by this division may
do so when a specific permit is approved by the village manager or designee.
Applications for such a permit shall be submitted on a form designated by the
village, and shall be submitted, except in case of emergency, at least 48 hours
prior to the event in question. Applications for such a permit shall include
the nature of the event, the time, place, and date of the event. In determining
whether to grant such a permit, the village manager or his designee shall take
into account the proposed volume, duration, time, location, and other
circumstances surrounding the proposed activities. A permit shall not be
unreasonably withheld, and may contain appropriate conditions, including limits
as to time, place, duration, decibel levels, and manner, designed to minimize
disruptive impact from noise generated. Permits for religious or political
purposes shall be granted, subject only to reasonable restrictions. Permits
issued under this section shall specify that the permission granted shall
continue for a stated period, or until revoked after actual notice by the
village manager or designee where the activities actually or imminently
threaten to cause material and substantial disruption to the community or
invasion of the rights of others. Persons shall not be held in violation of
this division when acting in conformity with a valid permit issued pursuant to
this division, but any permit may be revoked if the village manager or designee
determines the authorized activity has resulted in generation of unreasonably
loud or disturbing sound levels.
   (b)   In case an application for a permit under this subsection is denied or
a permit is granted with conditions unacceptable to the applicant, or a permit
is revoked, the applicant or permit holder may be entitled to a prompt but
informal appeal hearing before the village manager upon submission of a written
request. The decision of the village manager whether to grant an appeal hearing
or to reverse, modify, or uphold the challenged action shall be final.
   (c)   The permit fee for a permit issued pursuant to this section shall be
$25.00 and shall be paid to the village upon issuance of the permit.
(Ord. No. 2012-0602, 6-15-2012)
Sec. 16-136. Enforcement and penalties.
   Any public safety officer of the village who determines that probable cause
exists that any person has violated this division shall first issue an oral
order to comply with this division. Any person who fails to comply with this
division, after being given such an oral order and a reasonable time to comply
therewith, or any person who violates this division again within 30 days
following the receipt of such an oral order, shall be issued a civil citation
carrying a penalty in the amount of $50.00 pursuant to G.S. 160A-175, which
penalty shall be exempt from prosecution under G.S. 14-4. Once a public safety
officer issues an oral order to comply with this division to any person, the
public safety officer need not issue another oral warning to that person prior
to issuing a citation, provided that the violation occurs within 30 days of the
issuance of the oral order. The civil penalty shall be paid during regular
business hours at the office of the village clerk or online at the village
website within 48 hours of issuance of the civil citation.
(Ord. No. 2012-0602, 6-15-2012; Ord. No. 2019-10-01, § 4, 2019)
Secs. 16-137--16-150. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
FALSE ALARMS
Sec. 16-151. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Address means the mailing address of the owner as shown on the records of
the village tax administrator.
   Alarm company means any private individual or business entity that installs,
monitors, or services any alarm system within the village.
   Alarm system means any electronic or mechanical device transmitting an alarm
signal outside the location, intended to alert law enforcement personnel to an
actual or attempted unauthorized entry into a building or to the commission or
attempted commission of a crime or intended to alert fire or emergency medical
personnel to an actual or suspected fire or medical emergency. This definition
shall include, but not limited to, silent, audible and direct telephone dialer
alarms.
   Commercial alarm user means an owner or authorized representative of a
commercial structure who has access to a commercial structure.
   Excessive false alarm means any false alarm occurring during a period
beginning with the receipt of the notice of malfunction by any owner and ending
365 days thereafter.
   False alarm means an alarm signal indicating that an entry or other crime
was committed or attempted or that a fire or medical emergency exists when
evidence indicates, upon inspection after response to the alarm, that the alarm
was activated through the owner's negligence or equipment malfunction within
the control of the owner or alarm business operator. An alarm signal caused by
conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances or equipment
malfunction shall not be deemed a false alarm; provided that equipment
malfunction must be verified by the alarm company that monitors the alarm or an
alarm service technician.
   Notice of malfunction means that notice forwarded to the owner by the
director of public safety as required by section
16-153.
   Owner means the corporation, person, or other entity owning the real estate
on which is located any fire detection system that produces any false alarm.
(Ord. No. 2000-23, § 1, 10-21-2000; Ord. No. 2001-049, § 1, 11-17-2001; Ord.
No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013)
   Cross References: generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 16-152. Commercial alarm users.
   All commercial alarm users shall respond or cause a responsible
representative to respond to the alarm site within 30 minutes when notified by
officials. Each commercial alarm user shall furnish to the department of public
safety, in writing, the names and telephone number of at least one, but no more
than five persons authorized and able to deactivate the alarm system.
(Ord. No. 2001-049, § 5, 11-17-2001; Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013)
   State Law References: to regulate noise, G.S. 160A-184.
Sec. 16-153. Notice to owner of false alarms; civil penalties.
   (a)   The director of public safety shall note and keep an official register
of all responses to both monitored and unmonitored alarms by the department of
public safety. Upon the reporting of two false alarms within 12 months from any
single address, the director of public safety shall cause to be mailed to the
owner of such alarm system (in this division referred to as owner) by certified
mail, return receipt requested, a notice of malfunction:
      (1)   Informing the owner that the department of public safety has
received two false alarms; and
      (2)   Containing a warning that the occurrence of additional false alarms
to which the department of public safety shall respond occurring within the
next 365 days shall result in a civil penalty based on the following schedule:
 
1st additional false alarm . . . . .                     $ 50.00
2nd additional false alarm . . . . .                     75.00
3rd additional false alarm . . . . .                     100.00
4th additional false alarm . . . . .                     150.00
5th additional false alarm . . . . .                     200.00
6th additional false alarm . . . . .                     250.00
7th and each additional false alarm thereafter . . . . . 500.00
 
   The notice of malfunction shall be forwarded to the record owner at the
address shown on the records of the village tax administrator.
   (b)   Notice of assessment of a civil penalty shall be mailed by first class
mail to the owner at his address. If any civil penalty is not paid within ten
days of the date of mailing of such notice of assessment or the date on which
any appeal is determined adversely to the owner, whichever comes later, the
village may undertake a civil action to enforce the payment of such penalty. If
the village is required to undertake a civil action to enforce the payment of
such penalty, the defendant shall be liable for all costs incurred by the
village in the pursuit of such action. In addition to any civil sanctions
imposed in this section, violation of this division shall constitute a class 3
misdemeanor, punishable by imprisonment and/or fine not to exceed $500.00
Nothing contained in this division shall prevent the village from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. No. 2000-23, §§ 2,3, 10-21-2000; Ord. No. 2001-49, §§ 2,3, 11-17-2001;
Ord. No. 2013- 0501, 5-17-2013)
Sec. 16-154. Appeals.
   Any owner who has been assessed a civil penalty pursuant to section 16-153
may request, in writing, within ten days after mailing of the notice of
assessment of the civil penalty, an informal hearing with the director of
public safety. At such hearing, the owner must show that:
      (1)   Any false alarms for which he has been penalized were the result of
violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not
reasonably subject to owner's control; and
      (2)   The cause of such false alarm has been corrected or is not subject
to repetition. Upon such a showing the director of public safety may relieve
the owner of penalty arising therefrom. Any decision of the director of public
safety shall be mailed in writing to the owner at his address and the director
of public safety shall inform the village manager. The decision of the director
of public safety may be appealed to the village manager. In such case the
notice of appeal to the manager shall be in writing and shall be filed with the
manager within ten days of mailing of the final decision by the director of
public safety. The manager shall, upon receipt of the notice of appeal,
schedule a hearing on the matter within 30 days from the date of receipt
thereof. Appeal to the manager shall be de novo and the burden of proof shall
be on the owner to show by the preponderance of the evidence the above two
facts. The manager shall either uphold the civil penalty or strike the penalty.
The decision of the village manager regarding the penalty shall be final and
failure to perfect an appeal to the village manager within the time set forth
in this section shall constitute a waiver of the right of appeal.
(Ord. No. 2000-23, § 4, 10-21-2000; Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013)
DIVISION 3.
GENERALLY
Sec. 16-155. Helicopter landings.
   (a)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful, except for emergency landing
purposes, for any person to land a helicopter within the corporate limits of
the village without prior approval from the village manager, director of public
safety or their designee. This section shall not apply to the operation of a
helicopter at the village's request for rescue or medical transport purposes or
to a helicopter owned or operated by a state governmental unit or the
government of the United States for any valid public purpose.
   (b)   Penalties. Any person who shall violate this section shall be required
to pay a civil penalty in the amount of $1,500.00 pursuant to G.S. 160A-175.
The civil penalty shall be paid during regular business hours at the office of
the village clerk or online at the village website within 48 hours of issuance
of the civil citation.
(Ord. No. 2021-1002, § 1, 10-22-2021)
Chapter 17
RESERVED
Chapter 18
PARKS AND RECREATION*
*   Cross References:
ch. 10; streets, sidewalks and other public places,
ch. 24.
   State Law References: enabling law, G.S. 160A-350 et seq.
Article I. In General
Sec.
18-1. Personal watercraft safety.
Secs. 18-2--18-30. Reserved.
Article II. Creek Access
Sec.
18-31. Title.
Sec.
18-32. Authority.
Sec.
18-33. Jurisdiction.
Sec.
18-34. Purpose.
Sec.
18-35. Administration and penalties.
Sec.
18-36. General regulations.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 18-1. Personal watercraft safety.
   (a)   Definition. For purposes of this section, the term "personal
watercraft" shall be as defined in the G.S. 75A-13.3(a).
   (b)   Operator. The restrictions for operation of a personal watercraft
shall be as described in G.S. 75A-13.3(b), except that only persons at least 13
years of age but under 16 years of age may operate personal watercraft pursuant
to subparagraphs (1) and (2) of that statute.
   (c)   Speed. In all village waters, no person may operate a personal
watercraft in excess of an idle speed or a slow speed creating no appreciable
wake in the following areas:
      (1)   Within 50 feet of posted waterbird sanctuaries or management areas;
       (2)   Within 25 feet of the marsh or shore within the intracoastal
waterway.
      (3)   Within Bald Head Creek.
   (d)   Wildlife. In accordance with G.S. 113-291.1, it shall be unlawful for
an operator of a personal watercraft on the waters in the county to chase,
harass, molest, or disturb any wildlife except when lawfully angling for
hunting or trapping such wildlife.
   (e)   Sale. At the time of purchase, a dealer in personal watercraft shall
require the buyer of personal watercraft to receive instruction addressing safe
operation of the watercraft.
   (f)   Lease. A personal watercraft livery owner or the livery'sagent or
employee shall:
      (1)   Require positive identification from all renters;
      (2)   Post personal watercraft regulations:
      (3)   Require all renters to read the regulations;
      (4)   Require all renters to sign a rental contract, containing a clause
stating that the renter has read and understood all applicable safety
regulations; and
      (5)   Instruct all renters in the safe operation of the personal
watercraft.
   (g)   Penalties. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a class 3 misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than
$500.00 or imprisonment of not more than 20 days, in the discretion of the
court, as provided by G.S. 14-4.
(Ord. of 7-15-2000, § 1; Ord. No. 2011-0901, 9-16-2011)
Secs. 18-2--18-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
CREEK ACCESS
Sec. 18-31. Title.
   This article shall be known as the Village of Bald Head Island Creek Access
Ordinance, Bald Head Island, North Carolina.
(Ord. No. 52, art. I, 11-15-1997)
Sec. 18-32. Authority.
   The village hereby exercises its authority to adopt and enforce a creek
access ordinance pursuant to the authority granted to the village by G.S. 160A-
350 et seq.
(Ord. No. 52, art. II, 11-15-1997)
Sec. 18-33. Jurisdiction.
   This article shall govern the use of village-owned property at designated
creek access points lying within the municipal boundaries of the village,
specifically the property known as the Bald Head Island Creek Access.
(Ord. No. 52, art. III, 11-15-1997)
Sec. 18-34. Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to regulate the use of village-owned property
in a manner that encourages equitable use by all property owners in an effort
to ensure that recreational facilities are adequately maintained and utilized.
This article is designed to adhere to G.S. 160A-351, the declaration of state
policy, in which making available adequate recreational opportunities for
citizens is a subject of general interest, and a function requiring appropriate
action by local government. This article shall govern the use of the creek
access to further these goals. These regulations represent consideration of the
character of creek access points on the island and have been enacted with a
view of preserving the existing environment and/or ensuring the development of
a future environment that realizes the greatest possible use and enjoyment of
the creek access. In addition, this article seeks to provide a safe and
attractive recreational area for village property owners.
(Ord. No. 52, art. IV, 11-15-1997)
Sec. 18-35. Administration and penalties.
   (a)   Administration. The village manager shall be responsible for
administering the village creek access policy.
   (b)   Violations. Any failure to comply with a requirement, prohibition, or
limitation imposed by the provisions of this article, shall constitute a
violation of this article.
   (c)   Criminal penalties. Violation of the provisions of this article shall
constitute a class 3 misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment and/or fine not to
exceed $500.00, as specified by G. S. 14-4. Each day that the violation
continues to exist shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. Nothing
contained in this subsection shall prevent the village from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
   (d)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   In addition to other remedies cited in this article for the
enforcement of this article, violations of this article may subject the
offender to civil penalties as set forth in subsections (2), (3), and (4) of
this subsection (d). The village may recover this penalty by civil action if
not paid at the village offices within 48 hours of the issuance of any civil
citation. In addition, failure to pay the civil penalty within the 48-hour
period may subject the offender to criminal sanctions as set forth in
subsection (c)of this section.
      (2)   The following civil penalties are established for violations of
section
18-36(a), (b)and (d):
         a.   First violation: Warning citation
         b.   Second citation; each successive occurring within six months:
$300.00
   If violation has not been corrected within ten days after the first
citation, the subject property shall be determined to be abandoned and may be
seized and a fine will be assessed daily, until the violating party takes
corrective action.
      (3)   The following civil penalties shall be enforced for violations
other than those referenced above:
 
First citation . . . . .                         $ 50.00
Second citation for same offense . . . . .       100.00
Sequential violations for same offense . . . . . 100.00
 
   These civil penalties are in addition to any other penalties which may be
imposed by the court of law for violations of the provisions of this article.
      (4)   In addition to the foregoing enforcement provisions, this article
may be enforced by any remedy provided in G.S. 160A-175, including, but not
limited to, all appropriate equitable remedies issued from a court of competent
jurisdiction as provided in G.S. 160A-175(d)and particularly the remedy of
injunction and order of abatement as allowed by G.S. 160A-175(e).
   (e)   Abandoned vessels.
      (1)   If the violator fails to remove his vessel from the creek access
within the specified period of time allowed, the vessel will be determined to
be abandoned and the village may seize such abandoned vessels. The owner of any
vessel removed pursuant to this article from any property owned by the village
or any private property shall pay to the village all reasonable costs
incidental to the removal and storage of such vessel.
      (2)   Written notice of each removal of any abandoned vessel and of the
possible sale or disposition thereof shall be given as promptly as possible to
the owner thereof at the owner's last known address according to the latest
registration certificate or certificates of title on file with the state
division of motor vehicles or department of public safety and shall describe
the vessel, place of storage and procedure of recovery thereof. Notice need not
be given to the registered owner when the vessel does not display a license
plate or a valid registration certificate.
      (3)   Any time that an abandoned vessel shall be removed to a place of
storage, the village shall collect the current towing fee and a daily storage
fee. Any owner shall have the right to a hearing to determine whether the
vessel was abandoned within the village in order to contest the towing and/or
storage fees. The hearing shall be heard by the village manager who shall
determine by preponderance of the evidence as to whether the vessel was in fact
abandoned. The right of appeal from such decision shall be to the district
court for Brunswick County. At the conclusion of the hearing the village
manager shall render his decision; the decision shall be further reduced to
writing and forwarded to the owner or other individual seeking a hearing who
shall be entitled to appeal the decision to the district court for Brunswick
County by giving due notice of appeal within ten days of the date that such
notice shall have been mailed to the individual appealing. Pending any hearing
or appeal pursuant to this article, the owner or other individual may obtain a
release of the vessel at any time after the towing and/or storage fees are paid
or by posting a bond with the village in the form of cash in the amount of the
towing and/or storage fees. Unless the cash bond shall be paid, storage fees
shall continue to accrue pending resolution of the appeal.
      (4)   If an abandoned vessel is worth $100.00 or more and should the
owner thereof refuse to pay the costs referenced in this section or should the
identity or the whereabouts ofsuch owner be unknown and unascertainable after a
diligent search, it shall, after being held by the village for 30 days and
after seven days advertisement in a local newspaper and after 20 days' written
notice to the registered owner at the last known address, if his identity is
known, and to the holders of any liens of record against the vessel and to the
state division of motor vehicles, be sold by the director of public safety or
his designee at public auction; provided, however, that any person having an
interest in the vessel may redeem it at any time prior to the sale by paying
all costs accrued to date. Such costs shall include advertisement fees.
(Ord. No. 52, art. VI, 11-15-1997; Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013)
Sec. 18-36. General regulations.
   (a)   Storage facilities. The village creek access, located at 109 North
Bald Head Wynd (the “Access”), is equipped with storage facilities for canoes,
kayaks, and small Jon boats. Use of such storage facilities is limited to those
types of vessels and any trailers designed to store or transport said vessels.
Property owners wanting to utilize the storage facilities may purchase a permit
from the village at the currently required rate to be renewed annually at a
cost to be determined by the village council. The amounts of such fees are on
file and available in the clerk's office. These registration permits shall be
nontransferable. Storage for such vessels and trailers shall be made available
on a first come, first serve basis. The village manager may make provisions to
utilize the available storage area in the most effective manner, while
preserving the aesthetic beauty of the Access. These permits shall be made
available to the public on January 1 of each year, or the first working day
thereafter. No vessel or trailer shall be stored at the facility without having
affixed thereto a valid permit. Notwithstanding the non-transferable nature of
the registration permits, property owners with a valid permit to utilize the
storage facilities at the Access may transfer the permit rights to another
vessel of the same type owned by the property owner and obtain a new permit.
The rights and duration of the prior permit shall apply to the new permit and
the prior permit shall be cancelled. The transfer shall require payment to the
village of a transfer administration fee as set forth on the then-current fee
schedule set by the village manager from time to time and maintained at Village
Hall. The initial transfer fee shall be $50.00 for a vessel and trailer and
$25.00 for a kayak, canoe or similar small vessel. Different fees may apply to
different types of vessels and/or trailers.
   (b)   Parking areas. The access is intended to allow daily use of the
facilities, with parking spaces for boat trailers. The parking facilities shall
be limited to daytime use. Overnight storage of trailers or boats shall require
a permit pursuant to section
18-36(a).
   (c)   Size limitations/restrictions. Use of the Access shall be limited to
boats under 17 feet in length with motors smaller than 75 horsepower. The
launching of boats with larger motors shall be prohibited.
   (d)   Mooring of vessels. No person shall allow a boat or vessel owned by,
registered in his name or under his control to be moored at the Access
overnight.
   (e)   Prohibited activities. In addition to other prohibited activities
listed elsewhere in this article, the following activities are hereby
prohibited on or at the Access:
      (1)   Littering;
      (2)   Use of crabpots;
      (3)   Cooking, except for cooking in village installed permanent grills;
      (4)   Cleaning of fish or shellfish;
      (5)   Consumption of alcoholic beverages;
      (6)   Blocking of Access boat ramp or parking areas;
      (7)   Launching of jet skis.
Signs stating the prohibitions enacted in this section shall be posted at the
Access, notifying the public of their restriction.
(Ord. No. 52, art. V, 11-15-1997; Ord. No. 2001-011, § 1, 5-19-2001; Ord. No.
2011-1202, 12-16-2011; Ord. No. 2013-0601, 6-19-2013; Ord. No. 2022-1202, 12-
16-2022)
Chapter 19
RESERVED
Chapter 20
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT*
*   Cross References: and building regulations,
ch. 6; environment,
ch. 10; utilities,
ch. 30.
   State Law References: G.S. 14-399; littering or discharge of sewage in
waters and lakes, G.S. 75A-10; solid waste management, G.S. 130A-290 et seq.;
authority to regulate the disposal of solid wastes, G.S. 160A-303.1.
Article I. In General
Sec.
20-1. Littering.
Sec.
20-2. On-Island mulch production.
Secs. 20-3--20-30. Reserved.
Article II. Collection and Disposal
Sec.
20-31. Definition.
Sec.
20-32. Removal required.
Sec.
20-33. General requirements.
Sec.
20-34. Residential requirements.
Sec.
20-35. Commercial requirements.
Sec.
20-36. Pickup of major discarded items and yard debris.
Sec.
20-37. Regular solid waste collection.
Sec.
20-38. Special events.
Sec.
20-39. Signs.
Sec.
20-40. Authority to regulate.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 20-1. Littering.
   (a)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Litter means any rubbish, waste material, cans, refuse, garbage, trash,
debris or discarded material of every kind and description.
   Watercraft means any boat or vessel, whether motorized or not, used for
transport upon or across the water.
   (b)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization or
corporation to carelessly, recklessly, or intentionally throw, scatter, spill,
or place or carelessly, recklessly, or intentionally permit to be blown,
scattered, spilled, thrown or placed or otherwise disposed of any litter upon
any public property or private property not owned by that person within the
corporate limits or in the waters or marshlands located within the corporate
limits of the village, including but not limited to all public highways, public
parks, beaches, campgrounds, marshlands, roads, streets, alleys or waterways,
except in such instances as the litter shall be deposited into litter
receptacles in such a manner that the litter deposited therein shall be
prevented from being carried away or deposited by the elements upon any part of
such private or public property or waters.
   (c)   Vehicles and watercraft. When litter is carelessly, recklessly, or
intentionally thrown, scattered, spilled or placed or carelessly, recklessly,
or intentionally caused to be blown, scattered, spilled, thrown or placed from
any vehicle or watercraft, the operator thereof shall be presumed to have
committed such offense.
   (d)    Violation and penalty. Any person who violates this section shall be
subject to a civil citation carrying a penalty in the amount of $500.00 per
offense pursuant to G.S. 160A-175, which penalty shall be exempt from
prosecution under G.S. 14-4. The civil penalty shall be paid during regular
business hours at the office of the Village Clerk or online at the village
website within 48 hours of issuance of the civil citation. The village reserves
the right to seek an appropriate equitable remedy to abate a violation of this
section from a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 21A, § 1, 2-20-1998; Ord. No. 2001-026, § 1, 10-26-2001; Ord. No.
2021-0801, § 1, 8-20-2021)
Sec. 20-2. On-Island mulch production.
   Production of mulch on-Island. The Timber Creek Mulch Site was founded to
provide on-Island production of mulching material made from indigenous
vegetation.
   Disposal of yard debris/pick-up of mulch. To facilitate the adequate
availability of Island-produced mulch, all reasonable efforts should be made to
encourage the use of the Timber Creek Mulch Site. Thus, there will be no cost
associated with drop-off of yard debris at or pick up of mulch from the Timber
Creek Mulch Site. Notwithstanding the foregoing, there may be a charge for
load-out of large quantities of mulch from the Mulch Site, as set by the
schedule of fees maintained by the Village at Village Hall.
   Violation of Ordinance. Any person dumping yard debris in an unauthorized
area is subject to a fine of $500.00 for each offense and the civil penalty
will be payable to the Village Clerk within seventy-two (72) hours of the
offense. Each incident will be considered a separate violation.
(Ord. No. 2018-0604, 6-27-2018)
Secs. 20-3--20-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL*
*   State Law References: to regulate solid waste collection, G.S. 130A-309.
Sec. 20-31. Definition.
   The following, words terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Solid waste means all animal, fruit and vegetable matter; tin can; glassware
and crockery in which such matter has been stored and discarded from a kitchen
and all rags, papers and discarded refuse properly compacted, except building
materials, wood scraps and tree or plant trimmings.
(Ord. No. 17A, § I, 7-13-1998)
   Cross References: generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 20-32. Removal required.
   Any solid waste that shall be a menace to public health and safety shall not
be allowed to remain in any dwelling unit, restaurant, store, or other
building, or on any premises, longer than reasonably necessary to remove and
deposit in a container, properly shielded from view and protected from prowling
animals.
(Ord. No. 17A, § II, 7-13-1998)
Sec. 20-33. General requirements.
   (a)   The occupant of each building, premises, or place where solid waste
may be generated or exist, shall provide for himself a garbage container made
of a nonrusting material in which he shall deposit all solid waste.
   (b)   All garbage containers shall be placed in a location that can be
conveniently served by the sanitation worker.
   (c)   No garbage container shall be placed, or left on any public street for
any purpose except for those serving the designated beach access points and
street intersections.
   (d)   All garbage containers shall be kept reasonably clean and in an
animalproof enclosure with a lid and door opening for access.
(Ord. No. 17A, § III, 7-13-1998)
Sec. 20-34. Residential requirements.
   In order to receive solid waste collection at any residential structure the
following requirements shall be met:
      (1)   All garbage containers shall be a size not to exceed a holding
capacity of 33 gallons and shall be provided with handles and a tightfitting
cover, made of the same material as the container, and shall be watertight. All
garbage containers will be kept in an animalproof enclosure.
      (2)   Owners of dwelling units of up to four bedrooms shall provide a
minimum of two garbage containers of no more than 33 gallons holding capacity
for their units. For every dwelling unit with more than four bedrooms, the
owner shall provide one additional 33-gallon container for every two bedrooms,
or portion thereof.
      (3)   The owner or agency acting for the owner will be responsible for
keeping the garbage enclosure clean and free of overflow solid waste.
      (4)   All cardboard boxes shall be flattened to reduce volume of the
solid waste items.
      (5)   The garbage can enclosure shall be made animalproof by lining with
hardware cloth or some other acceptable method.
(Ord. No. 17A, § IV, 7-13-1998)
Sec. 20-35. Commercial requirements.
   In order to receive solid waste collection at any commercial establishment
the following requirements shall be met:
      (1)   The occupants of each building engaged in commercial activities,
shall be required to provide solid waste collection services at the expense of
the owner. All cardboard boxes shall be flattened to require less space in this
container.
      (2)   All restaurants must place their container on a concrete slab with
proper drainage to meet the regulations of the county health department. The
area around the container must be kept clean at all times.
      (3)   The village and its contractors shall not be responsible for
commercial pickup.
(Ord. No. 17A, § V, 7-13-1998)
Sec. 20-36. Pickup of major discarded items and yard debris.
   (a)   Major discarded items. Major discarded items such as appliances,
furniture or scrapped vehicles cannot be handled in regular garbage pick-up.
Property owners must arrange for the removal of major discard items at their
own expense. The placing or leaving of such articles along the streets is
forbidden and each day, or portion of a day, that said articles are placed or
left constitutes a separate violation.
   (b)   Yard debris. The public works unit will provide mulching or removal
services for yard debris on a schedule to be determined by the director. This
service will be provided with the following limitations:
      (1)   Arrangements must be made in advance with the public works unit.
      (2)   Only yard debris generated by the owner as part of the maintenance
of the property will be processed. Mulch will be left at the residence unless
otherwise specified.
      (3)   Yard debris is to be left in an accessible place adjacent to the
road, but not impeding access on the road.
      (4)   No yard debris in excess of six inches in diameter will be
processed.
      (5)   This service will not be provided for large quantities of debris
generated by clearing a property for sale or construction, whether to work is
carried out by the owner or by a contractor.
      (6)   In all cases in which debris is generated by a contractor, the
village will not be responsible for the removal of the waste generated.
(Ord. No. 2007-0401, 4-20-2007; Ord. No. 2021- 0801, § 2, 8-20-2021)
   Editors Note: No. 2007-0401, adopted Apr. 20, 2007, repealed §
20-36, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out.
Prior to amendment, §
20-36 pertained to pickup of major discarded items. See Code Comparative Table
for derivation.
Sec. 20-37. Regular solid waste collection.
   (a)   Regular solid waste collection from Labor Day to Memorial Day shall be
scheduled for one day each week. From Memorial Day through Labor Day (rental
season), there will be two scheduled pickups each week. Any additional pickups
of solid waste requested beyond the regular scheduled pickup, including rental
agent requests, shall be the responsibility of the owner and may be obtained by
contacting the village solid waste contractor.
   (b)   Solid waste will not be picked up if the provisions of this article
are not followed.
(Ord. No. 17A, § VII, 7-13-1998)
Sec. 20-38. Special events.
   Persons responsible for planning special events, such as fund raising
cookouts, and other events, where solid waste is generated, shall contact the
village solid waste contractor at least 96 hours prior to the event, to arrange
for collection of solid waste, and add that cost to the sponsors overall event
expenditures.
(Ord. No. 17A, § VIII, 7-13-1998)
Sec. 20-39. Signs.
   A sign designated "yes" prominently displayed will indicate to the
sanitation worker that there is solid waste in the container that needs to be
picked up. A sign designated "no" or the lack of a sign will indicate to the
collector that there is no solid waste to be picked up and will save his time
in stopping. The village shall furnish one sign for each unit. Lost signs can
be replaced at the currently required cost, such cost to be set from time to
time and shall be available for review at the clerk's office.
(Ord. No. 17A, § IX, 7-13-1998)
Sec. 20-40. Authority to regulate.
   Any person who violates this article shall be subject to a civil citation
carrying a penalty in the amount of $500.00 per offense pursuant to G.S. 160A-
175, which penalty shall be exempt from prosecution under G.S. 14-4. The civil
penalty shall be paid during regular business hours at the office of the
village clerk or online at the village website within 48 hours of issuance of
the civil citation. The village reserves the right to seek an appropriate
equitable remedy to abate a violation of this article from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 17A, § X, 7-13-1998; Ord. No. 2001-021, § 1, 10-26-2001; Ord. No.
2021-0801, § 3, 8-20-2021)
Chapter 21
RESERVED
Chapter 22
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT*
*   Cross References: and building regulations,
ch. 6; environment,
ch. 10; utilities,
ch. 30.
   State Law References—Authority to enact and enforce erosion and
sedimentation control, G.S. 160A-458, floodway regulations, G.S. 160A-458.1 and
stormwater regulations, G.S. 160A.459.
Sec.
22-1. Title.
Sec.
22-2. Goals and purposes.
Sec.
22-3. Definitions.
Sec.
22-4. Scope.
Sec.
22-5. Right of entry.
Sec.
22-6. Penalty for violation of chapter.
Sec.
22-7. Appeals.
Sec.
22-8. Injunctive relief.
Sec.
22-9. General requirements.
Sec.
22-10. Summary of state regulations.
Sec.
22-11. Mandatory standards for existing development.
Sec.
22-12. Mandatory standards for new developments.
Sec.
22-13. Mandatory standards for construction activities.
Sec.
22-14. Mandatory standards for public education.
Sec.
22-15. Notice of private stormwater pumping.
Sec.
22-16. Suspension of private stormwater management activities and drainage
access.
Sec. 22-17—22.18.   Reserved.
Appendix A.   A citizen's guide to identifying and reporting pollution
problems.
Appendix B.   A citizen's guide to improving water quality on the village.
Sec. 22-1. Title.
   This chapter may be cited as the "Village of Bald Head Island Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
(Ord. of 5-20-2000, § 1; Ord. No. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016)
Sec. 22-2. Goals and purposes.
   The central environmental goals of the village are to restore and preserve
water quality and the natural ecological functions of the surface waters and
groundwaters that are included in its planning area and to reduce the potential
for flooding residential areas. In order to meet these important goals, the
village adopts this chapter to:
   (1)   Regulate existing developments, new developments, and construction
activities in accordance with state requirements and institute additional
mandatory requirements to prevent careless pollution of surface waters and
groundwater and the creation of additional floodprone areas.
   (2)   Establish the authority of the village to administer and enforce
stormwater regulations.
   (3)   Create public education programs so that the citizens of the village
will have knowledge of how to reduce and prevent pollution from their homes and
businesses.
(Ord. of 5-20-2000, § 2; Ord. No. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016)
Sec. 22-3. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Area of environmental concern (AEC) means an area identified by the state
Coastal Resources Commission as environmentally fragile and economically
important where uncontrolled or incompatible development could result in
irreversible damage.
   Built-upon area means that portion of an individual development project that
is covered by impervious or partially impervious cover includingbuildings,
pavement, compacted soil including coquina and marl, recreation facilities,
gravel roadsand parking areas, etc. Wood slatted decks and the water area of a
swimming pool are not considered to be built-upon area.
   CAMA means the Coastal Area Management Act which was adopted by North
Carolina in 1974. The Act established a comprehensive regional resource
management program for the state's 20-county coastal area. The management
program that has evolved since 1974 in North Carolina has land use planning,
regulatory, land acquisition, and policy development components.
   CAMA major development permit means the permit required by the Coastal
Resources Commission for developments that infringe on areas of environmental
concern.
   Coastal wetland means any salt marsh or other marsh subject to regular or
occasional flooding by tides, including wind tides, whether or not the tide
waters reach the marshland areas through natural or artificial watercourses,
provided this shall not include hurricane or tropical storm tides. Coastal
wetlands contain some, but not necessarily all, of ten indigenous wetland plant
species. Included in this definition of coastal wetlands is such contiguous
land as the Secretary of the Department of Environment Quality (DEQ) reasonably
deems necessary to affect any such order in carrying out the purposes of the
regulations. (G.S. 113-230(a)).
   Development means any land disturbing activity which increases the amount of
built-upon area or which otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation
into the soil.
   Erosion means the wearing away of land surface by the action of wind, water,
gravity, or any combination thereof.
   Erosion and sediment control plan means a plan required by the Division of
Energy, Mineral, and Land Resources in which developers must describe the
sedimentation and erosion control devices they will use for land disturbing
activities that disturb one acre or greater.
   Estuarine shoreline means a non-ocean shoreline connected to estuarine
waters which are especially vulnerable to erosion, flooding, and other adverse
effects of wind, water and gravity. Estuarine shorelines extend from the mean
high water level in areas of tidal influence or normal water level in areas
without tidal influence along the estuaries, sounds, bays, and brackish waters
for a distance of 75 feet landward unless otherwise set by the Coastal
Resources Commission.
   Estuarine waters means all the water of the Atlantic Ocean within the
boundary of the state and all the waters of the bays, sounds, rivers, and
tributaries thereto seaward of the dividing line between coastal fishing
waters, as set forth in the most recent official published agreement adopted by
the Wildlife Resources Commission and the DEQ.
   Existing development means any land which has been utilized for a land
disturbing activity as of the effective date of Ord. No. 2016-1202.
   Groundwater means the subsurface water that occurs beneath the water table
in soils and geologic formations that are fully saturated.
   Infiltration system means a stormwater treatment system designed to allow
runoff to pass or move (infiltrate) into the soil.
   Land disturbing activity means any use of the land by any person in
residential, industrial, educational, institutional or commercial development,
highway and road construction and maintenance that results in a change in the
natural cover or topography and that may cause or contribute to sedimentation.
   New development means any land which is utilized for a land disturbing
activity after the effective date of Ord. No. 2016-1202, and includes any
rebuilding or other development that increases the built-upon area of an
existing development.
   NCAC means North Carolina Administrative Code.
   North Carolina Coastal Resources Commission means the state policy-making
organization with responsibility for the coastal region.
   Ocean hazard area means an area where there exists a substantial possibility
of excessive erosion and shoreline fluctuation. The seaward limit of this
boundary is the mean low water line.
   Redevelopment means any rebuilding activity which has no net increase in
built-upon area or which provides equal or greater stormwater control than the
previous development.
   Sedimentation means the deposition of solid material, both mineral and
organic, that has been transported from its site of origin by wind, water, or
gravity.
   State certification means one or more of the following documents: a CAMA
permit application and accompanying CAMA permit from the Division of Coastal
Management, a stormwater certification or permit, as required, from the
Division of Energy, Mineral, and Land Resources, and/or an erosion and sediment
control plan that has been approved by the Division of Energy, Mineral, and
Land Resources.
   Stormwater means the flow of water which results from precipitation and
which occurs immediately following rainfall or a snowmelt.
   Surface waters means rivers, streams, creeks, channels, lakes, reservoirs,
ponds, drainage systems, springs, wetlands, wells, the Intracoastal Waterway,
the Atlantic Ocean, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or
artificial, lying within or forming part of the boundaries of the village. This
term excludes privately owned ponds which have no entry or exit of water to or
from waters of public domain.
   Vegetative filter means an area of natural or planted vegetation through
which stormwater flows in a diffuse manner so that runoff does not become
channelized and which provides for control of stormwater runoff through
infiltration of runoff and filtering of pollutants. The defined length of the
filter shall be provided for the direction of stormwater flow.
   Wet detention pond means a structure that provides for storage and treatment
of runoff and includes a permanent pool of water.
(Ord. of 5-20-2000, § 3; Ord. No. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016)
   Cross References: generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 22-4. Scope.
   This chapter shall apply to the following entities within the jurisdiction
of the village:
   (1)   All property owners, regardless of their previous practices and
including new development, shall be subject to the regulations listed under
section
22-11, mandatory standards for existing development.
   (2)   All new developments shall be subject to the regulations listed under
section
22-12, mandatory standards for new developments.
   (3)   All construction activities, whether for new development or
improvements on existing developments, shall be subject to the regulations
listed under section
22-13, mandatory standards for construction activities.
   (4)   The village will make efforts to educate the public regarding
stormwater management in accordance with section
22-14.
(Ord. of 5-20-2000, § 4; Ord. No. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016)
Sec. 22-5. Right of entry.
   (a)   The village shall have the power and authority to conduct inspections
as may be reasonably necessary to carry out its duties pursuant to this chapter
and to enforce the terms of this chapter. When necessary to carry out the
village's duties pursuant to this chapter or to enforce the terms of this
chapter, the designated representatives of the village may enter at reasonable
times upon public or private property for the purpose of inspection. All
persons owning real estate within the village shall allow the designated
representative of the village to inspect such real estate to determine
compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter. No person shall
refuse access to the designated representative of the village nor shall any
person interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying
out his duties for the village at reasonable times. Any person who obtains a
building permit, zoning permit, approval of a land use plan, subdivision
approval or other development approval or permit, or which discharges into the
village's stormwater system or surface waters, hereby consents to and gives
permission to the designated representatives of the village to inspect their
premises for compliance with the terms of this chapter.
   (b)   If it is determined that a person has failed to comply with this
chapter, a notice of violation shall be served upon that person by registered
or certified mail or other reasonable means to give actual notice. The notice
shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and
specify a reasonable time period within which such measures must be completed.
The notice will warn that failure to correct the violation within the time
period will result in the assessment of a civil penalty or other enforcement
action. If the person in violation of this chapter fails to comply within the
time specified, enforcement action will be initiated.
(Ord. of 5-20-2000, § 11; Ord. No. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016)
Sec. 22-6. Penalty for violation of chapter.
   A violation of this chapter shall subject the offender to a civil fine in
the amount of $500.00 for each offense and any continuing violation thereof
shall be deemed a separate offense for each day during or on which the
violation shall continue. Any civil fine shall be paid at the office of the
village clerk within 48 hours of issuance of a civil citation. Nothing herein
shall prevent the village from taking such other lawful action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. of 5-20-2000, § 13; Ord. No. 2001-033, § 1, 10-26-2001; Ord. No. 2011-
0402, 4-15-2011; Ord. No. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016)
Sec. 22-7. Appeals.
   (a)    Any person who is found in violation of the requirements listed under
section
22-11,
22-12, or
22-13 may appeal by submitting a written explanation of the appeal to the
stormwater appeals board within 30 days of the date of the notification of the
fee. The appeals board shall consist of the current members of the village
planning board. This board shall render a decision on the appeal in writing
within 30 days after the receipt of the written appeal.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the stormwater appeals board, or any
taxpayer, officer, department or board of the village may present to a court of
competent jurisdiction a petition, duly verified, setting forth that the
decision is illegal and requesting review.
   (b)   Any citizen or developer who is found in violation of the requirements
listed under section
22-11 or
22-12, may appeal by filing a written explanation of the appeal with the
appropriate state agency within 30 days of the date of the notification of the
fee.
(Ord. of 5-20-2000, § 12; Ord. No. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016; Ord. No. 2021-0607, §
2, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 22-8. Injunctive relief.
   This chapter may also be enforced by appropriate equitable remedy issuing
from a court of competent jurisdiction. The general court of justiceshall have
jurisdiction to issue such orders as may be appropriate to enforce the terms of
this chapter. Upon a finding by the court of competent jurisdiction that a
violation is occurring or is threatened, it shall enter such orders or
judgments as are necessary to abate the violations or to prevent the threatened
violations of this chapter. The institution of an action for injunctive relief
under this section shall not relieve any party from any civil or criminal
penalty prescribed for violations of this chapter.
(Ord. of 5-20-2000, § 14; Ord. No. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016)
Sec. 22-9. General requirements.
   (a)   All visitors, residents, business owners, developers, and others who
utilize the resources of the village shall take all reasonable measures to
protect surface waters and groundwaters from damage resulting from their
activities.
   (b)    Whenever conflicts exist between federal, state, or local laws and
this chapter, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
   (c)    Any penalties imposed by the village shall be in addition to the
penalties imposed by the state or county.
(Ord. of 5-20-2000, § 5; Ord. No. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016)
Sec. 22-10. Summary of state regulations.
   The responsibility for administering the state's stormwater regulations is
shared by two divisions of the DEQ. These divisions are the Division of Coastal
Management and the Division of Energy, Mineral, and Land Resources.
   (1)   The Division of Coastal Management administers the Coastal Area
Management Act (CAMA). CAMA's goal is to protect areas of environmental concern
(AEC), which are fragile areas where incompatible development may result in
irreversible damage. CAMA identifies four broad categories of AEC's: estuarine
systems, ocean hazard areas, public water supplies, and natural and cultural
resource areas. Within these broad categories, there are 14 subcategories. The
subcategories that are most applicable to the village are: coastal wetlands,
estuarine waters, estuarine shorelines, public trust areas, ocean erodible
areas, high hazard flood areas, inlet hazard flood areas, and unvegetated beach
areas. Any structure to be built in an AEC must be permitted by the Division of
Coastal Management and must meet use standards adopted under CAMA and provided
in l5A NCAC 7H .0208. For a development in an AEC to be approved, it must be
water-dependent and must minimize impacts to the area's soil and ecology. Some
examples of water-dependent uses include bulkheads, piers, and marinas.
   (2)   The Division of Energy, Mineral, and Land Resources administers the
Sedimentation Pollution Control Act. This Act requires developers to prepare
erosion and sediment control plans for developments that disturb one acre or
larger. The plan must describe the temporary and permanent control measures the
developer will use to prevent accelerated erosion and off-site sedimentation.
Erosion and sediment control plans must meet certain site performance
standards, including restabilization of construction sites within a reasonable
time period, maintenance of a buffer along any natural watercourse or lake, and
protection from certain storm intensities. This Act gives local agencies the
authority to inspect land disturbing activities and to prosecute violators.
         The Division of Energy, Mineral, and Land Resources also administers
the state stormwater management program set froth in 15A NCAC 2H 1000 et seq.
This section of the administrative code regulates the density of developments
and mandates standards for engineered stormwater controls. The regulations
include requirements for non- residential developments with built-upon area of
more than 10,000 square feet, along with any development that requires a CAMA
major permit.
(Ord. of 5-20-2000, § 6; Ord. No. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016)
Sec. 22-11. Mandatory standards for existing development.
   (a)    No landscaping using impervious materials such as solid plastic and
vinyl that have a substantial or material impact on water percolation into the
soil, will be permitted. Property owners must remove any such materials
installed after May 20, 2000. Failure to comply within 30 days of notification
is subject to a fine of $50.00 for each incident and day of violation as well
as any and all costs of removal.
   (b)    Yard wastes, including dredge spoil, leaves, and yard trimmings, may
not be deposited into surface waters. Acceptable management practices for yard
wastes include composting and land filling. Persons who deposit yard wastes
into surface waters are subject to a fine of $200.00 for each incident of
violation as well as any and all costs of removal, cleanup and remediation.
   (c)    Septic systems must be pumped and maintained on a regular basis
according to local regulations to prevent contaminated wastewater from
discharging to surface waters. Owners of systems that are found to be
discharging to surface waters will be given seven calendar days to correct such
conditions. Property owners who fail to comply following this seven-day period
will be subject to a fine of $200.00 for each incident and day of violation as
well as any and all costs of cleanup and remediation.
   (d)    Hazardous compounds must not be discharged to a septic system. Such
compounds include but are not limited to paint, paint thinner, solvents,
pesticides, and petroleum products. Persons who discharge these hazardous
substances into septic systems are subject to a fine of $200.00 for each
incident of violation as well as any and all costs of removal, cleanup, and
remediation.
   (e)    All label directions must be followed so that fertilizers and
pesticides are mixed and applied correctly and at the proper time. The label is
a legal document. Persons who incorrectly mix or apply chemicals are subject to
a fine of $200.00 for each incident of violation as well as any and all costs
of removal, cleanup, and remediation.
   (f)    Chemicals on both commercial and residential property must be stored
in properly built and maintained storage facilities. Persons who do not store
chemicals safely will be given seven calendar days to correct such conditions.
Failure to comply following this seven-day period will be subject to a fine of
$200.00 for each incident and day of violation as well as any and all costs of
removal, cleanup, and remediation.
   (g)    Illegal discharges degrade water quality and are strictly prohibited.
The following direct discharges resulting from the improper disposal of such
materials into surface waters are unlawful. Violators will be subject to a fine
of $200.00 for each incident and day of violation as well as any and all costs
of removal, cleanup, and remediation.
      (1)   Sewage or biosolids.
      (2)   Polluted household wastewater, including but not limited to laundry
wash water and dishwater.
      (3)   Leaking sanitary sewers and connections which have remained
uncorrected for three days or more after seven days' notice.
      (4)   Leaking water lines with flows sufficient to cause soil erosion
which have remained uncorrected for three days or more after seven days'
notice.
      (5)   Commercial, industrial, or public vehicle, vessel, or equipment
wash discharge.
      (6)   Solid, chemical, or sanitary waste.
      (7)   Dead terrestrial animals or animal fecal waste.
      (8)   Petroleum products or derivatives thereof.
      (9)   Wrecked or discarded vehicles or equipment.
      (10)   Trash, refuse, or garbage.
(Ord. of 5-20-2000, § 7; Ord. No. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016)
Sec. 22-12. Mandatory standards for new developments.
   Persons who fail to comply with these regulations after they have received
notice from the village will be subject to a $500.00 fine for each violation
and other actions or penalties as may be authorized by the village.
   (1)   Developments that require state certification.
      a.   For developments that are one acre or larger and for non-residential
developments with a built-upon area or more than 10,000 square feet, the state
will require a stormwater certification or permit from the Division of Energy,
Mineral, and Land Resources. The developer must submit a copy of the stormwater
certification or permit to the village manager.
      b.   The Division of Water Quality may require a wetland 401 water
quality certification and/or a dredge and fill permit. If so, the developer
must submit copies of the permit application and the permit to the village
manager.
      c.   Developments that infringe upon state-defined areas of environmental
concern (AEC) will require either a CAMA major from the Division of Coastal
Management or a CAMA minor permit from the village manager. If a CAMA major
permit is required, then the developer must submit a copy of the permit
application and the approved permit to the village manager.
   (2)   Developments that do not require state certification. A development
which disturbs less than one acre, with a built-upon area of 10,000 square feet
or less for non- residential development, and does not infringe upon any state-
defined areas of environmental concern will usually not require state
certification. However, such developments will be subject to the following
requirements:
      a.   All requirements set forth in section
22-11 of this chapter.
      b.   When it is feasible, lots which are adjacent to waterways should be
graded so that they drain away from the waterway. Bulkheads that have received
the necessary approvals may be installed to accomplish this.
      c.   Direct outlet channels to surface waters are prohibited, except
discharging of stormwater ponding by persons or entities permitted by the state
or federal government and approved by the village will be allowed.
   (3)   Village requirements.
      a.   The village manager and the village building inspector have the
authority to monitor development projects to ensure that developers comply with
the state permits mentioned in this section. The village shall also have the
authority to levy fines when the state permits have been violated.
      b.   The developer must submit a signed and notarized operation and
maintenance plan or manual for stormwater systems, indicating what operation
and maintenance actions are needed, what specific quantitative criteria will be
used for determining when those actions are to be taken, and who is responsible
for those actions to the village manager.
      c.   Where no stormwater collection system exists, site grading shall not
be done in such a manner that stormwater runoff is directed onto adjoining
lots.
      d.   Roadway drainage systems and stormwater control systems must be
designed by a professional engineer licensed in the state.
(Ord. of 5-20-2000, § 8; Ord. No. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016)
Sec. 22-13. Mandatory standards for construction activities.
   Persons who fail to comply with these regulations after they have received
notice from the village will be subject to a $500.00 fine for each violation
and other actions or penalties as may be authorized by the village.
   (1)   For construction activities that disturb one acre or more, the state
will require an erosion and sediment control plan. The developer must submit a
copy of the approved erosion and sediment control plan to the village manager.
   (2)   The village manager and the village building inspector have the
authority to monitor construction activities to ensure that developers comply
with the erosion and sediment control plan. The village shall also have the
authority to levy fines when the erosion and sediment control plan has been
violated.
   (3)   Construction activities that disturb less than one acre and infringe
upon a state defined area of environmental concern will require a CAMA minor
permit from the village manager.
   (4)   All debris and trash must be contained onsite during construction. All
garbage receptacles must have high sides or covers to prevent the airborne
transport of debris such as plastic and paper. In addition, hazardous materials
used during the construction process must be stored and disposed of properly to
ensure that they do not enter surface waters. All equipment and/or tools should
be covered when not in use.
(Ord. of 5-20-2000, § 9; Ord. No. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016)
Sec. 22-14. Mandatory standards for public education.
   (a)    The village will make efforts to promote, encourage, and facilitate
stormwater management public education initiatives.
   (b)    The public should be informed of how to identify and report pollution
violations and water quality problems. Such actions and conditions shall be
reported to the village manager. Serious violations may be reported to the
Department of Environmental health in Wilmington. Appendix A of this chapter
provides suggested public distribution materials on this topic.
   (c)    The public should be informed of how to minimize water pollution in
their homes and businesses, including lawn and garden care, use of household
chemicals, septic tank maintenance, and pet care. Appendix B of this chapter
provides suggested public distribution materials on this topic.
(Ord. of 5-20-2000, § 10; Ord. No. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016)
Sec. 22-15. Notice of private stormwater pumping.
   (a)   Any person desiring to pump stormwater, by electrical or mechanical
means, to a location that is outside the boundaries of his property or to a
location on his property that causes stormwater to discharge to a municipal
drainage system or the surface waters of the village, must notify the village
building inspector, the director of public services, and the director of the
department of public safety of the intent to pump not less than 24 hours in
advance of pumping. Section
22-6 notwithstanding, a violation of the mandatory notice provision in this
subsection (a) shall result in a civil penalty of $50.00. The civil penalty
shall be paid during regular business hours at the office of the village clerk
within 48 hours of issuance of the civil citation. Violation of this subsection
(a) shall be exempt from prosecution pursuant to G.S. 14-4.
   (b)   Any private stormwater pumping must comply with all provisions of
applicable law. This subsection (b) shall be subject to enforcement pursuant to
section
22-6.
(Ord. No. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016; Ord. No. 2021-0801, § 4, 8-20-2021)
Sec. 22-16. Suspension of private stormwater management activities and drainage
access.
   (a)   The village may suspend private stormwater management activities or
access to the municipal stormwater drainage system to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop a violation of law, an actual or threatened
discharge which presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to
public infrastructure, to the environment, to the health or welfare of persons,
to private property, or to the surface waters of the village.
   (b)   In addition to the section
22-6 penalty for violation of this chapter, if a person fails to comply with a
suspension order issued in an emergency, the village may take such steps,
including, without limitation, equitable remedies, as deemed necessary to
prevent or minimize damage to public infrastructure, to the environment, or to
the surface waters of the village, or to minimize damage to persons or
property.
(Ord. No. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016)
Sec. 22-17—22-18.   Reserved.
Appendix A. A citizen’s guide to identifying and reporting pollution problems.
   (a)    It is very important for you, as a citizen of the village, to report
problems when observed, so that the appropriate government agency can take
immediate action. Public reporting of pollution problems allows us to more
efficiently keep our community clean and environmentally safe.
   (b)    Be on the lookout for these common pollution problems:
   (1)   Unprotected areas of bare soil on a construction site or on any other
site. Construction sites must have erosion control structures such as siltation
fences and vegetated filters. In addition, no construction site should be left
without vegetation for longer than 30 working days after work on the site has
been completed. Under no circumstances should bare soil be left within 50 feet
of a wetland or waterway.
   (2)   Illegal dumping and illegal dump sites. Look for debris dumped in
creeks and along roadsides by companies and individuals trying to avoid
landfill fees.
   (3)   Discharges to creeks, wetlands or the ocean. Look for channels running
directly from a home or business to a wetland or a natural waterway. In
addition, look for pipes that discharge directly to a natural waterway.
   (4)   Oil and other chemical spills. Oil appears as a shiny slick on the
surface of natural waters. Other chemical spills may be identified when water
has an unusual color or odor.
   (5)   Sewer and septic system leaks from pipes and manholes. Usually, the
best way to identify sewer and septic problems is the odor. If you sense a
problem, try to identify the source.
   (6)   Degraded water. Some things to look for include bright green algae
growth, unusual odors, and dead aquatic life.
   (c)    To report pollution problems:
   (1)   If you see a pollution violation such as illegal dumping, in progress,
write down important information such as license plate numbers and company
names. If possible, you should take photographs as evidence. This information
may be used to hold polluters accountable.
   (2)   Report pollution violations and water pollution problems to the
village manager at (910) 457-9700.
   (3)   If the violation is of a very serious nature you may report problems
directly to the state Department of Environmental Quality in Wilmington at
(910) 796-7215. Once you describe the nature of the problem, you will be
directed to the appropriate person and agency.
(Ord. of 5-20-2000, app. A; Ord. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016)
Appendix B. A citizen's guide to improving water quality on the village. 
   Clean water and a healthy environment start with you and your neighbors.
This list offers many easy and inexpensive ideas that will benefit water
quality within the village. By practicing these suggestions, you will be doing
your part for a cleaner and healthier environment.
    (1)   Lawn and garden care. Well-maintained lawns and gardens can be a real
benefit to water quality and the local community. They add beauty, control
erosion, filter runoff from adjacent hard surfaces, reduce dust, and help
moderate summer heat. However, lawns and gardens are often the reason for
excessive water use and unnecessary applications of fertilizer. To help:
      a.   Reduce soil erosion by planting appropriate plant cover on bare
patches of ground.
      b.   Do not apply pesticides or fertilizer if heavy rain is expected. Use
only fertilizers that are really needed, based on soil tests and specific needs
of your plants. The agricultural extension center will test soils for free, and
some nurseries may also offer this service.
      c.   Keep fertilizer off driveways and sidewalks where it will be washed
into storm drains.
      d.   Remember that it is illegal to dump yard waste into creeks, ponds,
wetlands, and the ocean. Yard waste may be either composted or landfilled.
      e.   When removing mildew from your house or roof, use the most dilute
solution of cleaner that will do the job. If possible, use biodegradable
products.
      f.   Contact your county extension agent at (910) 253-2610 for
information on plant and integrated pest management (reducing the application
of chemicals by using natural controls).
   (2)   Household chemicals. Most households contain numerous chemicals that
can be dangerous if released into the environment such as: spot remover,
furniture polish, deodorizers, drain cleaner, oven cleaner, disinfectants,
ammonia, paint and other finishes, thinners and solvents, and batteries. These
chemicals can become pollutants if residues are poured down home drains or onto
the land surface. To help:
      a.   Select the least toxic products that will do the job and use only
when necessary. Use only recommended amounts and do not mix chemicals.
      b.   Do not apply chemicals near creeks, wetlands, or the ocean. Stuff
used cans of paint with newspapers and allow to dry before putting the cans
into the trash.
      c.   Never pour household chemicals down the drain or onto the ground.
   (3)   Motor vehicles. The oil from a single automobile can produce an eight-
acre oil slick, and a single quart of motor oil can contaminate as much as two
million gallons of drinking water. Used oil, antifreeze, and other motor
vehicle fluids are often dumped on land or into roadside ditches. To help:
      a.   Maintain motor vehicles and repair leaks promptly.
      b.   Dispose of used motor oil in oil recycling centers. Many auto parts
stores will take used oil and car batteries.
      c.   Arrange with local service stations or recycling centers to take
your used antifreeze. Avoid gas tank overflows during refueling.
      d.   Take your car to a commercial car wash where the cleaning water is
discharged to a treatment plant. If you do wash your car at home, use a
nontoxic and biodegradable detergent.
   (4)   Septic tanks. Septic systems depend upon bacterial action and soils to
absorb the discharge of household wastewater. If the drain field is damaged or
the soil becomes saturated, nearby surface waters may become contaminated with
sewage products.
      a.   Do not overload the system by allowing an inappropriately large
number of people to share a single dwelling.
      b.   Avoid putting household chemicals down the drain that could destroy
bacteria.
      c.   Consider giving up garbage disposals that add unnecessary solids and
grease to the system.
      d.   Do not flush or pour down the drain: grease, coffee grounds,
cigarettes, facial tissues and paper towels, sanitary products, and disposable
diapers.
      e.   Keep automobiles and heavy equipment off the system.
      f.   Maintain adequate vegetative cover over the drain field.
      g.   Follow the guideline below to determine how frequently to have your
septic tank pumped.
   Estimating Septic Tank Inspection and Pumping Frequency in Years
 
Tank Size (gallons) Number of People Using the System
                    1  2 4 6 8
900                 11 5 2 1 1
1,000               12 6 3 2 1
1,250               16 8 3 2 1
1,500               19 9 4 3 2
 
   (5)   Grinder pump stations. Grinder pump stations are located on the lots
within the village that have sewer service. These stations receive wastewater
discharged from a residence or commercial site and hold it until a certain
volume is being stored. At this point, the grinder pump turns on, grinding the
solids in the wastewater while it is pumped to the wastewater treatment
facility. If these pump stations are not properly maintained they may
malfunction, causing a discharge of untreated wastewater to nearby surface or
groundwaters.
      a.   Avoid putting household chemicals down the drain that could harm the
pump or electrical connections.
      b.   Consider giving up garbage disposals that add unnecessary grease to
the system.
      c.   Do not flush or pour down the drain grease, coffee grounds,
cigarettes, facial tissues and paper towels, sanitary products, and disposable
diapers.
      d.   Keep automobiles and heavy equipment away from the pump station.
      e.   Assure that the high water alarms are working properly so that
maintenance personnel may be notified upon failure of the system.
   (6)   Hard surfaces. Hard surfaces such as paved roads, driveways, rooftops,
and parking lots cause rapid runoff of rainwater. As water flows from hard
surfaces, it captures pollutants before it is discharged into our waterways. On
the other hand natural, vegetated areas improve water quality by soaking up and
cleansing rain. To help: On your property, try to limit the area of impervious
surfaces such as concrete, brick, highly compacted gravel, crushed shell,
coquina, and covered decks.
   (7)   Boats. Recreational boaters use a variety of cleaners, finishes, and
antifouling compounds, and are often responsible for discharging garbage,
sewage, and petroleum products into our waterways. Boats that create excessive
wakes contribute to shoreline erosion and increase sediment loads to adjacent
waterways. To help:
      a.   Avoid producing wakes within 500 feet of shore.
      b.   Scrub boats with brush and water instead of routinely using soap or
detergent. If cleaners are needed to remove stains, use phosphate-free
detergents.
      c.   Do not discharge boat sewage or trash into waterways.
      d.   Use a drop cloth when scraping boat hulls to catch toxic chips of
paint or antifouling.
   (8)   Animal waste. Animal wastes are high in nutrients and bacteria which
can contribute to excessive plant growth in waterways as well as closure of
shellfishing beds and swimming areas. Clean up after pets and dispose of wastes
in the trash or toilet.
(Ord. of 5-20-2000, app. B; Ord. No. 2016-1202, 12-16-2016)
Chapter 23
RESERVED
Chapter 24
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES*
*   Charter References: regulation, §
10.2.
   Cross References: ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the
village saved from repeal, §
1-9(6); any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes for
such improvements saved from repeal, §
1-9(9); any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the village
saved from repeal, §
1-9(15); buildings and building regulations,
ch. 6; environment,
ch. 10; floods,
ch. 14; parks and recreation,
ch. 18; subdivisions,
ch. 26; minimum design standards for streets, §
26-124; required improvements for streets, §
26-163; traffic and vehicles,
ch. 28; utilities,
ch. 30; zoning,
ch. 32.
   State Law References: authority relative to streets and sidewalks, G.S.
160A-296 et seq.
Article I. In General
Secs. 24-1--24-30. Reserved.
Article II. Intrusive Acts
Sec.
24-31. Definitions.
Sec.
24-32. Permit--Required.
Sec.
24-33. Same--Application; issuance.
Sec.
24-34. Motorized vehicles in excess of 4,000 pounds.
Sec.
24-35. Tracked vehicles.
Sec.
24-36. Penalty for violation of article.
Sec.
24-37. Minimum design standards for sidewalks.
Secs. 24-38--24-70. Reserved.
Article III. Location Identification for Buildings
Sec.
24-71. Definitions.
Sec.
24-72. Location identifiers required.
Sec.
24-73. Specifications.
Sec.
24-74. Prominent display required.
Sec.
24-75. Obstruction prohibited.
Sec.
24-76. Defacement, alteration, removal or destruction prohibited.
Sec.
24-77. Violation.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Secs. 24-1--24-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
INTRUSIVE ACTS
Sec. 24-31. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Excessive weight vehicle means any vehicle having a gross weight in excess
of 16,000 pounds per axle.
   Intrusive act and intrusive activity mean cutting, drilling, excavating,
removal of subjacent support, and any and all other acts or activities by which
the pavement of any public street or roadway or the subsurface supporting
material therefor is breached, disrupted, penetrated or damaged in any manner.
   Permit means a permit issued by the village manager pursuant to an
application submitted for permission to conduct any intrusive activity.
   Proposed intrusive act means the intrusive act or acts for which a permit is
sought.
   Public street or roadway means any roadway, street or other thoroughfare or
parking lot owned by the village, including the paved surfaces thereof and all
underlying substances placed there for the support and stability of the
surface.
   Special weight permit means a permit issued by the office of the village
manager permitting certain specified operations of excessive weight vehicles on
the streets and roadways of the village.
   Tracked vehicle means any motorized vehicle which propels itself atop and by
means of a metal track rather than atop and by means of a rubber tire or wheel,
including but not limited to cranes, bulldozers and other such vehicles.
(Ord. No. 30, § 1, 8-17-1991)
   Cross References: generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 24-32. Permit--Required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally conduct any intrusive
activity upon any public street or roadway within the village unless he has
obtained prior thereto a permit from the office of the village manager as
provided in section
24-33.
(Ord. No. 30, § 2, 8-17-1991)
Sec. 24-33. Same--Application; issuance.
   (a)   Criteria. Any person desiring to conduct any intrusive activities on
any public street or roadway within the village shall make application therefor
to the village. The application shall contain such information as shall, from
time to time, be determined by the village manager to be necessary to
adequately assess the application for compliance with the intent of this
article. The village manager shall review the application and shall permit the
activity upon finding of the following:
      (1)   The proposed intrusive activity shall be reasonably necessary for
the improvement or maintenance of the health, education or general welfare of
the citizens and residents of the village;
      (2)   Provisions have been made for adequate warning to both vehicular
and pedestrian traffic such that the proposed work shall not represent an
unreasonable risk of injury or damage to the person or property of any
individual;
      (3)   The proposed intrusive act is the least intrusive method by which
the purposes to be achieved by the proposed act can be reasonably accomplished;
      (4)   Public inconvenience arising from the proposed intrusive activity
will be minimized during the course of such activity; and
      (5)   The street or roadway shall be returned to its condition prior to
the proposed intrusive act or as near thereto as shall be reasonably possible.
   (b)   Additional conditions required. Upon review of the application
required by this section, the village manager shall determine whether the
proposed activity shall meet the criteria set forth in subsection (a)of this
section and, if so determined, the village manager shall issue a permit to the
applicant upon such conditions as the village manager shall find to be
necessary in order to accomplish the purposes of this article as set forth in
subsection (a)this section. Such conditions may include, but shall not be
limited to:
      (1)   Specific dates during which the proposed intrusive activity may be
carried on, including limitations on the number of days or hours per day during
which any street or roadway or portion thereof shall be impassable to vehicular
or pedestrian traffic due to the proposed intrusive activity;
      (2)   The manner in which the intrusive act shall be accomplished;
      (3)   The manner in which any reconstruction or repair work shall be
effected in order to return the public street or roadway to its condition prior
to the date of the intrusive act;
      (4)   The amount and conditions of bond to be posted by the applicant in
favor of the village ensuring compliance with conditions of the permit and that
the required repair work shall be accomplished within the time specified by the
permit; and
      (5)   The effective and expiration dates of the permit.
   (c)   Intrusive activity authorized by permit. Any intrusive activity
performed on any public street or roadway authorized by permit shall be done in
accordance with the terms and conditions hereof. No intrusive activity shall be
undertaken until at least one week's written notice has been given to the
village manager of the proposed intrusive activity; the bond as required herein
has been posted with the office of the village clerk; an appropriate written
permit application has been submitted; and a permit has issued from the
village.
   The application shall provide the following information:
      • Applicant's full legal name (and that of permittee, if different);
      • Applicant's street and mailing addresses, phone and fax numbers (and
those of permittee, if different);
      • Description and purpose of the activity, including proposed dates
thereof and diagrams, plans or specifications, if any;
      • The date(s)in which the street or roadway will be passable/impassable;
      • Whether final paving will be completed by the applicant or the village;
and
      • If the final paving is to be completed by the permittee, the date in
which the repairs will be completed (must be within ten working days of the
intrusive activity commencing);
      • Other data or plans as the village may require.
   The applicant or permittee shall furnish to the village a bond in the amount
specified in the permit, which shall be not less than $1,000.00, to secure the
permittee's performance under the permit and hereunder. The bond shall be in
cash or shall be in form acceptable to the village; shall be payable to the
Village of Bald Head Island; shall be conditioned upon the performance of each
and every condition of the permit; and shall provide for payment on behalf of
permittee of any fines or village invoices levied hereunder. With the exception
of an emergency that threatens the health, safety, or general welfare of Island
citizens and visitors, as determined by the village manager, no intrusive
activity shall be permitted on any street or roadway without the proper permit
and bond being issued; in violation of any permit provision; or in violation of
any other term or provision hereof. If intrusive activity is found to occur
without the proper permit and bond being issued; or in violation of any permit
provision; or in violation of any other term or provision hereof, the party
responsible for the activity shall be subject to a fine in the amount of
$200.00 per violation. Each day or portion thereof that a violation exists
shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. In the event an intrusive
activity is undertaken because of emergency circumstances, the applicant or
person performing the activity shall report the activity to the village manager
as soon thereafter as can reasonably occur.
   Repairs completed by the permittee must be refurbished using 6" of ABC
stone, mechanically compacted in 2" lifts and 1 1/2" of I-2 asphalt. The repair
must be level with the existing road. The repair will be inspected by a village
representative before the posted bond is refunded to the applicant. Repairs not
within the above guidelines constitute a violation hereof.
   Repairs which are to be completed by the village or which are completed by
the village as a result of permittee's or any person's failure to comply
herewith or with any permit provision, shall be charged to the bond and to the
permittee or person responsible at a rate not less than the cost of repair of
such intrusive activity as shown by the village's invoice. The invoice of the
village shall be conclusive as to the cost of repair charged hereunder. Any
such cost incurred by the village in excess of the amount of a cash or other
bond shall be paid by the permittee or person responsible within seven days of
notification of charges being mailed to the person responsible or to the
permittee at the address shown on the application.
   To any fine or village repair invoice not paid in full within ten calendar
days of notification having been mailed to the permittee or person responsible
shall be added an additional fine of $50.00. Unpaid amounts shall accrue an
additional amount monthly of one and one-half percent.
   It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to amend the completion
date, in writing, if repair or replacement work is expected to go past the
completion date provided in the application or in the permit. All permit
amendments or the grant of any permit shall be in village's sole discretion.
   Carolina Power & Light Company/Progress Energy is specifically excluded from
the provisions of the foregoing subparagraph (c)and is subject to prior
ordinances specific to it.
   (d)   Damaged village property. Nothing herein shall be construed as a
waiver, limitation or compromise of any rights or remedies the village may have
against any applicant, permittee or other person or entity to seek legal
redress for damages done to village property, including but not limited to
claims the village may have arising under contract, negligence, trespass,
conversion, nuisance or other theories of liability. Nor, except as expressly
provided herein, shall this article be construed to modify, limit or waive any
other laws, ordinances, regulations, rights or remedies of the village.
   (e)    Interference with underground utilities prohibited. Each permittee
shall ensure that no intrusive act or activity shall interfere with any
underground utilities, including but not limited to electrical, cable
television, water distribution or service, sewer collection and/or telephone
cable or conduit, and shall comply with all provisions of G.S. 87-115 et seq.;
and no permit issued pursuant to this article shall be construed by the
permittee or any other person to include certification that any proposed
intrusive act shall comply with G.S. 87-115 et seq.
   (f)    Signing of application; fee. Each applicant for a permit issued
pursuant to this section shall be required to sign the application therefor and
shall deliver to the village manager the currently required application fee and
which shall be nonrefundable and shall not be credited against the bond
required by the village manager.
(Ord. No. 30, § 3, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2002-004, § 1, 2-16-2002; Ord. No. 2004-
006, § 1, 9-17-2004; Ord. No. 2021-0801, § 5, 8-20-2021)
Sec. 24-34. Motorized vehicles in excess of 4,000 pounds.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorized vehicle with a
gross weight in excess of 4,000 pounds upon Stede Bonnet Wynd or Edward Teach
Wynd and to use the vehicle for purposes of through traffic.
(Ord. No. 30, § 5, 8-17-1991)
Sec. 24-35. Tracked vehicles.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any tracked vehicle on the
public streets or roadways of the village. Nothing contained in this article
shall prevent any person from transporting any tracked vehicle on any trailer
or other transportation device so long as the tracked vehicle shall not be in
contact with the public street or roadway.
(Ord. No. 30, § 6, 8-17-1991)
Sec. 24-36. Penalty for violation of article.
   Any person who violates this article shall be subject to a civil citation
carrying a penalty in the amount of $50.00 per offense, pursuant to G.S. 160A-
175, which penalty shall be exempt from prosecution under G.S. 14-4. The civil
penalty shall be paid during regular business hours at the office of the
village clerk or online at the village website within 48 hours of issuance of
the civil citation. The village reserves the right to seek an appropriate
equitable remedy to abate a violation of this article from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 30, § 7, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2001-031, § 1, 10-26-2001; Ord. No.
2011-0402, 4-15-2011; Ord. No. 2021-0801, § 6, 8-20-2021)
Sec. 24-37. Minimum design standards for sidewalks.
   Minimum design standards for a required four-foot and/or six-foot wide
sidewalk must comply with the following design standards:
      (1)   Construction joint every five feet.
      (2)   Install ½-inch expansion joints every 50 feet using felt or rubber
caulk.
      (3)   Concrete must be at a minimum five inches thick.
      (4)   One-inch tooled control edge must be used.
      (5)   Six millimeter "poly" vapor barrier must be used.
      (6)   #6, six inches by six inches square wire mesh must be used.
      (7)   Typical broom finish.
      (8)   One-inch by six inches forming mat must be used.
      (9)   Compacted or plate tamped sub-graded.
      (10)   Backfill to grade of top of sidewalk.
      (11)   Concrete shall be a minimum of 3,000 psi at 28-day break.
   As of the date of adoption of this section, any new sidewalks and/or repairs
to existing sidewalks must meet the above requirements and be inspected by the
building inspector prior to pouring of concrete. Contractors repairing
sidewalks damaged during the construction process must repair the sidewalks to
the above standards before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the
structure.
(Ord. No. 2007-0702, 7-20-2007)
Secs. 24-38--24-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
LOCATION IDENTIFICATION FOR BUILDINGS
Sec. 24-71. Definitions.
   The following, words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Single building site means any tract or parcel of real estate planned or
proposed to contain a single structure for occupancy by a single family or
commercial occupant and whose access to a publicly dedicated right-of-way is
over a driveway serving only that structure.
   Cluster building site means any tract or parcel of real estate planned or
proposed to contain either multiple structures or a single structure with
divided or multiple ownership or occupancy thereof and which structure or
structures, owners or occupants share access to a publicly dedicated right-of-
way over one or more common driveways.
(Ord. No. 44, § 2, 3-16-1996)
   Cross References: generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 24-72. Location identifiers required.
   From and after March 16, 1996, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued
for occupancy of any building constructed pursuant to a building permit issued
after March 16, 1996, unless the completed structure shall include location
identifiers in conformity herewith. Any such building shall be referred to
hereinafter as new construction.
(Ord. No. 44, § 1, 3-16-1996)
Sec. 24-73. Specifications.
   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for the occupancy of any new
construction constructed on a single building site unless the owner thereof
shall install a location identification bollard in conformity with the
following specifications:
      (1)   The location identification bollard shall consist of a six-inch by
six-inch pressure treated wooden post gray in color to enhance contrast with
numbering.
      (2)   Bollards shall have emblazoned on three sides thereof the street
number of the structure, which numbers shall each be a minimum of three inches
tall and shall be made of white reflective material.
      (3)   Bollards shall be embedded into the ground at a point adjacent to
the intersection of the driveway serving such structure and the publicly
dedicated right-of-way.
      (4)   Bollards shall be embedded in the ground in such a manner that they
are permanently affixed thereto and shall stand at least 36 inches above ground
level with numbering located at least 15 inches above ground level.
      (5)   Numerals shall appear on three sides of the bollard, excluding only
the side located opposite the publicly dedicated right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 44, § 3, 3-16-1996)
Sec. 24-74. Prominent display required.
   No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for occupancy of new
construction located on a cluster building site unless the owner thereof shall
display prominently the location identifier of such structure in a location
readily visible to emergency vehicles as approved by the building inspector.
The location identifier shall be uniform in appearance and location for all
structures or separately owned or occupied units within the cluster and shall
be of a size, style and material as shall be approved by the building inspector
for the village. Within cluster building sites where a specific developer or
community association shall control exterior appearances of structures, the
developer or association may, prior to any construction thereon, apply to the
building inspector for a uniform preapproved location identifier and on which
the developer or association may rely in its plan of development; provided,
however, that the layout of the development with proposed construction sites
and street locations therefor shall be presented to the building inspector
prior to initiation of development. Upon request therefor the building
inspector shall accumulate any additional relevant information and may then
determine the preapproved appearance and location of the location identifiers
for all structures within the cluster.
(Ord. No. 44, § 4, 3-16-1996)
Sec. 24-75. Obstruction prohibited.
   No owner of any building or unit thereof which is subject to this article
shall permit the location identifier to be obstructed by the growth of brush or
shrubbery or the placement of any other obstruction which might limit, in any
manner, the visibility of the location identifier from the nearest vehicular
access.
(Ord. No. 44, § 5, 3-16-1996)
Sec. 24-76. Defacement, alteration, removal or destruction prohibited.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, alter, remove or destroy any
location identifier erected pursuant to this article.
(Ord. No. 44, § 6, 3-16-1996)
Sec. 24-77. Violation.
   Any violation of this article shall constitute a class 3 misdemeanor
punishable in accordance with section
1-6.
(Ord. No. 44, § 7, 3-16-1996)
Chapter 25
RESERVED
Chapter 26
SUBDIVISIONS*
*   Cross References: ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat
saved from repeal, §
1-9(11); buildings and building regulations,
ch. 6; environment,
ch. 10; floods,
ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places,
ch. 24; utilities,
ch. 30; zoning,
ch. 32.
   State Law References: authority to regulate the subdivision of land, G.S.
160A-371.
Article I. In General
Sec.
26-1. Title of chapter.
Sec.
26-2. Purpose of chapter.
Sec.
26-3. Authority to adopt chapter.
Sec.
26-4. Jurisdiction of chapter.
Sec.
26-5. Relation to other ordinances.
Sec.
26-6. Intent of chapter.
Sec.
26-7. Subdivision defined.
Sec.
26-8. Other definitions.
Sec.
26-9. Word interpretations.
Sec.
26-10. General procedure for plat approval.
Sec.
26-11. Penalties for violation of chapter.
Sec.
26-12. Effect of plat approval on dedications.
Sec.
26-13. Amendments to chapter.
Sec.
26-14. Exceptions to terms of chapter.
Secs. 26-15--26-50. Reserved.
Article II. Plat Approval Generally
Sec.
26-51. Generally.
Sec.
26-52. Filing fees.
Sec.
26-53. Procedures for securing approval of subdivisions.
Secs. 26-54--26-90. Reserved.
Article III. Plat Requirements
Sec.
26-91. Generally.
Sec.
26-92. Other requirements.
Secs. 26-93--26-120. Reserved.
Article IV. Minimum Design Standards
Sec.
26-121. Generally.
Sec.
26-122. Name duplication.
Sec.
26-123. Lots.
Sec.
26-124. Streets.
Secs. 26-125--26-160. Reserved.
Article V. Required Improvements
Sec.
26-161. Permanent monuments.
Sec.
26-162. Street name signs.
Sec.
26-163. Streets.
Sec.
26-164. Construction procedures.
Secs. 26-165--26-200. Reserved.
Article VI. Final Plat Approval
Sec.
26-201. Preparation of final plat and installation of improvements.
Sec.
26-202. Improvements guarantees.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 26-1. Title of chapter.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision Ordinance
of Bald Head Island, North Carolina," and may be referred to as the
"subdivision ordinance."
(Ord. No. 8A, art. I, § I, 7-17-1998)
Sec. 26-2. Purpose of chapter.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate and control the subdivision of
land within the corporate limits of the village in order to promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare of the community. They are designed to
lessen congestion in streets and roadways; to further the orderly layout and
use of land; to ensure proper legal description and proper monumenting of
subdivided lands; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to
provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid
undue concentration of population; to facilitate adequate provisions for
transportation, water, sewerage, open space, recreational areas and other
public requirements; and to facilitate the further resubdivision of larger
tracts into small parcels of land.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. I, § II, 7-17-1998)
Sec. 26-3. Authority to adopt chapter.
   This chapter is hereby adopted under the authority and provisions of G.S.
160A-371 et seq.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. I, § III, 7-17-1998)
Sec. 26-4. Jurisdiction of chapter.
   This chapter governs each and every subdivision of land within the corporate
limits of the village as indicated on the official corporate boundary map of
the village.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. I, § IV, 7-17-1998)
   State Law References: jurisdiction, G.S. 160A-360.
Sec. 26-5. Relation to other ordinances.
   It is not intended that this chapter repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions agreements,
rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law.
However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the provisions of
this chapter shall govern.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. I, § V, 7-17-1998)
Sec. 26-6. Intent of chapter.
   For the purpose of interpreting this chapter, certain words or terms are
defined in this article. Except as defined in this article, all other words
used in this chapter shall have their everyday dictionary definition.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. II, § I, 7-17-1998)
Sec. 26-7. Subdivision defined.
   The term "subdivision" means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into
two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale or
building development, whether immediate or future, and shall include all
divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in
existing streets; but the following shall not be included within this
definition nor be subject to the regulations authorized by this chapter:
      (1)   The combination or recombination of portions of previously
subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased
and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the village as
shown in its subdivision regulations;
      (2)   The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres where no
street right-of-way dedication is involved;
      (3)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the
widening or opening of streets; and
      (4)   The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no
greater than two acres into not more than three lots, where no street right-of-
way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed
the standards of the village, as shown in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. II, § II, 7-17-1998)
   Cross References: generally, §
1-2.
   State Law References: G.S. 160A-376.
Sec. 26-8. Other definitions.
   Agent means any individual designated by the owner of any land which is the
subject of a proposed subdivision as having full authority to act with regard
to such proposed subdivision on behalf of the owner in all respects.
   Alley means a private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as a
secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on some other street.
   Buffer means an area required by this chapter to provide insulation from a
nonresidential tract.
   Building means any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels, or moveable property of any kind.
   Building footprint means the land area on which a proposed building is to be
located.
   Building setback line means line establishing the minimum allowable
distance, as defined in chapter
32, zoning, between the nearest part of any building and the nearest edge of a
street right-of-way or property line, when measured perpendicular thereto.
   Dedication means an appropriation of land to some public use made by the
owner thereof and accepted for such use by or on behalf of the public. Because
a transfer of property rights is entailed, dedication must be made by written
instrument and is completed with an acceptance by the village council.
   Easement means grant by the property owner of an interest in land less than
the fee simple title thereto for a specified purpose and use by the public, a
corporation or persons.
   Emergency vehicle means any vehicle operated by the department of public
safety.
   Flood hazard area means any site designated by the Federal Emergency
Management Authority (FEMA) as susceptible to flooding, and shown on the
official flood hazard boundary map and/or flood insurance rate maps for the
Bald Head Island area.
   Lot means a parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some
legal instrument such as a recorded deed or a recorded map and which is
recognized as a separate legal parcel for purposes of transfer of title. The
lot types are as follows:
      (1)   Corner lot means a lot located at the intersection of two or more
streets.
      (2)   Interior lot means a lot other than a corner lot with only one
frontage on a street.
      (3)   Through lot means a lot other than a corner lot with frontage on
more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as
double frontage lots.
      (4)   Single tier lot means a lot which backs upon a limited access
highway, a physical barrier, or another type of land use and to which access
from the rear is usually prohibited.
   Lot depth means the average horizontal distance between the front and the
rear lot lines.
   Lot of record means a lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which
has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county prior to
July 17, 1998, or a lot described by metes and bounds, the description of which
has been so recorded prior to July 17, 1998.
   Lot width means the horizontal distance between side lot lines at the front
building setback line.
   Manager means the duly employed village manager or such individual as shall
be designated by the village manager to conduct such duties and
responsibilities as are designated in this chapter to the village manager.
   Official maps or plans means any maps or plans officially adopted by the
village council as a guide for the development of the village consisting of
maps, charts, and texts.
   Parcel means a tract or plot of land.
   Planning board means the duly appointed planning board of the village,
referred to in this chapter as the planning board.
   Plat means a map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be, or has been
subdivided.
   Private driveway means a roadway serving two or fewer lots, building sites
or other division of land and not intended to be public ingress or egress.
   Private street means any street failing to meet the minimum design and
construction standards set forth in section
26-124(f)of this chapter and which may not thereof be accepted for dedication
by the village.
   Public street means any street meeting the minimum design and construction
standards set forth in section
26-124(f)of this chapter.
   Public utility and maintenance vehicle means any vehicle operated by the
village or any public utility used for purposes of installation, maintenance,
repair or improvement of any electrical or telephone transmission line, any
water or sewer main or other related equipment, any gas pipe main or other
similar public utility.
   Right-of-way means any parcel of land designated as a public or private
street or dedicated as an easement for electric or utility transmission lines,
oil or gas pipelines, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade tree, or
any other special use described on any proposed subdivision plat.
   Setback means the required distance in feet from the building setback line
to the property line or street rights-of-way.
   Street means a dedicated and accepted public right-of-way for vehicular
traffic:
      (1)   Primary thoroughfare means streets as defined in section
26-124(e)(1) of this chapter.
      (2)   Secondary street means streets as defined in section
26-124(e)(1) of this chapter.
      (3)   Cul-de-sac means a short street having but one end open to traffic,
the other end of which is permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
   Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the
ground.
   Subdivider means any person who subdivides or develops any land deemed to be
a subdivision as described in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. II, § III, 7-17-1998; Ord. No. 2013-0501, 5-17-2013)
   Cross References: generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 26-9. Word interpretations.
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain words shall be interpreted as
follows:
      (1)   The term "lot" includes the term "plot", "parcel" or "tract."
      (2)   The term "structure" shall include the term "building."
      (3)   The term "used for" shall include the meaning "designed for."
(Ord. No. 8A, art. III, § I, 7-17-1998)
Sec. 26-10. General procedure for plat approval.
   (a)   After July 17, 1998, no subdivision plat of land within
thejurisdiction of the village shall be filed for recordation until it has been
submitted to and approved by the appropriate village agency or has been
determined to be exempt from the approval process and until this approval or
exemption is entered in writing on the face of the plat by the official
designee of the approving authority. The register of deeds shall not file or
record a plat or subdivision of land located within the territorial
jurisdiction of the village that has not been executed in accordance with these
provisions, nor shall the clerk of superior court order or direct the recording
of a plat or heir division if the recording would be in conflict with this
section.
   (b)   No parcel identifier number as referred to in G.S. 161-30 shall be
assigned to any map, deed, deed of trust or other instrument affecting real
property if the instrument subdivides land and creates a subdivision of land in
violation of this chapter.
   (c)   No subdivider shall initiate the construction of any subdivision
improvements, including but not limited to streets, drainage works, utilities
or other improvement, nor shall any subdivider sell or contract to sell or
otherwise transfer title to any property, the sale of which would constitute a
subdivision under this chapter prior to approval of the preliminary plat
pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. III, § II, 7-17-1998)
Sec. 26-11. Penalties for violation of chapter.
   (a)   After July 17, 1998, any person who, being the owner or agent of land
located within the territorial jurisdiction of this chapter thereafter
subdivides his land in violation of this chapter or transfers or sells land by
reference to, exhibition of, or by any other use of a plat showing a
subdivision of the land before the plat has been properly approved under this
chapter and recorded in the office of the county register of deeds, shall be
guilty of a class I misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00. The
description by metes and bounds, in the instrument of transfer, or other
document used in the process of selling or transferring land shall not exempt
the transaction from this penalty. The village, by and through the village
council, may bring an action for injunction of any illegal subdivision,
transfer, conveyance or sale of land, and for an order requiring the offering
party to comply with this chapter.
   (b)   Building permits required pursuant to G.S. 160A-471 may be denied for
lots that have been illegally subdivided. In addition to other remedies, the
village may institute an appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the
unlawful subdivision of land, to restrain, correct, or abate the violation, or
to prevent any illegal act or conduct.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. III, § III, 7-17-1998; Ord. No. 2006-1002, 10-26-2006)
Sec. 26-12. Effect of plat approval on dedications.
   The approval of a plat pursuant to this chapter shall not be deemed to
constitute or effect the acceptance by the village of the dedication of any
street or other land areas, public utility line, or other public facility or
right-of-way as shown on the plat nor shall approval obligate the village to
maintenance thereof. However, the village council may by resolution accept any
dedication made to the public of lands or facilities that are located within
its subdivision regulation jurisdiction. Acceptance of dedication of lands or
facilities located within the subdivision regulation jurisdiction but outside
the corporate limits of the village shall not place on the village any duty to
open, operate, repair, or maintain any street, utility line, or other land or
facility and the city shall in no event be held to answer in civil action or
proceeding for failure to open, repair, or maintain any street located outside
its corporate limits. Acceptance of the dedication or maintenance of any such
facility shall require a resolution of acceptance and/or maintenance by the
village council.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. III, § IV, 7-17-1998)
   State Law References: approval, G.S. 160A-374.
Sec. 26-13. Amendments to chapter.
   The village council may from time to time amend the terms of this chapter,
but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by
or shall have been submitted to the planning board for review and
recommendation. The planning board shall have 60 days within which to make a
recommendation. If the planning board fails to make a recommendation within the
specified time, it shall be deemed to have recommended approval for the
amendment.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. III, § VI, 7-17-1998)
Sec. 26-14. Exceptions to terms of chapter.
   (a)   Generally. Where, because of severe topographical or other conditions
peculiar to the site, strict adherence to the provisions of this chapter would
cause an unnecessary hardship, the village council may, on recommendation of
the planning board, authorize an exception to the terms of this chapter only to
the extent that is in the best interest of the village and not to an extent
which would violate the intent of this chapter. The village council shall not
approve exceptions unless it shall make findings based upon the evidence
presented to it in each specific case that:
      (1)   The granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public
safety, or health, or be injurious to other property;
      (2)   The conditions upon which the request for exception is sought are
unique to the parcel and are not applicable generally to other property;
      (3)   Because of particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
conditions of the specific property involved, a particular hardship to the
owner would result, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the strict
adherence to these regulations is enforced.
   (b)   Conditions. In approving exceptions, the village council may require
such conditions as shall, in its judgement, secure substantially the objectives
of the standards or requirements of this chapter.
   (c)   Procedures. A petition for any such exception shall be submitted in
writing by the subdivider to village manager for review. The petition shall
state fully the grounds for the application and all the facts relied upon by
the petitioner. The petition shall then be presented to the planning board for
review. Upon review, the planning board shall provide a recommendation as to
whether the exception is or is not justified, and for what reason, and if
justified, under what terms and conditions. The petition will then be presented
to the village council, along with planning board recommendations for a final
decision. No preliminary or final plat shall be approved until all questions of
exception of this chapter have been resolved.
   (d)   Time applicability of modifications. Any exception granted under the
terms of this chapter shall expire 24 months from the date on which the
exception was granted, in the event the plat has not been recorded.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. III, § VII, 7-17-1998)
Secs. 26-15--26-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
PLAT APPROVAL GENERALLY*
*   State Law References: for plat approval, G.S. 160A-373.
Sec. 26-51. Generally.
   (a)   The following sections are an outline of the procedure for obtaining
approval of the subdivision of land within the territorial jurisdiction of this
chapter. The procedure for review and approval of a subdivision plat consists
of two separate steps. However, informal consultation with the village manager
for advice and assistance and preparation of a sketch plan is recommended prior
to the submission of the preliminary plat. The first step is the preparation
and submission to the planning board, and then to the village council a
preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision. The second step is the
preparation and submission to the village manager of a final plat together with
required certificates and assurances. The final plat is the instrument recorded
in the office of the register of deeds when duly approved pursuant to the terms
of this chapter.
   (b)   Any subdivider wishing to subdivide any tract shall submit a
preliminary plat of such proposed subdivision for approval. The following
procedures shall dictate the process of approval of a subdivision in the
jurisdiction of the village.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. IV, § I, 7-17-1998)
Sec. 26-52. Filing fees.
   Filing fees for subdivisions shall be as set forth by the village council in
their approved fee schedule and shall be modified from time to time, the
modification of which shall not constitute an amendment to this chapter
requiring review by the planning board. Filing fees shall be payable to the
village upon initial submission of the preliminary plat to the manager by the
subdivider.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. IV, § II, 7-17-1998)
Sec. 26-53. Procedures for securing approval of subdivisions.
   (a)   Sketch plan.
      (1)   Submission. Prior to the filing of a preliminary plat, a sketch
plan may be submitted to the village manager. The purpose of the sketch plan is
to enable the staff to assist the subdivider prior to extensive site planning
and engineering work necessary for the preparation of a preliminary plat and
final plat as required in this chapter.
      (2)   Conference. For the purpose of informal and confidential review and
discussion, a conference may be held between the subdivider or his agent, and
appropriate village staff. At the request of the staff, a field trip to the
subject property may be planned with representatives of the subdivider present.
      (3)   Review. Following the conference, based on the information on the
submitted sketch plan, the conferring officials may, as promptly as possible,
advise the subdivider of the extent to which the proposed subdivision conforms
to the applicable requirements of this chapter and may further suggest any
modifications of the plan which are deemed advisable or necessary to secure
compliance.
   (b)   Preliminary plat submission.
      (1)   Submission. The subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plat and
submit it to the manager with the application fee and all required
supplementary material. Ten copies of the preliminary plat and required
supplemental material shall be submitted to the manager not less than 21 days
prior to the next meeting of the planning board. The preliminary plat shall
contain all information as set forth in section
26-124 of this chapter.
      (2)   Review procedure.
          a.   Generally. One copy of the preliminary plat may be submitted to
the following people/agencies as determined by the village manager: village
manager, village engineer, director of public safety, building inspector, water
and sewer utilities, affected electric and telephone utility, and other
applicable review agencies. These agencies are to report facts, conclusions,
and recommendations to the village manager as soon as possible, but not later
than 14 days after submittal of the preliminary plat. The village manager will
also review the preliminary plat for compliance with the terms of this chapter.
   By letter filed with the village manager, an applicant shall identify an
official agent or agents in order to file a proposal prior to such proposal
being accepted to begin the timing and review process pursuant to this chapter.
This official agent so identified shall have full authority over representation
of the proposal including authority to agree to and make any changes determined
during the course of review.
         b.   Technical review. Fourteen days prior to the planning board
meeting, the village manager may call and conduct a technical review committee
meeting. Attendance of the subdivider/agent is mandatory. Notice of the meeting
by first class mail shall be given to the subdivider or the designated agent.
Representatives of the above referenced review agencies will also be invited to
attend to offer comments on the subdivision proposal. Presence and
participation of the official agent is mandatory. If the subdivider or the
official agent does not attend the review session, no discussion of the
proposal will be allowed, and it is automatically rescheduled for the next
monthly review session. At this meeting, the village manager will review the
subdivision proposal to check for compliance with all applicable plat
requirements and regulations set out in this chapter.
         c.   Planning board approval. The manager shall submit the preliminary
plat proposal to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning board
occurring more than 28 days after the submission of the preliminary plat to the
manager. The subdivider shall submit ten copies of the proposal to the planning
board, including any necessary revisions, not less than seven days prior to the
regularly scheduled meeting. The manager may report to the planning board as to
the compliance of the preliminary plat to the requirements of this chapter and
shall make any recommendations with regard thereto that the manager deems
relevant to the preliminary plat. The planning board shall consider the
preliminary plat in open session and shall require the attendance of the
subdivider or his agent. Notice of the meeting by first class mail shall be
given to the subdivider or designated agent. Failure of the subdivider or agent
to attend the planning board meeting at which such preliminary plat is
considered shall result in the deferral of any discussion or consideration
thereof and the automatic rescheduling of consideration of such plat to the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning board. If the subdivider or
his agent fails to attend two consecutive regularly scheduled meetings of the
planning board at which such preliminary plat is scheduled for consideration,
the proposal shall be deemed withdrawn by the subdivider. At its meeting the
planning board shall review the preliminary plat proposal and all other
pertinent material, shall hear from the official agent, and shall determine
whether the proposal meets the policy, purposes and standards established by
this chapter. The planning board then shall recommend to the village council
approval, conditional approval, deferral, or denial of the subdivision
proposal.
         d.   Village council approval. The planning board shall submit its
findings and recommendations to the village council at their next regularly
scheduled meeting. Upon recommendation from the planning board, the plat shall
be submitted to the village council. The subdivider shall submit ten copies of
the proposal to village staff for distribution to the council no less than ten
days prior to the village council meeting. The village council may approve,
reject, defer or grant conditional approval of the proposal.
   (c)   Subdivision final approval.
      (1)   Compliance with improvement requirements. Upon approval of the
preliminary plat by the village council, the subdivider may proceed with the
preparation of the final plat, and installation of or arrangement for required
improvements in accordance with the approved preliminary plat and the
requirements of this chapter. Prior to approval of a final plat, the subdivider
shall have installed the improvements specified in this chapter or guarantee
their installation as provided in this chapter. No final plat will be accepted
for approval unless the village manager acknowledges compliance with the
improvement or guaranteed standards of this chapter. No final plat will be
approved by the village manager until and unless the subdivider shall have
completed construction of the subdivision improvements or posted the cash or
equivalent security or surety in accord with the requirements set forth in
sections
26-201 and
26-202.
      (2)   Partial development. If the preliminary plat is approved with
designated phases, the final plat may constitute that portion of the
preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at that
time. Such portion shall conform to all requirements of this chapter including
installation of required improvements. The face of the plat shall also contain
certifications, all to be executed as required in section
26-91 et seq.
      (3)   Signature for recordation. Once the final plat has been approved by
the village manager, he shall sign it in the name of the village council, as
its agent, for recordation. The village manager has the authority to require a
final plat to come before the village council in a regular meeting, for
approval for recordation.
      (4)   Minor corrections. In the event of changes between the approved
preliminary plat and the final plat submitted to the manager for approval, the
manager shall have the authority to approve such final plat only in those
instances where the discrepancy between the approved preliminary plat and the
submitted final plat shall be in order to correct typographical errors or other
revisions to the preliminary plat not affecting compliance with any of the
substantive features of the subdivision. In any circumstance, the manager shall
have the authority to submit any revised final plat to the village council for
approval of revisions.
   (d)   Preliminary plat approval standing in time.
      (1)   Approval of any preliminary plat shall be valid for a period of 24
months from and after the date of approval thereof. Within 24 months of the
date of approval of any preliminary plat, the subdivider shall install all
required subdivision improvements or make any provisions for guarantee of the
installation thereof pursuant to section
26-91 et seq. and thereafter may submit a final plat for approval by the
manager. Failure of the subdivider to install subdivision improvements or
provide and post the necessary guarantees in lieu thereof and to provide to the
manager a final plat for approval or to record such approved final plat within
such 24-month period shall void the approval of the preliminary plat. Any
subsequently proposed subdivision of such property shall be approved only upon
conformity with the terms and conditions of this chapter.
      (2)   For any subdivision which has received approval of the preliminary
plat and which discloses on its face that the subdivision is to be approved and
recorded in sections or phases, and where the plat for one such section or
phase shall receive final approval and be recorded within 24 months of the date
of preliminary approval thereof, the subdivider shall automatically have an
additional 18 months from and after the expiration of 24 months from the date
of approval of the preliminary plat in which to complete subdivision
improvements for all sections or phases thereof or post the appropriate bond in
lieu thereof and to submit to the manager a final plat of all other sections or
phases thereof and to record the same. Any portion of the subdivision which had
received approval of the preliminary plat but the final plat to which is not
approved and recorded within such succeeding 18-month period shall have such
approval as to that portion of the subdivision voided and any future
subdivision thereof shall be approved only upon conformity with the terms and
conditions of this chapter.
      (3)   No plat which has received preliminary approval shall be submitted
to the manager for final approval in phases or sections other than preliminary
plats which show plainly on the face thereof that the plat is to be submitted
for final approval in phases or sections.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. IV, § III, 7-17-1998; Ord. No. 2001-016, 8-25-2001; Ord. No.
2013-0501, 5-17-2013)
Secs. 26-54--26-90. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
PLAT REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 26-91. Generally.
   (a)   The preliminary and final plat of a proposed subdivision shall be
clearly and legibly drawn to an engineering scale not smaller than one inch
equals to 100 feet. If the preliminary plat requires more than one sheet, a key
diagram showing relative location of the several sections shall be drawn on
each sheet.
   (b)   The preliminary and final plats and any attachments shall depict or
contain the information indicated in the following table. An "X" indicates that
the information is required.
Information Preliminary Final
Information                                                   Preliminary Final
TITLE BLOCK CONTAINING:
Property designation                                          X           X
Name of owner/subdivider                                      X           X
Location including township, county and state                 X           X
Date survey was conducted and plat prepared; Date of any      X           X
revisions
Scale of drawing in feet per inch listed in words or figures  X           X
Bar graph                                                     X           X
Name, address, registration no., and seal of registered land  X           X
surveyor/professional engineer
Vicinity map showing the relationship between the proposed    X           X
subdivision and surrounding area
Names, address, and phone numbers of all owners, registered
land surveyors, land planners, landscape architects, and      X           X
professional engineers
North arrow and orientation                                   X           X
Boundaries of the tract or portion thereof to be subdivided,
distinctly and accurately represented with all bearings and   X           X
distances shown
Names of owners of the adjoining properties                   X           X
Names of any adjoining subdivisions of record or proposed and X
under review
Minimum building setback lines                                X           X
Zoning classifications of the tract to be subdivided and      X
adjoining properties
Existing property lines on the tract to be subdivided and on  X           X
adjoining properties
Existing buildings or other structures, water courses,
bridges, culverts, storm drains, both on the land to be       X
subdivided and land immediately adjoining
Proposed lot lines, lot and block numbers and approximate     X           X
dimensions
The lots numbered consecutively throughout the subdivision    X           X
Wooded areas, marshes, swamps, ponds or lakes, streams or     X
stream bed and any other natural features affecting the site
Exact location of the flood hazard and floodway and floodway  X           X
fringe areas from the community's FIRM or other FEMA maps
STREET INFORMATION:
Proposed streets                                              X           X
Existing and platted streets on adjoining properties and in   X           X
the proposed subdivision
Rights-of-way, location and dimension                         X           X
Pavement widths                                               X           X
Approximate grades                                            X           X
Design engineering data for all corners and curves            X           X
Typical street cross sections                                 X           X
Street names                                                  X           X
Street maintenance agreement                                  X           X
LOCATIONS AND DIMENSIONS OF ALL:
Utility and other easements                                   X           X
Buffers                                                       X           X
Pedestrian or bicycle paths                                   X           X
Recreation areas and open space with specific type indicated  X           X
Areas to be dedicated to or reserved for public use           X           X
Commercial areas (if applicable)                              X
Future ownership (dedication or reservation for public use to
governmental body, for owners to duly constituted homeowners' X
association, or for tenants remaining in subdivider's
ownership) of recreation and open space lands
 
   (c)   The following supplemental information shall be submitted to the
village manager:
Information Preliminary Final
Information                                                   Preliminary Final
PLANS FOR UTILITY LAYOUTS INCLUDING: (PRELIMINARY PLANS SHALL INCLUDE SCHEMATIC
DRAWINGS)
Sanitary sewers
Storm sewers                                                  X
Other drainage facilities, if any                             X
Water distribution lines                                      X
Telephone lines                                               X
Electric lines                                                X
Water systems illustrating connections to existing systems,
showing lines sizes, the location of fire hydrants, blowoffs, X
manholes, force mains and gate valves
Plans for individual water supply and sewage disposal         X
systems, if any
Profiles based upon mean sea level datum for sanitary sewers  X
and storm sewers
SITE CALCULATIONS INCLUDING:
Acreage in total tract to be subdivided                       X
Acreage in parks and recreation areas and other               X
nonresidential uses
Total number of lots created                                  X
Acreage in the smallest lot in the subdivision                X
Linear feet in streets                                        X           X
Sufficient engineering data to determine readily and
reproduce on the ground every straight or curved line, street
line, lot line, right-of-way line, easement line, and setback
line, including dimensions, bearings, or deflection angles,
radii, central angles, and tangent distance for the center                X
line of the curved property lines that are not the boundary
line of curved streets. All dimensions shall be measured to
the nearest one-tenth of a foot and all angles to the nearest
minute
Accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments,                     X
markers, and control points
Copy of any proposed deed restrictions or similar covenants.
Such restrictions are mandatory when private streets and                  X
recreation areas are established
Copy of the erosion control plan submitted to the appropriate             X
authority, if such a plan is required
Site topo one-foot intervals                                  X
Evidence that all required state/federal permit applications  X
shall have been submitted to appropriate authorities
404 Wetland delineation survey                                X
 
(Ord. No. 8A, art. V, § I, 7-17-1998)
Sec. 26-92. Other requirements.
   (a)   Generally.
      (1)   The final plat shall meet the requirements of G.S. 47-30 or
successor thereto. The seal and signature of a surveyor shall certify this
statute is satisfied. The plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn to an
appropriate scale and shall be no larger than 24 inches by 18 inches.
      (2)   If the final plat requires more than one sheet, a key diagram
showing relative location of the several sections shall be drawn on each sheet
and the individual sheets shall provide appropriate match lines.
   (b)   Certification to be notarized. The final plat shall contain the
following certification, which shall be completed by the registered land
surveyor or engineer on whose authority the subdivision was prepared, filling
in all appropriate information, and whose signature shall be acknowledged by a
notary public or other official authorized to administer oaths:
      (1)   On the final plat:
         "I,________, certify that this map was (drawn by me) (drawn under my
supervision) from (an actual survey made by me) (an actual survey made under my
supervision) (deed description recorded in book ________, page ________, book
________, page ________, etc.) (other); that the error of closure as calculated
by latitudes and departures is 1:________; that the boundaries not surveyed are
shown as broken lines plotted from information found in book ________, page
________; that this map was prepared in accordance with G.S. 47-30 as amended.
Witness my hand and seal this ________ day of ________A.D., 20________.
________, surveyor (or engineer).
      (2)   Any final plat which shall include the presence of private streets
thereon shall further contain the notice with regard to the existence of
private streets as set forth in section
26-124(j).
(Ord. No. 8A, art. V, § II, 7-17-1998)
Secs. 26-93--26-120. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV.
MINIMUM DESIGN STANDARDS
Sec. 26-121. Generally.
   Each subdivision shall contain the improvements specified in this article,
which shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter
and paid for by the subdivider, unless other means of financing is specifically
stated in this chapter. Land shall be dedicated and reserved in each
subdivision as specified in this article. Each subdivision shall adhere to the
minimum standards of design established by this article.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. VI, § I, 7-17-1998)
Sec. 26-122. Name duplication.
   The name of the subdivision shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the
name of an existing subdivision within the village.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. VI, § II, 7-17-1998)
Sec. 26-123. Lots.
   The orientation, size, width, depth, and other standards of design for lots
in a proposed subdivision must comply in all respects with the requirements of
chapter
32, pertaining to zoning for the district in which the subdivision is located
and any other specifically adopted plans.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. VI, § III, 7-17-1998)
Sec. 26-124. Streets.
   (a)   Generally. The arrangement, character, width, grade, and location of
all streets shall provide for the most advantageous development of the entire
neighboring area, and shall be considered in relation to existing and planned
streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in
appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such
streets. Standards that apply to streets are as follows in subsection (b)
through (l).
   (b)   Relationship of proposed streets to adjoining streets. The proposed
street system shall be extended in alignment with existing streets unless
otherwise approved by the village council.
   (c)   Street names. Proposed streets, which are proposed to be in alignment
with others already existing and named, shall bear the name of the existing
streets. Other street names shall be assigned by the subdivider subject to the
approval of the village manager. Names of streets which duplicate or are
phonetically similar with the names of existing streets shall not be approved.
   (d)   Access to public streets. Every lot shall have either direct or
indirect access to a public street. A lot has direct access to a public street
if the lot abuts such a street for at least 30 feet. A lot has indirect access
if it is abutting a public street for less than 30 feet or has access to a
public street only by means of a private street. All private streets shall be
designed so as to afford, for emergency vehicles as well as public utility and
maintenance vehicles, ingress and egress over such street to each lot with
indirect access.
   (e)   Intended use of streets. Street widths shall be as following:
    (1)   Secondary streets. Streets leading into and within subdivisions,
whether public or private, shall be provided with a right-of-way. Every
secondary street which connects a subdivision to a public street serves as a
means of ingress and egress and shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 30
feet. However, the village council may require wider rights-of-way in circum-
stances, where, due to design, topography or other factors peculiar to the land
to be subdivided, the minimum width set forth herein is deemed to be inadequate
to permit such street to function safely as a secondary street.
    (2)   Primary thorough fares. When a street within a subdivision serves as
a collector for 100 lots or more, or is capable of extension onto abutting
lands with that capability, it shall be classified as a primary thoroughfare
and there shall be a minimum right-of-way of 40 feet for single lane primary
thoroughfares and bifurcated primary thoroughfares. If a street connects two
primary thoroughfares, it shall be classified as primary thoroughfare,
regardless of the number of lots it serves. Other internal secondary streets in
a subdivision may be provided with a right-of-way width of 30 feet. If a
subdivision connects to an existing primary thoroughfare, and contiguous
alignment would warrant the extension of such thoroughfare, the village council
may allow easements on both sides of the right-of-way to compose the required
width.
   (3)   Service access thoroughfare. When a paved surface is provided
primarily for service vehicles and resident vehicles and not general traffic it
shall be classified as a service access thoroughfare.
   (f)   Minimum design and construction stan-dards. It is the intent of this
chapter that all streets, within a subdivision or not, be designed and
constructed to minimum standards including drainage, grading, subbase, base and
paving. Any new subdivision road shall be paved and constructed according to
the minimum standards of design and construction according to this chapter. For
every public street, all of the following minimum design and construction
standards and criteria for subdivisions shall apply:
   (1)   Design criteria by road classification.
      a.   The following list classifies road types into three categories and
dictates the minimum design standards for each classification:
               Classification   Type
                  A   Secondary streets and culs-de-sac
                  B   Primary single lane thoroughfares
                  C   Primary bifurcated thoroughfares
                  D   Service access thoroughfares
Description A B C D
Description                          A         B         C            D
Right-of-way width                   30 feet   40 feet   40 feet      20 feet
Clearing width                       16 feet   18 feet   16 feet/lane 14 feet
Clearing height at pavement          13.5 feet 13.5 feet 13.5 feet    13.5 feet
Base course width                    14 feet   16 feet   12 feet/lane 12 feet
Pavement width                       12 feet   14 feet   10 feet/lane 10 feet
Minimum Crown                        1/4"/foot 1/4"/foot 1/4"/foot    1/4"/foot
Super elevation rate                 N/A       1/4"/foot 1/4"/foot    1/4"/foot
Minimum elevation                    6' MSL    6' MSL    6' MSL       6' MSL
Minimum sight distance on curves and 50 feet   75 feet   50 feet      50 feet
intersections
Minimum turn-around radius from C/   24 feet   N/A       N/A          N/A
L pavement
 
       b.   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible
at right angles (90 degrees).
       c.   New street intersections shall, whenever practical, coincide in
centerline alignment with any existing or approved preliminary plat or final
plat intersections on the opposite side of the street. Innovations in design
are encouraged through such means as curvilinear streets, culs-de-sac, courts,
and circles.
       d.   At all intersections, there shall be either an unobstructed 25-foot
radius or a 25-foot diagonal cutoff. Minimum sight distance along intersecting
roads shall be 50 feet. Crossovers will be 1 1/2 times as wide as its
connecting roads, with a minimum turning radius of 22 feet.
       e.   Add two feet to pavement width if stand up roll-out curbing is
used. If curbing is flush with pavement surface, then curbing shall at least be
one foot wide on each side to allow two additional feet of barrier-free driving
surface area.
    (2)   Pavement design. All streets shall meet the following minimum
requirements for base and pavement surface:
Base Course   Pavement Surface
6" ABC stone, compacted   1.5" SA or I-2 asphalt or BST
4" asphalt Base   1.5" SA or I-2 asphalt or BST
ABC   Aggregated base course, no. 7 stone
SA   Bituminous concrete surface course, type F-1 (sand asphalt)
I-2   Bituminous concrete surface course, type I-2
Base Course   Pavement Surface
BST   Bituminous surface treatment (3 courses)
      *Geosynthetic material, when used under four inches of compacted ABC
stone base, shall be considered the equivalent of six inches compacted ABC
stone alone.
      Any design or materials that may vary from any street design or materials
listed in subsection (f)(2) of this section shall have performance
characteristics equal to or greater than design and materials required in
subsection (f)(2) of this section and the use of the such design and/or
materials shall be approved by the manager only prior to actual installation of
the street and then only upon a showing by the subdivider, by clear, cogent and
convincing evidence, to the manager that such proposed substitute design or
materials meets or exceed performance characteristics of the design or
materials required by and similarly meet all requirements set forth in the then
current edition of North Carolina Standard Specifications for Roads and
Structures published by the state department of transportation.
   (3)   Drainage criteria. All subdivisions must meet all state, federal, and
village stormwater and drainage requirements.
   (4)   Utility easements.
      a.   For public streets, the construction and maintenance of all
utilities, cable, and telephone lines shall be located in the street rights-of-
way between the paved roadway and the street right-of-way line, except gravity
collection sewer lines may be located under the pavement within the right-of-
way. Where topography or subdivision design considerations make such location
impractical and utilities must be located outside the right-of-way, then a
perpetual unobstructed easement shall be provided with access to the street
right-of-way. The approving board shall determine where these exceptions are
necessary.
      b.   In addition, manholes should be designed and located in such a
manner that will cause the least interference with roadway users, other
utilities and future highway expansion. Every effort should be made to avoid
their location in wheel paths or at street intersections. All plans,
specifications, design computations, and installations of manholes shall meet
the state department of transportation standards.
      c.   Easements shall be provided for each drainage path, and shall be a
width adequate to accommodate any such installation and maintenance.
      d.   An easement for utilities which cannot be accommodated within the
street easement shall be provided to ensure that there can be service to each
lot by electric, telephone, water and sewer utilities. When such easements are
required they shall provide ten feet on each side of the lot line, for a total
of 20 feet.
   (g)   Water and sewer systems.
   (1)   Each lot shall be capable of service with a water system and a sewage
disposal system meeting standards and requirements of the state.
   (2)   When a subdivision is within 1,000 feet of a water or sewer system,
and the system has the capacity to provide the necessary water and sewer, the
subdivider shall connect to such system and shall design a water distribution
system for the subdivision meeting any requirements of state and village
ordinances.
   (h)   Platting to ownership boundaries; reserve strips. All subdivisions
must extend to outer prop-erty lines of the parcel of property to be subdi-
vided. Survey descriptions must conform to existing survey descriptions of
record to ensure there is no land area remaining between the lots and streets
and the property boundary.
   (i)   Observance of federal and state requirements. The subdivider shall
exercise care in determining that all federal and state regulatory statutes and
administrative code requirements relating to lands and waters are satisfied.
   (j)   Private streets.
    (1)   The road classification utilized (A, B, C) for public streets shall
be the same as private. The following requirements should apply to all private
streets:
 
Description        A (feet) B (feet) C (feet) D (feet)
Right-of-way width 20       30       40       20
Clearing width     16       16       16       14
Base course width  12       14       12       12
Clearing height    12       12       12       12
 
      *The Harbor streets are covered under a separate agreement made effective
March 21, 2013.
   (2)   The village council may allow clearing widths in some cases to be
less, due to specimen tree preservation. Due to the site specific concerns of
the island, every effort should be made to blend roadways with the natural
contours of the island.
   (3)   Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles (90 degrees).
   (4)   New street intersections shall, whenever practical, coincide in
centerline alignment with any existing or approved preliminary plat or final
plat intersections on the opposite side of the street. Innovations in design
are encouraged through such means as curvilinear streets, culs-de-sac, courts,
and circles.
   (5)   The village council in some cases may require wider roads or clearing
area to promote public safety and the interest of the public. Private streets
must be indi-cated on plats as private, and maintenance and upkeep shall be the
responsibility of the property owner's association. For private streets, the
following statement shall be printed in bold on the plat of record:
      NOTE: THE STREETS DESIGNATED HEREON AS "PRIVATE" ARE NOT OR WILL NOT BE
CONSTRUCTED TO MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR DEDICATION TO AND ACCEPTANCE BY THE
VILLAGE OF BALD HEAD ISLAND AND THE VILLAGE SHALL NOT BE RESPONSIBLE, NOW OR AT
ANY TIME IN THE FUTURE, FOR MAINTENANCE OF ANY STREET, PAVEMENT, UTILITY OR
OTHER IMPROVEMENTS LOCATED WITHIN THE RIGHTS-OF-WAY OF ANY PRIVATE STREET.
   (k)   Street acceptance standards. In order for a street to be accepted into
the village street system, the following criteria shall be met:
   (1)   The street must be public as defined in this chapter and therefore
must meet the minimum design and construction standards set forth in subsection
(f) of this section ("construction standards").
   (2)   The individual(s) or entity dedicating the street ("dedicator") must
dedicate the entire street right-of-way to the village free of charge.
   (3)   The dedicator shall provide a sealed North Carolina engineer's written
certificate stating that the street meets the construction standards and has no
condition or deterioration which suggests any existing or imminent failure to
comply with the construction standards. In addition, the engineer will evaluate
the street being proposed, assess for drainage issues, and submit a sealed
certificate that the street has adequate drainage for use as a public street.
The cost of the engineer's certification and drainage assessment shall be the
responsibility of the dedicator.
   (4)   Dedicator shall submit a letter stating that there has been no
flooding or drainage issues within the past 12 months on the street being
proposed for dedication.
The village has the right to go onto and inspect the street and to obtain core
samples for independent testing and analysis prior to acceptance of the street.
The village has the right to refuse acceptance of any street offered for
dedication.
   (l)   Timber bridge construction standards.
   (1)   The village shall review and approve all plans and specifications for
timber bridges proposed to be constructed as a part of any public or private
street. Timber bridges, whether constructed as a part of public or private
streets, shall adhere to public and private street standards for right-of-way
widths, unobstructed driveable area as determined by required base width,
clearing height, minimum turnaround radius, and minimum sight distances in
accordance with article IV of this chapter.
   (2)   The proposed construction shall comply with all village ordinances,
state building codes, village transportation plans, and all applicable CAMA
requirements. Further, timber bridges must be designed and constructed to the
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO)
standard specifications for bridges and structures.
   (3)   The village transportation engineer shall review and approve design
and construction plans for compliance with this section, and to address other
safety concerns as needed, prior to construction. Such improvements shall be
completed, or guarantees furnished in accordance in lieu thereof with this
chapter.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. VI, § I, 7-17-1998; Ord. of 4-15-2000, § I; Ord. No. 2007-
0601, 6-15-2007; Ord. No. 2013-1001, 9-10-2013; Ord. No. 2025-1002, § 1, 10-17-
2025)
   Cross References: Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 24.
Secs. 26-125--26-160. Reserved.
ARTICLE V.
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS
Sec. 26-161. Permanent monuments.
   (a)   Permanent monuments shall be placed at the point of intersection of
the tangents or curves when such point lies completely within the right-of-way
of the proposed street. Otherwise, monuments shall be placed on the centerline
at the points of tangency of all curved areas.
   (b)   All lot corners, other than those marked by permanent monuments, shall
be marked by metal or concrete stakes.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. VII, § I, 7-17-1998)
Sec. 26-162. Street name signs.
   (a)   The subdivider shall be responsible for erecting one street name sign
at each intersection in a form acceptable to the village manager. The
subdivider is also responsible for erecting stop and yield signs where needed
in the subdivision based on approval of the village manager. Stop signs shall
be erected at any intersection directing traffic on the inferior road to stop
and yield to vehicles traveling on the dominant road.
   (b)   Street name signs shall be consistent in size, height, appearance, and
manner of erection of those already established on the island.
   (c)   If street name signs are erected after any utility may have been
installed in a right-of-way, the subdivider is to coordinate with utility
representatives, public and private, to avoid damages to buried cables, lines
or pipes, and satisfy any requirement of such companies and/or governmental
entities.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. VII, § II, 7-17-1998)
Sec. 26-163. Streets.
   (a)   For every public and private street, all of the minimum design and
construction standards as defined in article IV of this chapter shall be met.
On the preliminary and final plats, there shall be clear language as to whether
specifically named streets shall be public or private.
   (b)   Where there are to be private streets, the subdivider must file
recorded information relating to the formation of an entity for ownership,
operation and maintenance, including all storm drainage related to and
necessary for the street. Full disclosure of such information shall be
disclosed in regard to any sales or leases of lands covered by the plat. In the
case of private streets, a street disclosure statement as defined in section
26-124(j) of this chapter shall be displayed in bold on the face of the final
recording plat.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. VII, § III, 7-17-1998)
   Cross References: sidewalks and other public places,
ch. 24.
Sec. 26-164. Construction procedures.
   (a)   No construction or installation of improvements shall commence in a
proposed subdivision until the preliminary plat has been approved, and the
appropriate authorities have approved all plans and specifications. In
addition, no lot or tract may be cleared, excavated, graded or filled until the
building inspector has issued a landscape permit whether or not such activity
is in connection with proposed construction.
   (b)   No building, zoning or other permits shall be issued for erection of a
structure in a new subdivision until all the requirements of this chapter have
been met. The subdivider, prior to commencing any work within the subdivision,
shall make arrangements with the manager to provide for adequate inspection.
The manager shall inspect and approve all completed work prior to release of
the sureties or return of cash or equivalent security in lieu of a surety.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. VII, § IV, 7-17-1998)
Secs. 26-165--26-200. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI.
FINAL PLAT APPROVAL
Sec. 26-201. Preparation of final plat and installation of improvements.
   Upon approval of the preliminary subdivision plat by the village council,
the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat, and the
installation of or arrangement for required improvements in accordance with the
approved preliminary plat and the requirements of this chapter. Prior to
approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall have installed the improvements
specified in this chapter or guaranteed their installation as provided in this
chapter. No final plat shall be approved by the manager until all subdivision
improvements have been completed or guarantees furnished in lieu thereof in
accord with this article. For any preliminary plats which indicate on their
face that the subdivision will be accomplished in sections or phases, all
subdivision improvements for that phase shall be completed prior to submission
of the final plat for that phase to the manager for approval.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. VIII, § I, 7-17-1998)
Sec. 26-202. Improvements guarantees.
   (a)   Agreement and security required. In lieu of completion of subdivision
improvements prior to final plat approval, the subdivider may execute an
agreement with adequate surety or security whereby the subdivider shall commit
to completion of all improvements subsequent to final plat approval. Upon
execution of an agreement by the subdivider, together with posting of adequate
security or sureties as required in this chapter, the final plat shall be
approved by the manager if otherwise in conformity to the requirements of this
chapter. In conjunction with the agreement to complete subdivision
improvements, the subdivider shall either provide a surety for the completion
of the improvements or post a cash or equivalent security to secure completion
of the subdivision improvements. The security or surety performance bond shall
be in an amount of 1.25 times the cost of completion of all subdivision
improvements as estimated by the village manager.
      (1)   Surety performance bond. The subdivider may obtain a performance
bond from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in the state. The
bonds shall be payable to the village and shall be in an amount equal to a
minimum of 1.25 times the entire cost, as estimated by the village manager, of
installing all required improvements. The duration of the bond shall be until
such time as the improvements are accepted by the village.
      (2)   Cash or equivalent security. The subdivider shall deposit cash, an
irrevocable letter of credit, or other instrument readily convertible into cash
at face value or with the financial institution designated as an official
depository of the village. The use of any instrument other than cash shall be
subject to the approval of the village. The amount of deposit shall be equal to
a minimum of 1.25 times the cost, as estimated by the village manager, of
installing all required improvements. If cash or other instrument is deposited
in escrow with a financial institution as provided above, then the subdivider
shall file with the village an agreement between the financial institution, the
subdivider, and the village in accordance with the following:
         a.   The cash or equivalent security shall be held by the financial
institution in trust until release of the cash or equivalent security by the
village. Such cash or equivalent security shall not be used or pledged by the
subdivider in any manner, revoked, withdrawn or diverted until release of the
sum by the village.Failure by the subdivider to complete all subdivision
improvements pursuant to plans and specifications within the time limitations
specified therefor and in conformity with this chapter shall be a default by
the subdivider under its agreement. Upon notification by the manager of the
subdivider's default and submission to the financial institution of an
engineer's estimate of the amount needed to complete the improvements, the
financial institution shall immediately pay to the village funds estimated to
complete the improvements plus administrative fees up to the full balance of
the cash or equivalent security. If the cash or equivalent security is in
excess of the amount estimated by the engineer to complete the subdivision
improvements plus administrative fees associated therewith, the financial
institution shall continue to hold remaining portions of cash or equivalent
security until notified by the manager that the improvements have in fact been
completed. Once improvements have been completed by the village, the village
may make additional demands of the financial institution for the total actual
cost of completion of the improvements, together with administrative costs
incurred by the village associated with default and completion of the
subdivision improvements by the village. The financial institution shall
thereupon pay from the cash or equivalent security all costs incurred by the
village in completion thereof plus all administrative costs up to the full
balance of the cash or equivalent security. Thereafter the financial
institution may release to the subdivider any remaining cash or equivalent
security.
      (3)   Default. If failure by the subdivider to complete all subdivision
improvements pursuant to the plans therefor and pursuant to this chapter within
the time frames set forth in the agreement, the manager shall notify the
subdivider, the surety, the financial institution holding any security, and any
other interested parties of the fact of default and the village's intent to
complete all subdivision improvements. Upon such default the village shall
undertake an engineer's estimate of the cost of completion of such
improvements. The village may demand that the surety complete the improvements
or may undertake the completion of the improvements itself. If the village
shall elect to complete the improvements itself, the village may demand of the
surety or the financial institution holding the cash or equivalent security an
amount equal to the estimated cost of completion, together with all
administrative costs, professional fees and any and all other costs anticipated
to be incurred by the village in the completion of the improvements. Upon such
demand the surety or the financial institution shall deliver funds in the
amount of such estimated cost of completion to the village which shall then use
such funds to complete the improvements; however, tender by the surety or the
financial institution of estimated cost of completion to the village in an
amount less than the surety's obligation or the cash or equivalent security
shall not release the surety or financial institution from its obligations
hereunder. If there remains any cash or equivalent security or any unused
portion of the surety's bond after demand for the estimated cost of completion,
the surety or financial institution shall retain such excess until completion
of the improvements by the village. Upon completion of the improvements and
ascertainment of the actual cost thereof, including all administrative or other
costs incurred by the village in the completion of the improvements, the surety
or financial institution shall tender to the village the actual costs incurred
in completion of the improvements including administrative and other fees up to
the maximum amount of the bond or cash or equivalent security. Upon completion
of the project by the village and payment of the actual costs thereof by the
surety or financial institution, the obligations of the surety or financial
institution shall terminate and any cash or equivalent security held by any
financial institution may be returned to the subdivider.
      (4)   Release of guarantee security. Upon successful completion of
subdivision improvements by the subdivider, the village shall notify the surety
or financial institution of the fact of successful completion of the
improvements and the release of the subdivider from any further obligations
under his agreement as well as the release of the surety or financial
institution from the obligation of its bond or security agreement.
(Ord. No. 8A, art. VIII, § I(A), 7-17-1998)
Chapter 27
RESERVED
Chapter 28
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES*
   *Charter References— Motor vehicle regulation, §
10.1 et seq.
   Cross References— Junk vehicles, §
10-51 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions,
ch. 16; streets, sidewalks and other public places,
ch. 24.
   State Law References— Motor vehicles, G. S. ch. 20; powers of local
authorities, G.S. 20-169.
Article I. General
Sec.
28-1. Preamble.
Sec.
28-2. Appeal.
Sec.
28-3. Definitions.
Sec.
28-4. Exemptions.
Sec.
28-5. Liabilities.
Sec.
28-6. Penalties.
Sec.
28-7. Towing and impoundment.
Sec.
28-8. Schedule of penalties.
Sec.
28-9. Transition of compliance with Chapter 28 for internal combustion engine
(I.C.E.) vehicles.
Secs. 28-10—28-29. Reserved.   
Article II. Operation of Vehicles
Division 1. General Rules of the Road
Sec.
28-30. Helmet requirements and restraining seat use requirements.
Sec.
28-31. Improper equipment.
Sec.
28-32. Open container of alcoholic beverage.
Sec.
28-33. Parking.
Sec.
28-34. Passing.
Sec.
28-35. Prohibited modes of transportation.
Sec.
28-36. Reckless driving.
Sec.
28-37. Speed limit.
Sec.
28-38. Stop signs.
Sec.
28-39. Streets with vehicle restrictions.
Sec.
28-40. Unlicensed drivers.
Sec.
28-41. Vehicles on beaches.
Secs. 28-42—28-49. Reserved.
Division 2. Personal-Use Electric Vehicles
Sec.
28-50. Purpose.
Sec.
28-51. Mandatory registration of personal-use electric vehicles.
Sec.
28-52. Registration requirements.
Sec.
28-53. Personal-use electric vehicle equipment and specifications.
Sec.
28-54. Issuance of registration.
Secs. 28-55—28-69. Reserved.
Division 3. Commercial-Use Vehicles
Sec.
28-70. Purpose.
Sec.
28-71. Mandatory permits for commercial-use vehicles.
Sec.
28-72. Permit requirements for electric commercial-use vehicles.
Sec.
28-73. Electric commercial-use vehicle equipment and specifications.
Sec.
28-74. Permit requirements for internal combustion engine (I.C.E.) vehicles.
Sec.
28-75. Special use permit for internal combustion engine (I.C.E.) vehicles.
Sec.
28-76. Time of operation.
Sec.
28-77. Parking of commercial-use vehicles.
Secs. 28-78—28-89. Reserved.
Division 4. Trailers
Sec.
28-90. Purpose.
Sec.
28-91. Classes of trailers.
Sec.
28-92. Permit requirements.
Sec.
28-93. Mandatory permits for commercial-use trailers.
Sec.
28-94. Special use permit.
Sec.
28-95. Time of operation.
Sec.
28-96. Parking of commercial trailers.
Secs. 28-97—28-109. Reserved.
Division 5. Taxicabs and Taxicab Drivers
Sec.
28-110. General.
Sec.
28-111. Written approval of taxicabs required.
Sec.
28-112. Taxicab driver’s license required.
Secs. 28-113—28-129. Reserved.
Article III. Harbour Village Parking District
Sec.
28-130. Establishment.
Sec.
28-131. General provisions.
Sec.
28-132. Administration.
Sec.
28-133. Enforcement and penalties.
Sec.
28-134. Exemptions.
Sec.
28-135. Miscellaneous provisions.
Secs. 28-136—28-149. Reserved.
ARTICLE I.
GENERAL
Secs. 28-1. Preamble.
   Bald Head Island is an environmentally focused community living in harmony
with nature. Safety for all who inhabit and visit is paramount. It is a
privilege to operate a vehicle on Bald Head Island, and all vehicles must be
registered or permitted. All users must share the roadways and pedestrians and
cyclists must be granted the right-of-way. All users are encouraged to use
care, to show courtesy, and to exercise common sense.
   This Chapter 28 of the Village Ordinances governing traffic and vehicles has
been amended to align with the spirit and intent of that Village Council
Resolution 2018-0601 passed on June 27, 2018, captioned “Village of Bald Head
Island Resolution Expressing Intentions of Council with Respect to Vehicles
Powered by Internal Combustion Engines.”
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019
Sec. 28-2. Appeal.
   (a)   Deadline. Unless another procedure is established for a particular
violation by ordinance or state law, assessments of civil penalties and other
enforcement decisions made under this chapter may be appealed by filing a
written notice of appeal with the Village Clerk within 30 days after the date
of notification of the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement
decision. The failure to give notice of appeal within this time period shall
constitute a waiver of the right to contest the assessment of penalties or
other enforcement decision.
   (b)   Process. Appeals shall be determined through a nonjudicial
administrative process established by the Village Manager. Rules and
procedures, if any, adopted by the Village Manager shall be made available for
review at Village Hall. The Village Manager or his designee shall render all
decisions on appeal in writing. The Village decision on appeal shall be subject
to review by the Superior Court of Brunswick County by proceedings in the
nature of certiorari. Any petition for certiorari shall be filed within 30 days
after the date that a written decision is issued.
   (c)   Appeal standard. The Village Manager or his designee shall review an
appeal from the assessment of civil penalties or other enforcement decisions
using a preponderance of the evidence standard. Notwithstanding a determination
that the preponderance of the evidence supports the assessment of civil
penalties or other enforcement decision, the Village Manager or his designee
shall have the discretion to dismiss or reduce civil penalties or reverse any
other enforcement decision where warranted.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-3. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning or the term is specifically defined otherwise
regarding a particular division or section.
   Abandoned vehicle refers to any vehicle that is left upon the Village
streets or public right-of-way in violation of a law or ordinance prohibiting
parking, left on property owned by the village for longer than 24 hours, or
left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or lessee
thereof, for longer than four hours.
   Assessment notice refers to that village notice that assesses repair or
mitigation costs associated with damages to village assets to the owner of the
offending vehicle.
   Beaches refers to foreshore, beach strand and barrier dune system.
   Bicycle refers to a device with two wheels in tandem propelled by human
power via pedals.
   Bicycle operator refers to a person who propels a bicycle.
   Bicycle passenger refers to a person who is transported on or by a bicycle.
   Commercial electric vehicle refers to any vehicle used for commercial
purposes, the propulsion of which is derived primarily from the use of
electricity.
   Commercial purpose means by or on behalf of a commercial entity that is
regularly engaged in the sale of goods or services.
   Commercial-use trailer refers to a trailer used primarily on village streets
for commercial purposes.
   Commercial-use vehicle refers to any electric vehicle, or internal
combustion engine vehicle (I.C.E. vehicle) used for any commercial purpose.
   Curb weight refers to the weight of the electric vehicle in an operational
status with all fluids and components, including batteries, but without driver,
passengers, or cargo.
   Department refers to the Village Department of Public Safety or successor
agency.
   Device refers to any apparatus solely propelled by the human body.
   Director refers to the Director of the Department or other individual
designated to act on behalf of the Director.
   Electric golf cart refers to any vehicle used in the conveyance or
transportation of persons or property on village streets, the propulsion of
which is derived from the use of electricity, and the original base model of
which is designed for golf course use.
   Electric vehicle refers to any vehicle used in the conveyance or
transportation of persons or property on village streets, the propulsion of
which is derived from the use of electricity.
   Emergency refers to a situation that to a reasonable person poses an
immediate risk to health, life, property, or environment.
   Emergency vehicle refers to any vehicle that responds to an emergency as
directed by the village or other duly acting governmental agency.
   Government vehicle refers to any vehicle being operated for official
government business by an agent or employee of the United States, North
Carolina, or any county or municipality of North Carolina.
   Harbour Village Parking District ("District") refers to the right-of-way
boundaries of those public
streets and alleys in the District that have been dedicated and accepted by the
Village. A portion of the District lies outside the Harbour Village subdivision
boundary.
   Heavy equipment vehicle refers to a heavy-duty vehicle operated primarily
for earthwork functions.
   Helmet refers to a piece of headgear that meets or exceeds the impact
standards for protective helmets set by the American National Standards
Institute (ANSI), the Snell Memorial Foundation, Consumer Product Safety
Commission Standards, or ASTM bicycle helmet standards, as they may beamended
from time to time. A protective helmet shall be appropriately fitted and shall
include straps designated to affix the helmet snugly and securely to the head.
   Internal combustion engine vehicle (I.C.E. vehicle) refers to any vehicle,
the propulsion of which is derived from the use of any engine powered solely or
partially by the internal combustion of fossil fuels.
   Lawful possessor refers to any person who owns, possesses, or operates any
vehicle towed or impounded pursuant to this chapter.
   Licensed driver refers to any individual legally licensed to operate a
vehicle on the streets or highways of the State of North Carolina.
   Nuisance vehicle refers to any vehicle left on public or private property
that is determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, or a public
nuisance.
   Official Island Transportation System refers to the vehicles used primarily
to deliver persons or property to and from the ferries that service Bald Head
Island.
   Officer refers to any duly sworn individual employed or contracted by the
Village Department.
   Owner refers to the person who owns any vehicle as shown on the village
registration or permit application for a permit to operate such vehicle or, if
no such application exists, on the registration records for such vehicle as
maintained by the State Division of Motor Vehicles.
   Owner's address refers to that mailing address of the owner of any vehicle
as shown on the village registration or permit application for the right to
operate such vehicle on village streets or, if no such application exists, on
the records for such vehicle as maintained by the State Division of Motor
Vehicles.
   Pedestrian refers to a person who goes or travels on foot.
   Permit refers to permission obtained from the Department legally to operate
a commercial-use vehicle on village streets.
   Person means any individual, corporation, company, partnership, trust, or
like entity.
   Personal-use electric vehicle refers to any electric vehicle used primarily
on village streets for personal or residential use.
   Personal-use trailer refers to a trailer used primarily on village streets
for personal or residential purposes.
   Public right-of-way refers to any right-of-way other than a public street
that is under the jurisdiction and control of the village.
   Public utility vehicle refers to those vehicles used by public utility
companies to provide essential services, such as broadband, electricity, gas,
sewer, telephone, and water.
   Registration refers to permission obtained from the Department legally to
operate a personal-use vehicle on village streets.
   Repair cost refers to the total cost to the village to repair, mitigate, and
return any village asset to its condition immediately prior to the specific
damage sustained, including, without limitation, all costs of labor, materials
and equipment used to make such repairs.
   Restraining seat refers to a seat separate from the saddle seat for the
operator of the bicycle that is fastened securely to the frame of the bicycle
according to manufacturer's instructions. It must be adequately equipped to
restrain the passenger in such seat as to protect such passenger from the
moving parts of the bicycle. A restraining seat shall meet or exceed the
standards set by the Consumer Product Safety Commission, as well as the
standards set by 16 CFR 1501, 16 CFR 1500.48, 16 CFR 1500.49, and 16 CFR 1303,
as they may be amended from time to time.
   Scooter refers to a device consisting of a narrow footboard mounted between
two or more wheels in tandem with an upright steering handle.
   Segway refers to a self-balancing, non-tandem, two-wheeled device designed
to transport one person.
   Skateboard refers to a flat, short, narrow board mounted on four wheels,
generally ridden in a standing position.
   Special use permit refers to the permission obtained from the Department to
operate I.C.E. vehicles outside workday hours, and to operate I.C.E. vehicles
on streets with vehicle restrictions.
   Taxicab refers to any electrically-powered vehicle, seating nine or fewer
passengers, operated upon streets, as authorized and approved under this
chapter, on-call or on a standing basis, accepting or soliciting passengers for
hire between such points as may be directed by the passenger so being
transported. Taxicab also includes any electrically-powered vehicle, seating 12
or fewer passengers upon streets, as authorized and approved under this
chapter, on a fixed route, accepting or soliciting passengers for hire. Taxicab
includes both in-service and out-of-service vehicles. Taxicab shall not mean
the Official Island Transportation System operated for delivery of ferry
passengers.
   Taxicab operator refers to the person, business, or entity that operates a
taxicab on village streets.
   Terminal refers to any point of embarkation or disembarkation to or from
Bald Head Island used by and for public transportation.
   Towing and impoundment refers to the process of the village or its
contractor removing a vehicle and confining it to a secure place.
   Trailer refers to an unpowered vehicle that is being towed by another
vehicle.
   Tricycle refers to a device with three wheels propelled by human power via
pedals.
   Tricycle operator refers to a person who propels a tricycle.
   Tricycle passenger refers to a person who is transported on or by a
tricycle.
   Unattended vehicle refers to any vehicle located on village streets without
an identifiable lawful possessor.
   Unlicensed driver refers to any individual not legally licensed to operate a
vehicle on the streets or highways of the State of North Carolina.
   Vehicle refers to any machine by which any person or property may be
transported on village streets, the propulsion of which is derived from the use
of electricity or the internal combustion of fossil fuels.
   Vehicle dimensions refer to the maximum vehicle dimensions allowed on
village streets.
   Village asset refers to any street, signage, vegetation, road or other real
or personal property of the village.
   Village Manager refers to the individual employed by Village Council to
serve as the chief executive officer of the Village of Bald Head Island or the
individual designated to act on behalf of the Village Manager.
   Village streets refers to any public right-of-way for vehicular traffic
inclusive of the shoulders, rights-of-way, unimproved portion and any
improvements of any kind thereto, including any vegetation thereon.
   Workday refers to the time period from 6:00 o'clock a.m. until 6:00 o'clock
p.m., Monday through Friday. The following holidays, on the days nationally
observed or otherwise, shall be non-workdays: New Year's Day, Easter Friday,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Thursday and Friday,
and Christmas Eve through Christmas Day. Provided, however, this definition
shall not be construed to govern hours of work, such as on a job site, which is
elsewhere regulated in the Village Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
   Cross-reference—Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 28-4. Exemptions.
   The operation of electrically powered vehicles within the village is exempt
from the following provisions of the North Carolina General Statutes: G.S. 20-
50, G.S. 20-52, G.S. 20-57, G.S. 20-63, G.S. 20-115, G.S. 20-122.1, G.S. 20-
123.2, G.S. 20-125, G.S. 20-125.1, G.S. 20-126, G.S. 20-127(b), G.S. 20-127(c),
G.S. 20-128, G.S. 20-129, G.S. 20-131, G.S. 20-135.2, G.S. 20-l35.2(a), G.S.
20-135.3, G.S. 20-137.1, and G.S. 20-309.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-5. Liabilities.
   (1)   Any applicant for a registration or permit to operate a vehicle on
village streets shall be deemed to be the agent of the owner of such vehicle
for the purposes of this chapter.
   (2)   Any person applying for a registration or permit to operate a vehicle
on village streets shall be deemed to have agreed as agent of the owner to
indemnify the village from any specific damage done to any village asset by
such vehicle. Further, any person applying for a registration or permit to
operate a vehicle on village streets shall include a written agreement by the
applicant as agent of the owner to indemnify and fully hold harmless the
village from any specific damage to any village asset occasioned by the
operation of the registered or permitted vehicle.
   (3)   Upon identification of any specific damage occasioned to any village
asset by the operation of any vehicle, the village may undertake the repair and
restoration of any such asset to the conditionimmediately before such damage
occurred and may assess the repair costs against the owner of the vehicle
causing such damage.
   (4)   Upon identification of such repair costs, the Village Manager shall
cause to be issued to the owner of such vehicle at the owner's address by first
class mail, postage prepaid and affixed thereto, an assessment notice. Such
notice shall include notification that the village intends to seek collection
of the repair costs from the owner thereof and that the owner shall have a
period of ten working days from the date of issuance of such notice in which to
notify the Village Manager in writing if such liability is contested in any
manner. If not contested by the owner, the assessment notice shall become the
final assessment. If the owner of such vehicle shall contest any aspect of the
assessment notice, the owner shall do so in writing delivered to the Village
Manager within ten days of the date of the assessment notice and the Village
Manager shall then schedule a hearing to be conducted not less than ten working
days after receipt of the notice. At such hearing, the objection of the owner
shall be heard and the owner shall have full opportunity to present any
objections to such assessment, together with any evidence in support thereof.
The Village Manager shall then decide all issues contested by the owner. The
Village Manager's decision with regard to all issues contested by the owner,
including but not limited to the liability of such owner for repair costs and
amount thereof, shall be final. The Village Manager shall notify the owner of
the decision and shall deliver written notice of the decision to the owner at
the owner's address by placing such notice in the United States mail with
first-class postage, prepaid and affixed thereto, within four working days of
the hearing. Such notice shall then become the final assessment. The owner
shall have 15 working days from the date of mailing of the final assessment in
which to pay the assessment.
   (5)   If the owner shall not pay the final assessment within 15 working days
of the date when the assessment becomes final, any registration of permit for
operation of the vehicle upon the village streets shall be revoked and no
registration or permit shall be issued thereafter to operate such vehicle on
the village streets until such time as the assessment has been paid in full.
Additionally, the village may seek collection of the assessment through any
civil process allowed by law.
(Ord. of 2000-26, § 2, 10-21-2000; Ord. No. 2010-0902, 9-24-2010; Ord. of 2019,
10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-6. Penalties.
   (1)   Unless otherwise stated herein on the schedule of penalties, village
enforcement of any penalty for violation of any provision in this chapter shall
be nonexclusive and shall not restrict further enforcement pursuant to G.S. 14-
4. Failure to satisfy any civil penalty assessed pursuant to this chapter
within the prescribed time may be recovered by the village in a civil action in
the nature of debt pursuant to G.S. 160A-175.
   (2)   Penalties for violation of this chapter shall be set forth on a
schedule adopted from time to time by resolution of Village Council. Any
violation not specified on said table shall be subject to a penalty of $50.00
pursuant to G.S. 160A-175 and shall be exempt from prosecution under G.S. 14-4.
   (3)   Any continuing violation hereof shall be deemed a separate offense
subject to fine for each calendar day during or on which the violation shall
continue.
   (4)   The civil penalty shall be paid during regular business hours at the
office of the Village Clerk or online at the village website
(www.villagebhi.org/payments) within 48 hours of issuance of the civil
citation. Violation of this section shall be exempt from prosecution pursuant
to G.S. 14-4.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-7. Towing and impoundment.
   (a)   Procedure. If any vehicle shall be determined by any officer of the
Department to be subject to towing and impoundment as an abandoned or a
nuisance vehicle, such officer is hereby authorized and empowered to detain the
vehicle and order its towing and removal by the village to an impound area
designated by the Village Manager for the safe storage thereof. The officer
authorizing towing and impoundment shall secure custody of the impounded
vehicle and shall be responsible for the delivery of the vehicle into the
custody of any person with whom the village contracts to tow and/or store
vehicles.
   (b)   Notice. The village shall make a concerted effort to determine the
identity of the owner or lawful possessor of the towed and impounded vehicle.
Upon identification, the village will notify the owner or lawful possessor of
the fact that the vehicle has been towed and impounded, the place where the
vehicle is located, the reason for the towing and impoundment, including any
violation with which the owner or lawful possessor is charged, the procedure
that must be followed to have the vehicle returned, and the procedure the owner
must follow to request a probable cause hearing on the towing. The village may
attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner or lawful possessor by telephone or
electronic means; however, whether or not the owner or lawful possessor is
reached by telephone or electronic means, written notice, including the
information set forth above, shall, unless waived in writing, also be mailed to
the registered owner's last known address.
   (c)   Fees. An owner or lawful possessor seeking to reclaim an impounded
vehicle shall be assessed the actual costs incurred by the village for towing
and storage of an impounded vehicle. The Village Manager is authorized and
empowered to contract for the towing and storage of vehicles. Any such contract
must provide for a schedule of reasonable towing fees and shall be available
for inspection with the Village Clerk.
   (d)   Reclaiming impounded vehicle. The Department is authorized to retain
possession of any vehicle towed pursuant to this section until such time as the
owner or lawful possessor shall appear to claim possession of the vehicle. In
order to reclaim possession of any vehicle towed and impounded, including
during the pendency of a request for a probable cause hearing, the owner or
lawful possessor shall:
   (1)   Present evidence of ownership or lawful possession of the vehicle;
   (2)   Present evidence that a licensed driver is present and authorized to
operate the vehicle on village streets; and
   (3)   Pay all assessed towing and storage costs that accrued during the
period of impoundment and sign a receipt confirming the release and return of
the vehicle, or post a bond for double the amount of such fees and charges to
the contractor with whom the village has contracted to tow and/or store
vehicles.
   (e)   Hearing before sale or final disposition. After the removal of an
abandoned or a nuisance vehicle, the owner or lawful possessor is entitled to a
hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing
the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the Village
Clerk within 30 days of the written notice issued pursuant to this section.
Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the Village Manager shall set a quasi-
judicial hearing before the Village Transportation Committee, or, if no such
Transportation Committee is then-organized and existing, before the Village
Council within 30 days of receipt of the request. The Village Manager may
establish rules and procedures that govern the appeal and quasi-judicial
hearing process. The decision of the Transportation Committee or Village
Council is subject to further review on appeal to the District Court of
Brunswick County by proceedings in the nature of certiorari. Any petition for
writ of certiorari shall be filed within 30 days after the date that the
Transportation Committee or Village Council issues a written decision.
   (f)   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle. Any vehicle declared to be
an abandoned or a nuisance vehicle under this chapter which is not claimed by
the owner or lawful possessor may be disposed of by the village or its
contractor for towing and/or storage of vehicles. Disposition of such a vehicle
shall be carried out through a procedure similar to that provided in G.S.
Chapter 44A, Article 1. If the vehicle is not purchased at sale and the
estimated value is less than the amount of fees accrued for towing and storage,
the vehicle may be destroyed.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-8. Schedule of penalties.
SCHEDULE OF PENALTIES
Violation         Section       Penalties    
                              First Offense Second Offense Third Offense
NC State Violations May Be Issued for the Following Offenses  
Open container;
driving under the 28-32         $250                         
influence
Reckless driving  28-36         $250                         
Speeding in one   28-37         $50           $75            $100
calendar year
Bald Head Island Civil Citations May Be Issued for the Following Offenses
Helmet            28-30         $10                          
Improper                                                     Towing &
equipment         28-31         $50           $100           Impoundment or
                                                             Removal *
                  28-33 (a) All                              Towing &
Parking           28-33 (b)     $50           $100           Impoundment or
                  Trailers                                   Removal *
                                                             Towing &
Passing           28-34         $50           $100           Impoundment or
                                                             Removal *
Prohibited                                                   Towing &
vehicles          28-35         $75           $100           Impoundment or
                                                             Removal *
Stop sign         28-38         $75                          
Streets with                                                 Towing &
vehicle           28-39         $50           $100           Impoundment or
restrictions                                                 Removal *
Unlicensed        28-40         $250                         
drivers
Vehicles on beach 28-41         $250                         
Bald Head Island Civil Citations May Be Issued for the Following
Registration-Related Offenses
Mandatory                                                    Towing &
registration of   28-51         $50           $100           Impoundment or
personal-use                                                 Removal *
electric vehicle
Mandatory permits                                            Towing &
for commercial-   28-71         $50           $100           Impoundment or
use vehicles                                                 Removal *
Mandatory permits                                            Towing &
for commercial-   28-93         $50           $100           Impoundment or
use trailers                                                 Removal *
*Actual cost for towing and impoundment, or for removal of vehicle from
island
 
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-9. Transition of compliance with Chapter 28 for internal combustion
engine (I.C.E.) vehicles.
   Transition of compliance with Chapter 28 for internal combustion engine
(I.C.E.) vehicles.
   (1)   Special use permit requirements will become effective July 1, 2020.
   (2)   The cost-of-living adjustments will be based on the Consumer Price
Index for All Urban Consumers, "CPI-U."
      2019-2020   Revised Transportation Ordinance, traffic and vehicles
approved increase I.C.E. daily fees by cost-of-living adjustment, 2000-2019
(47.25%)
      2020-2021   Increase I.C.E. annual fees by one-half (1/2) cost of living
adjustment, 2000-2020
            Increase I.C.E. daily fees by cost-of-living-adjustment, 2019-2020
            Add I.C.E. special use permits
            Require plan for converting to non-I.C.E. vehicles
            First-time applicants required to use non-I.C.E. vehicles, as
applicable
      2021-2022   Increase I.C.E. annual fees by the remaining one-half (1/2)
cost of living adjustment, 2000-2021
      2000-2021   Increase I.C.E. daily fees by cost-of-living adjustment,
2020-2021
            Show progress on plans to convert to non-I.C.E. vehicles, as
applicable
      2022-2023   Evaluate I.C.E. annual and daily fees increase
            Report progress on plans for conversion to non-I.C.E. vehicles, as
appropriate
      2024-2025   Transition for I.C.E. vehicles complete, as appropriate
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019; Ord. No. 2025-0604, §§ 1, 2, 6-20-2025)
ARTICLE II.
OPERATION OF VEHICLES*
*   State Law References: Operation of vehicles and rules of the road, G.S. 20-
138 et seq.
DIVISION 1.
GENERAL RULES OF THE ROAD
All pedestrians and all operators of all vehicles and devices on the village
streets are subject to and must comply with all basic rules of the road, as
well as the general rules of the road specified herein.
Sec. 28-30. Helmet requirements and restraining seat use requirements.
   (1)   A protective helmet is required for any person under the age of 16
years when operating a human-powered device, such as a bicycle, a tricycle,
roller blades, in-line skates or roller skates, human-powered scooter, or
human-powered skateboard on village streets.
   (2)   A protective helmet is required for use by those licensed drivers
operating electric devices.
   (3)   No bicycle operator shall allow anyone under the age of four years, or
weighing less than 40 pounds, to ride as a bicycle passenger other than in a
restraining seat that protects the passenger from moving bicycle parts, unless
the passenger is seated astride a permanently affixed seat of a tandem bicycle.
   (4)   No bicycle operator shall allow anyone under the age of 16 years to
ride as a bicycle passenger unless the passenger is wearing a protective
helmet.
   (5)   No parent or guardian of a human-powered bicycle operator shall
knowingly allow a violation of this section.
   (6)   It shall be unlawful to rent or lease any bicycle, tricycle, roller
blades, in-line skates, roller skates, scooter, or skateboard to or for the use
of any person under the age of 16 years unless:
   (a)   The person is in possession of a properly fitted protective helmet at
the time of such rental or lease; or
   (b)   The rental or lease includes a properly fitted protective helmet.
   (7)   Businesses that rent bicycles, tricycles, roller blades, in-line
skates, scooters, or skateboards shall post or make available to anyone renting
such devices written notice explaining the provisions of this section.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-31. Improper equipment.
   Requirements. The owner of any vehicle is responsible for the proper
maintenance of all equipment that existed consistent with the original
published manufacturer's specifications at the time of the initial village
registration inspection.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-32. Open container of alcoholic beverage.
   Prohibited. No person shall either possess an alcoholic beverage other than
in the unopened manufacturer's original container or consume an alcoholic
beverage in a vehicle while on the village streets. Only the person who
possesses or consumes an alcoholic beverage in violation of this section shall
be charged with this offense.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-33. Parking.
   Prohibited.
   (1)   No vehicle or trailer shall be left unattended in a location where it
impedes traffic or emergency vehicle access or transit.
   (2)   No vehicle or trailer shall be parked in a posted "no parking" area.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-34. Passing.
   Prohibited. No vehicle towing a trailer is allowed to pass another vehicle
or device on village streets.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-35. Prohibited modes of transportation.
   (a)   Prohibited.
   (1)   Use of electric scooters, electric skateboards, hover boards, Segways,
or similar apparatus on village streets is limited to individuals holding valid
drivers' licenses. Operators are required to wear helmets.
   (2)   Gas-powered golf carts are prohibited on village streets.
   (3)   Jet skis are not allowed to be parked on village streets or launched
from the village docks.
   (4)   All-terrain vehicles (ATVs), gators, side-by-sides, and similar light-
work or recreational vehicles are prohibited on village streets.
   (b)   Exceptions.
   (1)   Operators of Bald Head Island Conservancy vehicles may use village
streets solely to access the beaches from the Conservancy campus; and
   (2)   Operators of Bald Head Club vehicles may use village streets solely to
cross from one portion of golf course property to another.
   (3)   Emergency vehicles and government vehicles are exempt.
   (4)   Electrically powered bicycles, tricycles and wheelchairs are exempt.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-36. Reckless driving.
   Prohibited.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle on village
streets carelessly and heedlessly in willful or wanton disregard of the rights
or safety of others.
   (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle on village
streets without due caution and circumspection and at a speed or in a manner so
as to endanger or be likely to endanger any person or property.
   (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle on village
streets in a manner that facilitates the unsafe carriage of passengers while
the vehicle is in motion.
   (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle on village
streets that propels a human-powered device and/or its operator by said
vehicle.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-37. Speed limit.
   Established. It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of 18 miles
per hour on village streets. Reduced speed zones shall be obeyed.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-38. Stop signs.
   (a)   Intersections. When a stop sign has been erected or installed at an
intersection, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle or the
operator of any device to fail to stop and yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians or other vehicles.
   (b)   Other sites. When a stop sign has been erected or installed at a place
other than an intersection, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle
or the operator of any device to fail to stop and yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians or other vehicles.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-39. Streets with vehicle restrictions.
   (a)   Prohibited.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any internal
combustion engine (I.C.E.) vehicle on Edward Teach Wynd for purposes of through
traffic.
   (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate any internal
combustion engine (I.C.E.) vehicle on Maritime Way or Shoals Alley or Timber
Bridge without a special use permit.
   (3)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a commercial-use
vehicle in excess of 28 feet in length from bumper to bumper and 12 feet in
height without first securing a village escort and a map of the expressly
approved route of travel.
   (b)   Exceptions. Emergency vehicles, government vehicles, and Official
Island Transportation System vehicles are exempt from the provisions of this
section.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-40. Unlicensed drivers.
   Prohibited.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any unlicensed driver to operate any vehicle
on village streets. It shall further be unlawful for any person, entity or
corporation who is the owner or lawful possessor of any vehicle to permit an
unlicensed driver to operate a vehicle on village streets. It shall be lawful
for an individual privileged to operate a vehicle on the streets or highways of
the state pursuant to G.S. 20-11(b) - (e) to operate a vehicle on Bald Head
Island while in compliance with the requirements and restrictions set forth in
G.S. 20-11.
   (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle on village
streets in violation of any limitations or conditions of the operator's driver
license.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-41. Vehicles on beaches.
   (a)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on
the beaches of Bald Head Island.
   (b)   Exceptions. Bald Head Island Conservancy vehicles while being operated
for its missions, and emergency vehicles and government vehicles while being
operated at the direction or for the benefit of the village, are exempt from
the provisions of this section.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Secs. 28-42—28-49.   Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
PERSONAL-USEELECTRIC VEHICLES
Sec. 28-50. Purpose.
   (1)   The purpose and intent of this division is to subject every personal-
use electric vehicle on village streets to the regulations, registration
requirements, and registration fees set forth in this division.
   (2)   Any person who operates a personal-use electric vehicle on village
streets pursuant to the terms of a home or property rental agreement, or with
the consent and permission of the vehicle owner, shall be jointly and severally
responsible with the owner for the payment of any civil penalty, towing,
impoundment, and related fees.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-51. Mandatory registration of personal-use electric vehicles.
   Prohibited.
   (1)   No person shall operate any personal-use electric vehicle on village
streets unless properly registered.
   (2)   No owner shall fail to secure a registration sticker.
   (3)   No owner shall fail to renew an annual registration within 30 days of
expiration.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-52. Registration requirements.
   Persons registering personal-use electric vehicles shall provide the
following information:
   (1)   Name of owner;
   (2)   Addresses and contact information;
   (3)   Electric vehicle identification to include make, model, serial number
or VIN, and color;
   (4)   A signed agreement to obey all village rules and traffic regulations;
   (5)   Insurance in amounts not less than those statutorily required for
liability insurance under G.S. 20-279.1 et seq.; and
   (6)   Other information as deemed necessary from time to time.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-53. Personal-use electric vehicle equipment and specifications.
   The original published manufacturer specifications will rule when
determining all registration elements that cannot be readily measured, such as
weight and horsepower.
   (a)   Physical inspections. All personal-use electric vehicles must be
physically inspected when being registered for the first time with the village
and must be equipped with the following:
   (1)   Front headlights;
   (2)   Rear taillights;
   (3)   Rear brake lights;
   (4)   Rear view mirror with unobstructed view, specifically including an
unobstructed view of any trailers being towed;
   (5)   Parking brake;
   (6)   Seatbelts for all seating positions on the electric vehicle: and
   (7)   Rear-facing passenger grab bars.
   Proper functioning of the aforesaid equipment shall be the responsibility of
the electric vehicle owner, and the village assumes no liability with respect
to function, operation or inspection of the equipment.
   (b)   Dimension and weight limits. No personal-use electric vehicle shall be
registered or approved for use on village streets if the overall dimensions
and/or weight of the electric vehicle exceed any of the following dimensions:
      (1)   Length:   160.00 inches;
      (2)   Height:    84.00 inches;
      (3)   Width:    60.00 inches;
      (4)   Weight: 1,600.00 pounds. Weight shall be determined by the
manufacturer's published data or, if none is available, then by the electric
vehicle's curb weight.
   (c)   Lift kits: ride height modification limits. No personal use electric
vehicle shall be registered or approved for use on the village's streets with a
lift kit which has not been installed by the original equipment manufacturer
(OEM) unless it complies with the following specifications:
      (1)   Any electric vehicle which has a lift kit installed by the OEM
shall not be further lifted by the installation of an after-market lift kit.
      (2)   The maximum increase in electric vehicle height is limited to four
inches. The amount of lift will be determined
         by measuring the distance from the road to the top of the floorboard
on the lifted electric vehicle and comparing this distance to the same
measurement taken on the same model electric vehicle as delivered from the OEM.
      (3)   Any electric vehicle which has an after-market lift kit installed
must have heavy-duty springs included as part of the modification.
      (4)   If any part of the increase in electric vehicle height is the
result of the installation of larger tires, these tires must be United States
Department of Transportation highway-rated tires with a minimum wheel size of
10.00 inches and a maximum diameter of 23.00 inches.
   (d)   Horsepower limits. No personal-use electric vehicle that derives its
power from an electric motor that produces 7.0 horsepower or more shall be
registered or otherwise approved for use on village streets. All personal-use
electric vehicles that derive power from electric motors producing greater than
5.5 horsepower shall have a functioning speedometer.
   (e)   Unobstructed views. No personal-use electric vehicle shall be
registered or approved for use on village streets if the operator's view is
materially obstructed, obscured, or impaired by any sign, poster, sticker, or
other non-transparent material placed upon any front windshield, or side or
rear window. This subsection specifically permits signs, posters, stickers, or
other non-transparent materials that do not extend more than 12 inches from the
bottom edge or six inches from the top edge of the front windshield.
   (f)   Registration fees. The registrations issued pursuant to this section
shall be issued by the village upon payment of a registration fee as determined
by the Village Council from time to time.
   (g)   Revocation of registration. For failure to comply with any of the
provisions set forth in this division, the village in its sole discretion may
refuse to register the vehicle or may choose to revoke any registration
previously issued.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-54. Issuance of registration.
   (a)   Registration frequency. The owner of every personal-use electric
vehicle operated on village streets must be registered annually with the
village.
   (b)   Registration fees and insurance. The registrations issued pursuant to
this section shall be issued by the village upon payment of a registration fee
as determined by the Village Council from time to time by resolution and proof
of current insurance in amounts not less than those statutorily required for
liability insurance under G.S. 20-279.1 et seq.
   (c)   Revocation of registration. For failure to comply with any of the
provisions set forth in this division, the village in its sole discretion may
refuse to register the electric vehicle or may choose to revoke any
registration previously issued.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Secs. 28-55—28-69. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. COMMERCIAL-USE VEHICLES
Vehicles powered by internal combustion engines (I.C.E.) and primarily designed
for the transport of passengers are prohibited on the village streets except
for Official Island Transportation System vehicles.
Sec. 28-70. Purpose.
   (1)   The purpose and intent of this division is to subject every
commercial-use vehicle on village streets to the regulations, permit
requirements, and permit fees set forth in this division.
   (2)   This division also is intended to grant special preference to those
electric commercial-use vehicles with maximum overall dimensions of 160 inches
in length and 60 inches in width, alone or in combination with trailers.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-71. Mandatory permits for commercial-use vehicles.
   (a)   Permit required. The owner of every commercial-use vehicle operated on
village streets must be permitted annually with the village.
   (b)   Permit fees and insurance. The permits issued pursuant to this section
shall be issued by the village upon payment of a permit fee as determined by
the Village Council from time to time by resolution and proof of current
insurance in amounts not less than those statutorily required for liability
insurance under G.S. 20-279.1 et seq.
   (c)   Prohibited.
   (1)   No commercial-use vehicle shall be allowed to remain overnight within
the village for a total of five nights or more, during any consecutive 12-month
period if the overall dimensions exceed:
 
 
Maximum Allowable Dimensions             Length         Width      Height
   (a)   Pick-up trucks and cargo v230 inches  AND 82 inches   
   (b)   Box trucks, (1) delivery u28 feet box AND 102 inches 13 feet
   (c)   Box trucks, (2) contractor16 feet box AND 96 inches  13 feet
   (d)   Exemptions.
      (1)   Daily. Commercial vehicles that exceed maximum allowable
dimensions may be eligible for a daily permit, in the discretion of the public
safety department chief.
      (2)   Annual. Commercial vehicles that exceed maximum allowable length
dimensions may be eligible for an annual permit, limited to one pickup truck
registered to a person or entity possessing a North Carolina general
contractor's license (and further limited to one pickup truck to any single
commercial construction entity or North Carolina general contractor's license,
but not to both an entity and licensee in the same business organization or
its affiliates) and in the discretion of the public safety department chief.
 
   (2)   No owner shall fail to secure a permit.
   (3)   No owner shall fail to renew an annual permit within 30 days of
expiration.
   (4)   No person operating a non-electric commercial-use vehicle shall fail
to honor the workday use parameters.
   (5)   No person shall operate any non-electric commercial-use vehicle on
streets with vehicle restrictions without a special use permit.
   (6)   No person operating a commercial-use vehicle shall fail to comply with
the specified terms and conditions of the commercial-use vehicle permit as
issued.
   (7)   All commercial vehicles are subject to village sign ordinances.
   (d)   Revocation of permit. For failure to comply with any of the provisions
set forth in this division, the village in its sole discretion may refuse to
permit the vehicle or may choose to revoke any permit previously issued.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019; Ord. No. 2025-0903, § 1, 9-19-2025)
Sec. 28-72. Permit requirements for electric commercial-use vehicles.
   Persons requesting a permit for an electric commercial-use vehicle shall
provide the following information:
   (1)   Name of owner;
   (2)   Addresses and contact information;
   (3)   Vehicle identification to include make, model, serial number or VIN,
and color;
   (4)   Insurance in amounts not less than those statutorily required for
liability insurance under G.S. 20-279.1 et seq.; and
   (5)   Other information as deemed necessary from time to time.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-73. Electric commercial-use vehicle equipment and specifications.
   (a)   Physical inspections. All electric commercial-use vehicles must be
physically inspected when being registered for the first time with the village
and must be equipped with the following:
   (1)   Front headlights;
   (2)   Rear taillights;
   (3)   Rear brake lights;
   (4)   Rear view mirror with unobstructed view, specifically including an
unobstructed view of any trailers being towed;
   (5)   Parking brake; and
   (6)   Seatbelts for all seating positions.
   Proper functioning of the aforesaid equipment shall be the responsibility of
the vehicle owner and the village assumes no liability with respect to
function, operation or inspection of the equipment.
   (b)   Dimensions. No electric commercial-use vehicle shall be permitted or
approved for use on Bald Head Island if the overall dimensions exceed:
   (1)   For workday-use restrictions exemption electric commercial-use
vehicles' maximum overall dimensions: Length - 160 inches, and Width - 60
inches.
   (2)   Other electric commercial-use vehicles: Length - 215 inches, Width -
82.00 inches.
   (c)   Unobstructed views. No electric commercial-use vehicle shall be
registered or approved for use on village streets if the operator's view is
materially obstructed, obscured, or impaired by any sign, poster, sticker, or
other non-transparent material placed upon any front windshield, or side or
rear window. This subsection specifically permits signs, posters, stickers, or
other non-transparent materials that do not extend more than 12 inches from the
bottom edge or six inches from the top edge of the front windshield.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-74. Permit requirements for internal combustion engine (I.C.E.)
vehicles.
   (a)   Filing of application. The owner of any I.C.E. vehicle must apply to
the village for a permit to operate the vehicle on village streets.
Applications outlining the process to prove the eligibility and/or need for an
I.C.E. vehicle permit may be obtained from the village. All required
information, documentation, and fees may change from time to time by resolution
of Council or determination by the Director or Village Manager.
   (b)   Proof of need for I.C.E. permit consideration. The village shall
review all I.C.E. vehicle permit applications, requested information, and
documentation. The village may issue the requested permit for an I.C.E. vehicle
if it is determined that the applicant has proven:
   (1)   The proposed use of the vehicle meets the need for which the permit is
sought; and
   (2)   The proposed use of the vehicle may only be met reasonably by use of a
vehicle powered by an internal combustion engine; and
   (3)   The application complies in all other respects with the aforesaid
provisions.
   (c)   Permit requirements. Should a permit be granted, the permit holder is
required to maintain proof of:
   (1)   A signed agreement to obey all village rules and traffic regulations;
   (2)   A current vehicle registration;
   (3)   A current vehicle inspection pursuant to G.S. 20-183.2;
   (4)   Insurance in amounts not less than those statutorily required for
liability insurance under G.S. 20-279.1 et seq.; and
   (5)   Any other information as may be required and determined by the village
from time to time.
   (d)   Permit fees. The permits issued pursuant to this section shall be
issued by the village upon payment of a permit fee as determined by the Village
Council from time to time.
   (e)   Revocation of permit. For failure to comply with any of the provisions
set forth in this division, the village in its sole discretion may refuse to
permit the vehicle or may choose to revoke any permit previously issued.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-75. Special use permit for internal combustion engine (I.C.E.)
vehicles.
   (a)   Classes of special use permits.
   (1)   Emergency vehicles, government vehicles, and Official Island
Transportation System vehicles. By virtue of the nature of these vehicles, they
are automatically granted a special use permit status to operate freely on
village streets without workday restrictions.
   (2)   Heavy equipment vehicles and public utility vehicles. An annual
special use permit may be granted to operate a heavy equipment vehicle or a
public utility vehicle on village streets. The fees associated with such annual
special use permits shall be in lieu of all other I.C.E. annual permit fees.
   (3)   Workday hours. Other than heavy equipment vehicles and public utility
vehicles, a special use permit is required to operate any internal combustion
engine (I.C.E.) vehicle or commercial-use trailer on village streets outside
workday hours. A daily special use permit fee may be assessed in addition to
all required I.C.E. permit fees.
   (4)   Streets with vehicle restrictions. A special use permit is required to
operate any internal combustion engine (I.C.E.) vehicle or commercial-use
trailer on any streets with vehicle restrictions on Bald Head Island. Should
there be an established need for repeated use of a restricted street by an
I.C.E. vehicle, a special use permit may be granted for the duration of the
project.
   (b)   Filing of application. The application for a special use permit shall
contain all information required for a workday permit and, in addition thereto,
shall include the following:
   (1)   The purposes to be accomplished by the use of the vehicle;
   (2)   The reasons justifying that the proposed use may be accomplished only
by an I.C.E. vehicle;
   (3)   The date of the proposed use of the vehicle;
   (4)   The proposed route of travel of the vehicle;
   (5)   The specific hours during which the vehicle shall be used;
   (6)   Proof that provisions for overnight parking or temporary storage of
the vehicle has been made.
   (c)   Permit parameters. If all information required by the application for
a special use permit is submitted, a special use permit may be issued if the
need is justified. Any special use permit shall govern the route of travel, the
date(s) and times of travel, the amount of the special use permit fee, and any
additional restrictions and conditions as the Director shall deem reasonably
necessary.
   (d)   Permit fees. The permits issued pursuant to this section shall be
issued by the village upon payment of a permit fee as determined by the Village
Council from time to time.
   (e)   Revocation of permit. For failure to comply with any of the provisions
set forth in this division, the village in its sole discretion may refuse to
permit the vehicle or may choose to revoke any permit previously issued.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-76. Time of operation.
   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an I.C.E. vehicle on
village streets at any time other than during workdays without a special use
permit.
   (2)   The only commercial-use electric vehicles without workday restrictions
are those whose maximum dimensions are 160 inches in length and 60 inches in
width.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-77. Parking of commercial-use vehicles.
   (a)   Prohibited. All persons operating commercial-use vehicles on village
streets must make advance arrangements for lawful parking of the vehicle
outside workday hours. Proof of these parking arrangements must be presented
upon request or readily displayed on the vehicle.
      Under no circumstances may a commercial-use vehicle be parked on:
   (1)   Village streets or public rights-of-way except while actively loading
or unloading;
   (2)   Individual lots or multifamily sites zoned for residential purposes
pursuant to Chapter 32 of this Code.
   (b)   Exceptions. The prohibitions of sub-section (a)(2) do not apply to
those electric golf carts used in the village for both personal and commercial
purposes.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Secs. 28-78—28-89. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. TRAILERS
Sec. 28-90. Purpose.
   The purpose and intent of this division is to subject every commercial-use
trailer on village streets to the regulations, permit requirements, and permit
fees set forth in this division.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-91. Classes of trailers.
   (a)   Personal-use trailers. Registration and permitting are not required.
   (1)   Trailers for boats 16 feet or less in length.
   (2)   Multi-purpose trailers such as those used for gardening or
transporting beach and fishing paraphernalia.
   (b)   Commercial-use trailers. Registration and permitting are required
annually.
   (1)   A trailer that is parked for a considerable period of time while
construction of improvements is ongoing on the property where parked.
   (2)   A trailer that is used to transport goods, materials, and/or equipment
from job site to job site during workdays.
   (3)   No commercial-use trailer shall be permitted or approved for use on
village streets if the box's overall width exceeds six feet, or seven feet if
it is a deck-over trailer where the wheels are underneath the trailer and do
not extend from underneath, there are no external wheel wells, and the overall
length exceeds 16 feet.
   (4)   Trailers that exceed maximum allowable dimensions may be permitted by
a daily permit when a state of emergency proclamation is declared by the mayor
for a natural disaster event and approved by the public safety department chief
and may be extended for a reasonable time after the state of emergency is
rescinded.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019; Ord. No. 2025- 0903, § 2, 9-19-2025)
Sec. 28-92. Permit requirements.
   (a)   Personal-use trailers. Personal-use trailers are not subject to
registration and permitting.
   (b)   Commercial-use trailers. Persons seeking a permit for a commercial-use
trailer shall provide the following information:
   (1)   Name of owner;
   (2)   Addresses and contact information;
   (3)   Trailer identification to include make, model, serial number or VIN,
and color, if available;
   (4)   A signed agreement to obey all village rules and traffic regulations;
   (5)   Other information as deemed necessary from time to time.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-93. Mandatory permits for commercial-use trailers.
   (a)   Prohibited.
   (1)   No person shall tow a commercial-use trailer unless properly
permitted.
   (2)   No owner of a commercial-use trailer shall fail to secure a permit for
the trailer.
   (3)   No owner of a commercial-use trailer shall fail to renew an annual
permit within 30 days of expiration.
   (4)   No person towing a commercial-use trailer shall fail to honor the
workday use parameters.
   (5)   No person shall tow any commercial-use trailer on village streets with
special restrictions without securing a special use permit.
   (6)   No person towing a commercial-use trailer shall fail to comply with
the specified terms and conditions of the commercial-use trailer permit as
issued.
   (7)   All commercial trailers are subject to the village sign ordinances.
   (b)   Revocation of permit. For failure to comply with any of the provisions
set forth in this division, the village in its sole discretion may refuse to
register the cart or may choose to revoke any registration previously issued.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-94. Special use permit.
   (a)   A special use permit is required to tow any commercial-use trailer on
village streets outside workday hours. The application for a special use permit
shall contain all information required for a workday vehicle permit and, in
addition thereto, shall include the following:
   (1)   The purposes to be accomplished by the use of the trailer;
   (2)   The reasons justifying that the proposed use may be accomplished only
by a commercial-use trailer;
   (3)   The date(s) of the proposed use of the trailer;
   (4)   The proposed route of travel of the trailer;
   (5)   The specific hours during which the trailer shall be used; and
   (6)   Proof that provisions for overnight parking or temporary storage of
the trailer has been made.
   (b)   If all information required by the application for a special use
permit is submitted, a special use permit may be issued if the need is
justified. Any special use permit shall govern the route of travel, the date(s)
and times of travel, the amount of the special use permit fee, and any
additional restrictions and conditions as the Director or Village Manager shall
deem reasonably necessary.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-95. Time of operation.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to tow a commercial-use trailer on
village streets at any time other than during workdays without a special use
permit.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-96. Parking of commercial trailers.
   (a)   Prohibited.
   (1)   All persons towing commercial-use trailers on village streets must
make advance arrangements for the lawful parking of the trailer outside workday
hours.
   (2)   All commercial-use trailers must be parked in contractor services or
in a village-designated commercial parking site.
   (3)   At no time may a commercial-use trailer be parked on a village street
or public right-of-way including medians.
   (b)   Exceptions. Commercial-use trailers used to facilitate construction
may be parked overnight on the property upon which the construction is ongoing.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Secs. 28-97—28-109.   Reserved.
DIVISION 5. TAXICABS AND TAXICAB DRIVERS
Sec. 28-110. General.
   (1)   Operation of taxicabs on Bald Head Island shall be in accord with
Chapter 28, as well as all other applicable laws, regulations, and other
ordinances.
   (2)   The Village Manager, in the interest of public health and safety, may
revoke, modify or deny a taxicab approval or taxicab driver permit.
   (3)   All taxicabs on Bald Head Island, both in-service and out-of-service,
shall park and operate only in areas, upon roadways, and during operating hours
as designated by the Village Manager.
   (4)   Taxicabs shall operate on an on-call basis unless otherwise approved
by the Village Manager.
   (5)   The Village Manager may determine a fee schedule for taxicab fares, a
copy of which must be posted in each taxicab in a location visible from the
passenger area of the vehicle.
   (6)   No taxicab shall be allowed to pull a trailer or other additional
storage device that extends the vehicle's total length beyond that at the time
of approval under section 28-94.
   (7)   All taxicab operators shall maintain such insurance coverage with
limits and provisions as the village may from time to time require for motor
vehicle and commercial general liability coverage with minimum limits of
$1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 aggregate. Coverage must be
issued by reputable insurers acceptable to the village. The policies shall name
the village as an additional named insured and contain a waiver of subrogation
against the village. The taxicab operator shall maintain worker's compensation
coverage, as required by law. The taxicab operator must provide proof of
coverage prior to commencing operation and upon request by village.
(Ord. No. 2011-0101, 1-21-2011; Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-111. Written approval of taxicabs required.
   (a)   Filing of request. Pursuant to Session Law 1997-324, the Village of
Bald Head Island Charter, Article X, Section 10.1, all taxicabs operating
within the village must receive written approval by the village. A taxicab
operator must submit a written request for village approval to the Village
Manager.
   (b)   Taxicab approval limit. The Village Manager shall approve no more than
three taxicabs for any taxicab operator and not more than six taxicabs to
operate within the village, with the following exceptions:
   (1)   A taxicab operator approved by the village pursuant to this division
may also apply for, and at the Village Manager's discretion, be granted
approval for backup taxicabs. Only three of the taxicabs of any taxicab
operator may be in service at any given time. The approval of the backup
taxicabs shall not be counted when determining how many taxicabs the village
has approved. The out-of-service taxicabs may be kept on-island in a location
approved by the Village Manager.
   (2)   If the operation of an approved and permitted taxicab ceases for
greater than 30 days, or fails to begin within 30 days of the application for
approval, for any reason other than a seasonal hiatus, the village may cancel
the approval and approve another taxicab.
   (c)   Request contents. The request for village approval shall include the
following:
   (1)   The owner of the vehicle's full legal name and address;
   (2)   A copy of the vehicle registration;
   (3)   Proof of insurance in accordance with this division;
   (4)   Proposed fare rates;
   (5)   Proposed hours of operation;
   (6)   Proposed dispatch location; and
   (7)   Other requirements as determined by the Village Manager.
   (d)   Amendments. A taxicab operator must immediately inform the Village
Manager of any changes to the required contents above and the village may
modify or revoke its prior approval.
   (e)   Term. The term of any approval shall be two years. Thereafter, the
taxicab operator must reapply.
(Ord. No. 2011-0101, 1-21-2011; Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-112. Taxicab driver's license required.
   Each taxicab applicant must possess and maintain a valid taxicab driver's
license and insurance as required by all applicable laws, regulations, and
ordinances, and must submit copies of all license and insurance information
with the Director for verification. Each taxicab applicant must submit a
written application to the Director to operate a vehicle on the village streets
and must provide a current driving record. Additionally, in granting or issuing
the permission to operate on the village streets, the Director may require each
applicant to submit to drug screening and may consider:
   (1)   Violation of any federal or state law relating to the use, possession,
or sale of alcoholic beverages or narcotic or barbiturate drugs; and
   (2)   Addiction to or habitual use of alcoholic beverages or narcotic or
barbiturate drugs.
   Other requirements or conditions regarding the applications may be imposed
by the Village Manager as may be deemed in the interest of public health and
safety, and in accord with Session Law 1997-324, the Village of Bald Head
Island Charter, Article X, Section 10.1, and G.S. §160A-304, and a permit fee
may be assessed as determined by the Village Manager, not to exceed the
statutory limits set forth in G.S. §160A-304.
(Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Secs. 28-113—28-129   Reserved.
ARTICLE III. HARBOUR VILLAGE PARKING DISTRICT
Sec. 28-130. Establishment.
   (a)   There is hereby established on Bald Head Island the Harbour Village
Parking District ("District"). The purpose hereof is to promulgate and adopt
certain regulations and policies pertaining to the parking of vehicles and
trailers within the District.
   (b)   The District shall include the right-of-way boundaries of those public
streets and alleys that have been dedicated and accepted by the village
including: Keelson Row; Leeward Court; Windward Court; Tanbark Court; Transom
Row; Turks Head Court; Row Boat Row; Brinkman's Alley; Pequod Alley; and
Ebeneezer Alley; in addition to such adjoining areas as may be identified
within the terms of this article. It is acknowledged that a portion of the
District lies outside of the Harbour Village subdivision boundary.
   (c)   There are created hereby the following parking use designations within
the District:
   (1)   No parking overnight;
   (2)   Yacht Club parking only;
   (3)   Overnight parking Harbour Village resident decal only; and
   (4)   No parking.
   There is attached to Ordinance Number 2013-0202 and made a part of this
article a plat of the District ("District Overlay") with a color-coded overlay
that depicts various use control and designated parking areas within the
District ("parking spaces"). The Council may, from time to time, amend the
parking use designations and parking spaces by amendment of the plat attached
to Ordinance Number 2013-0202. The then-current version of the plat shall be
maintained at Village Hall.
(Ord. No. 2013-0202, 2-20-2013; Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-131. General provisions.
   (a)   Limited duration general parking shall be available in the parking
spaces within the District between the hours of 6:00 o'clock a.m. and 2:00
o'clock a.m. (the following date), except as provided herein. However, persons
are prohibited from parking in such a manner as to block any driveway or the
entrance to any garage or crofter structure, any marked public beach access or
the marked vehicular access point on Row Boat Row.
   (b)   Decals for controlled overnight or 24-hour parking in the parking
spaces shall be available in those color-coded areas depicted on the District
overlay and including areas designated for:
   (1)   Yacht Club/Marina patron only overnight parking,
   (2)   Harbour Village resident only overnight parking, and
   (3)   Harbour Village Inns overnight parking.
Decal holders shall also observe overnight parking prohibited; parking
prohibited; and side of street parking requirements. Decals shall only be
issued to those providing satisfactory evidence of entitlement thereto.
   (c)   It shall be a violation of this article to park within the Harbour
Village in contravention of the requirements hereof.
   (d)   Parking decals shall be available only to the following persons or
entities:
   (1)   Harbour Village residents and improved property owners;
   (2)   Harbour Village Inns and lodging facilities located upon the Harbour
Village lots for which such land use is permitted;
   (3)   The owners of the limited commercial-use properties designated as HV
lots numbers 86 and 87; and
   (4)   Yacht Club members and Marina patrons. Harbour Village residents and
improved property owners shall be entitled to one decal per property; the Inns
shall be entitled to two decals per platted lot occupied by the Inn. HV 86 and
87; owners shall be entitled to one decal per property; and Yacht Club members/
Marina patrons shall be entitled to a total of 155 decals; of which 12 decals
shall be issued to Bald Head Island Limited, LLC and ten decals shall be issued
to the Bald Head Island Club.
   (e)   Marina patrons shall be defined as owners or operators of vessels
occupying a slip attached to a membership owned and leased by the Bald Head
Island Club; owners or operators of vessels occupying a slip attached to a
membership owned and leased by Bald Head Island Limited, LLC; owners and
operators of transient vessels who secure vehicle access and 24-hour parking
privileges for the duration of their moorage agreement; the Bald Head Island
Club; and Bald Head Island Limited, LLC; and owners or operators of vessels
occupying a slip that is attached to a Bald Head Island Yacht Club membership
under the terms of a rental or moorage agreement with the Yacht Club member.
   (f)   Recognizing that Yacht Club members and Marina patrons may have
particular needs related to transporting safety equipment and other equipment
and supplies related to safe vessel operation and in order to assist access to
the marina and moored vessels by persons with disabilities, there is created
within the District limited areas designated as Yacht Club only parking as same
are depicted on the District overlay.
   (g)   Marina day visitors who own, lease or otherwise utilize a vehicle
shall park in accordance with the general parking provisions hereof, including
subsection (b).
   (h)   All persons shall observe and comply with all parking control signage
posted within the District including as the same pertain to permitted and
controlled use areas, pull in and parallel only parking and parking
prohibition.
   (i)   No person shall park or otherwise leave unattended any vehicle or
related apparatus that interferes with the reasonable access to the Harbour
Village or Village Department of Public Safety vehicles and equipment.
Department staff and personnel may use any such means as are necessary to
remove any obstructions and facilitate access and passage by responding
vehicles and equipment.
(Ord. No. 2013-0202, 2-20-2013; Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-132. Administration.
   (a)   Administration of this article shall be handled by the Village
Department of Public Safety utilizing such staff positions as may be directed
by the Village Manager and the Director of Public Safety. Responsibilities
shall include issuance and control of the District parking decals and ordinance
enforcement. In their discretion the Village Council and Village Manager may
assign and delegate these functions to a contracted private party.
   (b)   Parking decals shall be issued on a calendar year basis and shall
become available as of November 1 of the current year for the succeeding year.
Decal design and color scheme may change annually in order to aid in the ease
of identification and enforcement. The Department of Public Safety may collect
an annual fee for the issuance of each decal.
   (c)   Persons and entities who qualify for a parking decal shall fill out a
request form at the Department of Public Safety and shall submit with the
request satisfactory proof of their ownership of one of the qualifying
properties or status as a Yacht Club member/Marina patron. To assist in this
process the Yacht Club shall furnish on at least an annual basis a current list
of members in good standing and the names of any individuals whose vessels
currently occupy a slip in the marina under the terms of a long term slip
rental agreement.
   (d)   Persons to whom a parking decal is issued shall report at the
Department of Public Safety to have the decal affixed to the designated
vehicle. Individual persons and entities may qualify for multiple decals if
they are the owner of more than one qualifying Harbour property or if they own
one or more qualifying properties and are also Yacht Club members/Marina
patrons. Decals are nontransferable and shall remain affixed to the vehicle and
clearly visible.
   (e)   Decal holders who sell or dispose of a vehicle within a given year may
obtain a replacement decal from the Department of Public Safety upon return of
the existing decal or submission of satisfactory evidence of the destruction of
the existing decal, and submission of satisfactory proof that they remain
entitled to issuance of a decal under the terms of this article.
   (f)   The village may enter into an agreement on mutually agreeable terms
with Bald Head Island Limited, LLC, as manager for the Bald Head Island Yacht
Club, securing its services to continue issuance of the following parking
decals and/or hang tag displays:
   (1)   Owners or operators of vessels occupying a slip attached to a
membership owned by the Bald Head Island Club;
   (2)   Owners or operators of vessels occupying a slip attached to a
membership owned by Bald Head Island Limited, LLC for a period less than an
annual lease agreement; and
   (3)   Owners and operators of transient vessels who secure vehicle access
and 24-hour parking privileges for the duration of their moorage agreement.
(Ord. No. 2013-0202, 2-20-2013; Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-133. Enforcement and penalties.
   (1)   Vehicles that are parked within the District in violation of the terms
of this article are subject to being ticketed by a member of the Department of
Public Safety, immobilization of the vehicle and removal (towing) to a vehicle
storage area. Such vehicles and their owner/operator shall also be subject to
the fines, fees and charges set out herein. Violation of this article shall be
exempt from prosecution pursuant to G.S. 14-4.
   (2)   In those instances where a vehicle is ticketed but the violation of
this article is abated prior to immobilization or removal of the vehicle the
owner/operator of the vehicle shall pay a fee in the amount of $50.00 pursuant
to G.S. 160A-175.
   (3)   When a vehicle is immobilized but the owner/operator returns to the
vehicle prior to removal such person may have the immobilization device removed
upon the payment of a $75.00 removal fee.
   (4)   Removed vehicles may be reclaimed by the owner/operator on Monday
through Friday between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. The fee to reclaim
the vehicle shall be $125.00 for the first offense and this fee shall include
two days of storage charges. Thereafter, the storage fee shall be an additional
$5.00 per day until the vehicle is reclaimed. The reclamation fee for the
second offense and any subsequent offenses shall be $250.00, which shall
include two days of storage charges with the assessment of additional storage
at the rate of $5.00 per day until the vehicle is reclaimed.
   (5)   It shall be a violation of this article for any person to remove,
alter or transfer a duly issued and affixed parking decal from the registered
vehicle to another vehicle. It shall also be a violation of this article for
any person to knowingly affix a lost, stolen, altered or counterfeit parking
decal to any vehicle. Persons violating this subsection shall be subject to
citation and payment of a fee in the amount of $50.00 pursuant to G.S. 160A-
175.
   (6)    Persons guilty of repeated violations of this article (more than
three violations in any 12- month period) are subject to forfeiture of the
right to secure the issuance of a parking decal for their vehicles at the
discretion of the Director or Village Manager.
   (7)   Persons who operate any vehicle on Bald Head Island pursuant to the
terms of a home or property rental agreement or with the consent and permission
of the vehicle owner shall be jointly and severally responsible, with the
owner, for the payment of any civil penalty, immobilization device removal fee,
vehicle reclamation fee and vehicle storage fee.
   (8)   The village shall post signage within the rights-of-way of Harbour
Village streets and alleys advising that overnight and extended duration
parking within the Harbour Village is decal-controlled and that persons
violating the terms of the village ordinance pertaining thereto are subject to
fines, charges, vehicle immobilization and vehicle removal. Signage shall also
advise regarding permitted parking practices and areas where parking is
prohibited.
   (9)   The village may enter into an agreement with Bald Head Island Limited,
LLC, or other private parties, upon mutually agreeable terms to serve as the
enforcement contractor to issue citations and perform attachment of
immobilization devices, removal of immobilization devices, vehicle removal and
storage services and the processing of vehicle reclamation.
   (10)   The Village Council may amend the amounts of the fees set forth in
this section by adoption of a fee schedule. The then-current version of the fee
schedule shall be maintained at Village Hall.
(Ord. No. 2013-0202, 2-20-2013; Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-134. Exemptions.
   (1)   The owner or operator of a vehicle that has been rendered immobile or
inoperable for mechanical reasons not related to the negligent or intentional
conduct of the owner or operator shall be exempt from the provisions of this
article for a period of 72 hours, provided that such person advises the
Director of such circumstances and provides the Director with their name,
contact information, the village vehicle permit registration number, a vehicle
description and the location of the vehicle.
   (2)   If a stolen vehicle or vehicle taken without the consent of the owner
or operator is parked in violation of this article, it shall be exempt from the
terms hereof provided the owner or operator of the vehicle advises the Director
of such circumstances and provides the Director with their name, contact
information, the village vehicle permit registration number and a description
of the vehicle. This exemption shall last for a period of 72 hours following
discovery of the vehicle parked within the District and notice of same provided
to the owner or operator.
   (3)   Exemptions shall not apply in the case of any vehicle left or parked
within the District in such a manner as to impede safe usage of the Harbour
Village streets and alleys, access by emergency vehicles, equipment and
responders, and safe pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. No. 2013-0202, 2-20-2013; Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Sec. 28-135. Miscellaneous provisions.
   (1)   This article shall become effective upon execution and delivery of
those documents and completion of those actions set forth in the Resolution of
Village Council Regarding Harbour Village Street Dedication, Parking Ordinance
and Related Agreements adopted January 18, 2013. Satisfaction of these
requirements shall be evidenced by a letter from the Village Manager delivered
to the Village Clerk stating the date of satisfaction.
   (2)   Nothing contained herein shall limit, restrict or obviate the rights
of the Harbour Association and Bald Head Island Limited, LLC to regulate,
control and limit parking and other usage of Harbour Village common areas,
private property, and other areas outside of village dedicated rights-of-way.
   (3)   The Village Manager shall have the power reasonably and temporarily to
abate the strict enforcement of this article during the periods of village
special events and holidays and only for the duration of such special events
and holidays.
   (4)   The Director and Village Manager shall have the discretionary power to
waive or set aside the strict enforcement of this article and the collection of
any fine, fee or charge for hardship or other just cause shown.
(Ord. No. 2013-0202, 2-20-2013; Ord. of 2019, 10-15-2019)
Secs. 28-136—28-149.   Reserved.
Chapter 29
RESERVED
Chapter 30
UTILITIES*
   *Cross Reference—Administration,
ch. 2; buildings and building regulations,
ch. 6; electrical code adopted, §
6-35; environment,
ch. 10; floods,
ch. 14; solid waste management,
ch. 20; stormwater management,
ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places,
ch. 24; subdivisions,
ch. 26.
   State Law Reference—Municipal authority to construct, operate, etc., water
supply and distribution systems, sewage systems, etc., G.S. 160A-312.
Article I. In General
Sec.
30-1.    Violations; penalties.
Secs. 30-2 ––30-30. Reserved.
Article II. Emergency Service
Sec.
30-31. Definitions.
Sec.
30-32. Overhead wires and structures--Prohibited; exception.
Sec.
30-33. Same--Installation and maintenance.
Sec.
30-34. Exceptions.
Sec.
30-35. Franchise agreements.
Sec.
30-36. Violation and penalty.
Secs. 30-37—30-40. Reserved.
Article III. Water and Wastewater
Division 1. General
Sec.
30-41. Village Council to control and regulate water and sewer systems.
Sec.
30-42. Sewage facilities for structures.
Sec.
30-43. Director of Public Services.
Sec.
30-44. Service.
Sec.
30-45. Septic systems.
Sec.
30-46. Construction of water or sewer main; permit required; application;
issuance.
Sec.
30-47. Connection to public water and sewer and abandonment of private system.
Sec.
30-48. Village's responsibility and liability.
Sec.
30-49. Consumer's responsibility.
Sec.
30-50. Access to premises.
Sec.
30-51. Change of occupancy.
Sec.
30-52. Suspension of service.
Sec.
30-53. Abridgement or modification of rules.
Sec.
30-54. Construction.
Secs. 30-55—30-80. Reserved.
Division 2. Charges and Fees
Sec.
30-81. Classification of users.
Sec.
30-82. Types of charges and fees.
Sec.
30-83. Method of determining user charges, fees.
Sec.
30-84. Tap fees and utility tap relocation.
Sec.
30-85. New customer account fee.
Sec.
30-86. Meter reading; billing; collecting.
Sec.
30-87. Complaints and adjustments.
Secs. 30-88—30-110. Reserved.
Division 3. Extensions and Connections
Sec.
30-111. Extensions defined.
Sec.
30-112. Extensions of water and sewer systems.
Sec.
30-113. Additional extensions authorized.
Sec.
30-114. Reasons for extension refusal.
Sec.
30-115. Inspection by Village.
Sec.
30-116. Extensions required within rights-of-way.
Secs. 30-117—30-130. Reserved.
Division 4. Water Wells
Sec.
30-131. Installment regulated.
Secs. 30-132—30-150. Reserved.
Division 5. Discharges to Wastewater System and Effluent Disposal
Sec.
30-151. Sanitary sewer use policy; adoption and administration.
Sec.
30-152. Restrictions on disposal of wastewater effluent.
Sec.
30-153. Fats, oils, and greases control.
Secs. 30-154—30-170. Reserved.
Division 6. Water Conservation Standards
Sec.
30-171. Purpose.
Sec.
30-172. Definitions.
Sec.
30-173. Water waste prohibited; penalties for violating standard.
Sec.
30-174. Determination of a water supply shortage or emergency.
Sec.
30-175. Required actions under water supply shortage or emergency conditions.
Secs. 30-176—30-190. Reserved.
Division 7. Cross Connection Control
Sec.
30-181. Purpose.
Sec.
30-182. Definitions.
Sec.
30-183. Responsibility.
Sec.
30-184. Right of entry; authorization.
Sec.
30-185. Law; unprotected cross connection prohibited.
Sec.
30-186. Installation.
Sec.
30-187. Degree of hazard.
Sec.
30-188. Notice of contamination or pollution.
Sec.
30-189. Violations and civil penalties.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 30-1. Violations; penalties.
   (a)   Upon a violation of any provision of this chapter, the village may
enforce this chapter through civil proceedings, or by any other remedy provided
for under G.S. 160A-175 or as otherwise specifically set forth in this chapter,
except that a violation of this chapter shall not result in criminal
proceedings.
   (b)   Written notice of a violation may be provided to the violator by
personal service or first class mail. When first class mail is sent via the
United States Postal Service, receipt shall be deemed to occur on the third day
after the date of the postmark.
   (c)   Upon notification of a violation as provided for in subsection (b)of
this section, each day's continuing violation shall be deemed a separate and
distinct offense.
   (d)   Upon the violation of any provision of this chapter, the violator
shall be subject to a civil penalty in the sum of $500.00, to be recovered by
the village in a civil action in the nature of debt if the offender does not
pay the penalty within five business days after the violator has been cited for
violation of this chapter.
   (e)   In addition to the foregoing remedies, the provisions of this chapter
may be enforced by the village by injunctive relief or other appropriate
equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (f)   The provisions of this chapter may also be enforced by an order of
abatement.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2011-0402, 4-15-2011)
Secs. 30-2--30-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II.
EMERGENCY SERVICE
Sec. 30-31. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Emergency service means temporary electrical communication or similar or
associated utility service required to be supplied to a specific site while
ordinary service of such utility to the site is interrupted as a result of
unforeseen or unexpected occurrences.
   Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures means poles,
towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, cross-arms,
braces, transformers, insulators, cut-outs, switches, communication circuits,
appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground used or useful
in supplying electric communications or similar or associated utility services.
(Ord. No. 3, § 1, 11-15-1985)
   Cross Reference—Definitions generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 30-32. Overhead wires and structures—Prohibited; exception.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct,
maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated
overhead structures within the village except as shall otherwise be provided in
this article.
(Ord. No. 3, § 2, 11-15-1985)
Sec. 30-33.    Same—Installation and maintenance.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, poles, overhead wires and
associated overhead structures may be installed and maintained for a period not
to exceed ten days in order to provide emergency service without authority of
the village building inspector. The town building inspector may grant special
permission for emergency service on such terms as he may deem appropriate,
without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct,
install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures for a period not to exceed 30 additional days. In any event any such
poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures installed for
emergency service shall be removed at the expiration of ten days or the
expiration date of the special permission granted by the village building
inspector, whichever shall be later. Upon such expiration the poles, overhead
wires and associated overhead structures installed for emergency services shall
be removed by the party installing, erecting, constructing, maintaining or
using the service.
(Ord. No. 3, § 3, 11-15-1985)
Sec. 30-34. Exceptions.
   This article does not apply to the following types of facilities:
      (1)   Poles or similar supporting structures used exclusively for street
lighting;
      (2)   Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures for
furnishing communication services;
      (3)   Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface
mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and
concealed ducts;
      (4)   Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures
used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects except that such
temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures shall not be
installed for periods in excess of 180 days without the special permission of
the village building inspector who shall grant such special permission on such
terms as he may deem appropriate, having due regard for the size of the
construction project, the electrical requirements thereof, the period of time
reasonably necessary to complete the proposed construction, and any other
factors which the village building inspector shall deem relevant.
(Ord. No. 3, § 4, 11-15-1985)
Sec. 30-35. Franchise agreements.
   No franchise agreement entered into between the village and any utility
company shall permit the installation of utility services otherwise than as
provided in this article; and in the event of any conflict between the
provisions of this article and any franchise agreement between the village and
a supplying utility, the provisions of this article shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 3, § 5, 11-15-1985)
Sec. 30-36. Violation and penalty.
   A violation of this article shall subject the offender to a civil fine in
the amount of $50.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed
committed for each day during or on which the violation shall continue to
occur. Any civil penalty imposed by the village for a violation of this article
shall be issued in the form of a citation payable to the office of the village
clerk within 48 hours of issuance. In addition to the penalties in this
section, the building inspector shall post written notice of the violation on
any real estate which is noncompliant with this article and ten days thereafter
shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all
poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures supplying utility
service to the property, and the cost of doing so shall be recoverable by the
village by civil action against the person owning, operating, or leasing the
property serviced by noncomplying utility service.
(Ord. No. 3, § 6, 11-15-1985; Ord. No. 2001-024, § 1, 10-26-2001; Ord. No.
2011-0402, 4-15-2011)
Secs. 30-37—30-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE III.
WATER AND WASTEWATER
DIVISION 1.
GENERAL
Sec. 30-41. Village council to control and regulate water and sewer systems.
   The sewer system and water system of the village shall be under the control
of, and the duty of prescribing and enforcing full compliance with the rules
and regulations governing the public sewer and water systems shall be vested
in, the village council or its authorized agent.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-42. Sewage facilities for structures.
   No person shall build or remodel any structure used for human habitation or
occupancy within thevillage which is not provided with water-carried sewage
facilities connected to a public sewer system (or septic system for an existing
structure which is compliant with the "sunset provisions" of section
30-35 herein) constructed in accordance with the requirements of the state
commission for health services, this chapter, the village building code, and
any other applicable regulations.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-43. Director of public services.
   (a)   The director of public services, as agent of the village council and
subject to policy guidance as established from time to time by the village
council, shall be in charge of the water and sewer systems of the village; and
he shall supervise the maintenance and operation thereof and administer and
enforce the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances relating to the
village water and sewer systems.
   (b)   The director of public services is responsible for compliance with all
local and state regulations as pertains to the village water and sewer systems.
   (c)   The director of public services or his designee shall, at all
reasonable hours, be granted access to all premises, public and private within
the village's jurisdiction, for the purpose of inspecting connections with and
fixtures to the sewer system and reading or testing of water meters or
examining hydrants, fixtures or connections on which village water pressure is
maintained.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2021-0801, § 7, 8-20-2021)
Sec. 30-44. Service.
   (a)   All new consumers must complete a written and signed application for
water and/or sewer service on such form as the village may from time to time
prescribe. This application may be faxed, mailed or delivered in person to the
village development services department.
   (b)   The village may reject any application for water or sewer service not
available under a standard rate, or which involves excessive service cost, or
which may affect the supply of service to other customers or for other good and
sufficient reasons.
   (c)   The village may reject any application for water or sewer service when
the applicant is delinquent in payment of any bill incurred for water or sewer
service previously supplied to the same location or any other location.
   (d)   As of July 1, 2009, all newly installed in-ground irrigation systems
are required to have a separate dedicated water service meter.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2009-0602, 6-19-2009)
Sec. 30-45. Septic systems.
   (a)   The person owning or controlling the on-site system (Type I - VI),
commonly known as a septic system, shall be responsible for assuring compliance
with the laws, rules, and permit conditions regarding system location,
installation, operation, maintenance, monitoring, reporting and repair.
   (b)   An on-site system shall be considered malfunctioning when it fails
("Failure") to meet one or more of the following requirements, either
continuously or intermittently, or if it is necessary to remove the contents of
the tank(s)at a frequency greater than once per month in order to satisfy the
conditions.
      (1)   Discharge of sewage to the surface of the ground, surface waters,
or directly into groundwater at any time.
      (2)   Back-up of sewage into the facility, drains, collection system, or
freeboard volume of the tank.
      (3)   Free liquid surface within three inches of finished grade over the
nitrification trench for two or more observations made not less than 24 hours
apart.
   (c)   The director of public services may request the local health
department to make periodic general inspections and report its findings to the
village manager.
   (d)   Notice of violations may be issued for compliance and permit
violations by the local health department. Legal remedies, as set forth in Sec.
30-4 and other applicable law, can be pursued after observation and
documentation of one or more malfunctions.
   (e)   The village no longer permits the installation of any type of private
on-site sewer systems.
   (f)   This subsection (f)shall apply only to properties located on Bald Head
Island which, prior to the enactment of this article, used a septic system as
the sole means of sewage collection and treatment ("prior septic property").
Any prior septic property shall be allowed to continue to use its septic system
for a period not greater than 20 years from January 1, 2007, after which period
septic system use is prohibited. Further provided, each prior septic property
must connect (i.e., "tap on") to the sewer system of the Village of Bald Head
Island and discontinue septic system use immediately upon the failure of its
septic system. This section in no way prevents an owner of property which
utilizes a septic system from earlier connecting to the village sewer system.
Other than prior septic properties, no property on Bald Head Island shall use
or install a septic system. All costs associated with any connection or tap
fees, the discontinuance of use or removal of any septic system and any clean-
up or other expenses resulting from a septic system failure shall be the sole
responsibility of the property owner of record at the time those expenses are
incurred.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2021-0801, § 7, 8-20-2021)
Sec. 30-46. Construction of water or sewer main; permit required; application;
issuance.
   (a)   An application for construction of a water or sewer main ("main")
shall be submitted to the village manager, signed by the village manager,
approved by the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources,
and all necessary government authorizations or permits issued, before any
property is connected to the main or before the main shall have been laid or
constructed.
   (b)   Each application for a main permit shall be accompanied by a plan or
drawing showing in detail the location of the main and. all proposed
connections to the existing mains.
   (c)   Upon completion of the main, the project engineer of record must
submit certification of the main to the director of public services with as-
built drawings.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2021-0801, § 7, 8-20-2021)
Sec. 30-47. Connection to public water and sewer and abandonment of private
system.
   (a)   At such time as public water or sewer becomes available to a property,
a direct connection can be made at the owner's discretion. The property owner
must complete a request for service and pay the appropriate connection charges
in full to receive water or sewer service. Sewer connections must be made if
the on-site system does not meet local health department guidelines, and as
otherwise herein required. Sewer connection charges will not apply if the
property owner is currently paying monthly sewer fees and if the connection is
deemed necessary by the director of public services.
   (b)   If an existing well is to remain in service for non-potable use only,
any cross connections from such private well to the public system shall be
eliminated at the time of connection.
   (c)   Any existing septic system or similar private disposal facility (at
the owner's expense) shall be abandoned as provided herein, pumped out and
filled with suitable material in such a manner as to leave the abandoned
facility in a safe and sanitary condition.
   (d)   All usage fees, in accordance with the village fee schedule, shall be
charged to those being served by the water or sewer system and billing will
commence immediately following connection.
   (e)   New sewer connections shall be properly designed and constructed in
accordance with such guidelines as published by the environmental protection
agency or other regulatory agency, and approved by the village. Under no
conditions shall sanitary wastewater be discharged into any storm sewer system.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2021-0801, § 7, 8-20-2021)
Sec. 30-48. Village's responsibility and liability.
   (a)   Where village water and/or sewer service is available, the village
shall run a service line from its distribution line or collection line to the
property to be served.
   (b)   The village may install its water meter or sewer tap at the property
line or, at the village's option, on the consumer's property, or in a location
mutually agreed upon.
   (c)   The village does not assume the responsibility of inspecting piping or
apparatus on the customer's property.
   (d)   The village reserves the right to refuse or discontinue service unless
the consumer's lines or piping are installed in such a manner as to prevent
cross connections, backflow, or other such problems.
   (e)   The village shall not be liable for damage of any kind whatsoever
resulting from water or sewer service located on the consumer's premises,
unless such damage results directly from negligence on the part of the village.
The village shall not be responsible for any damage done by or resulting from
any defect in the piping, fixtures or appliances on the consumer's premises.
The village shall not be responsible for acts or negligence of third persons or
forces beyond the control of the village. The village shall not be responsible
for damages of any nature resulting from any interruption, cancellation, or
refusal of sewer or water service.
   (f)   The village shall not be responsible for any leaks which may develop
or occur on the premises of water and/or sewer consumers. However, regarding
residential and non-residential water services, in water leak instances, the
Village manager, director of public services, or the designee of either of
them, may consider a discretionary adjustment up to 50% of the estimated water
loss component of billed water deliveries during the month in which the water
loss occurred. The consumer must request an adjustment within 60 days after the
date of the bill for the month in which the incident occurred. The request must
include a suitable repair invoice from a licensed plumber or, in the event the
repairs are made by the owner, the repairs must be inspected and approved by
the village building inspector prior to any adjustment. Adjustments may be
considered for nonresidential sewer charges in the same manner as adjustments
for water services but only where it can be demonstrated to the village's
satisfaction that water lost did not enter the sanitary sewer system. Because
the residential sewer charge is not based on water consumption, adjustments may
not be considered for residential sewer charges. Only one adjustment may be
considered for any given property within a 24-month period; provided, however,
in the sole discretion of the Village Manager, a second adjustment within said
24-month period may be given in extenuating circumstances beyond the reasonable
control of the consumer.
   (g)   Under normal conditions, the consumer will be notified of any
anticipated interruption of service, but the village is not responsible for any
failure to give or the content of any service notices.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2011-1001, 10- 21-2011; Ord. No. 2020-0203, 2-26-
2020; Ord. No. 2021-0801, § 7, 8-20-2021)
Sec. 30-49. Consumer's responsibility.
   (a)   Piping on the consumer's premises must be so arranged that the
connections are conveniently located with respect to the village system.
   (b)   If the consumer's water or sewer piping on the consumer's premises is
so arranged that the village is called upon to provide additional taps, each
tap will be considered as a separate and individual account.
   (c)   Where water service and/or sewer tap is to be placed on the premises
of a consumer, a suitable place shall be provided by the consumer and agreed
upon by the village. This site must be unobstructed and accessible at all
times.
   (d)   The consumer's piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained
by the consumer at the consumer's expense in a safe and efficient manner and in
accordance with the village rules and regulations and those of other regulatory
agencies.
   (e)   The consumer shall guarantee proper protection for the village's
property that is placed on the consumer's premises and shall permit access to
it only by authorized representatives of the village.
   (f)   If any loss or damage to the property of the village or any accident
or injury to persons or property is caused by or results from the negligence or
wrongful act of the consumer, his agents or employees, then the cost of the
necessary repairs or replacements shall be paid by the consumer to the village,
and any such costs or liability otherwise resulting shall be assumed by the
consumer, and the village indemnified therefrom.
   (g)   The amount of such loss or damage or the cost of repairs shall be
added to the consumer's bills, and if not paid, the village may discontinue
service or take other enforcement or lawful actions.
   (h)   The consumer shall pay a service fee for after-hours call-out of
utility personnel if the problem is determined to arise from consumer's fault
or responsibility or to exist on consumer's side of the service. The after-
hours service fee will be added to the monthly utility bill. Failure by the
consumer to pay timely may result in disconnection of service or other village
action.
   (i)   The consumer's side of the service shall be from the connection to the
meter yoke for water service and to the point of the pump tank invert
connection or the cleanout/connection at the roadside, for gravity sewer
service.
   (j)   The water and sewer service fee shall be added to the utility bill,
and failure by the consumer to pay shall result in disconnection of service or
other village action.
   (k)   All potential sewer customers must stop sewer discharge piping
installation approximately three feet short of pump systems. The final three
foot connection to the village owned sewer system will be the responsibility of
village utilities staff.
   (l)   Water service consumers are not permitted to connect to any plumbing
that may have the potential to produce wastewater, unless the plumbing is
attached to an approved and operational sewer system.
   (m)   Any costs, fees or expenses incurred by village from breach by
consumer of its responsibilities or other fault of consumer shall be billed to
and be the responsibility of the consumer.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2009-0602, 6-19-2009)
Sec. 30-50. Access to premises.
   (a)   Duly authorized agents of the village shall have access at all
reasonable hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of testing,
repairing, installing or removing village property, inspecting piping, reading
or testing meters or for any other purpose in connection with the village's
water and sewer service.
   (b)   Each consumer shall grant, convey or shall cause to be granted or
conveyed to the village a perpetual easement and right-of-way across any
property owned or controlled by the consumer whenever the perpetual easement
and right-of-way is necessary for the village water and sewer facilities and
lines to enable service to the consumer.
   (c)   Consumer shall cooperate with village to prepare and record any
easements or rights-of-way in favor of village and the costs of same shall be
the responsibility of the consumer.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-51. Change of occupancy.
   (a)   Not less than three days' notice must be given in writing to the
village utilities department to discontinue service or if there is a change in
occupancy.
   (b)   A nonrefundable new customer account fee in accordance with an
established schedule of fees and charges shall be paid at the time that an
account is established for service. Such fee shall also be paid for any
transfer of accounts from one customer to another.
   (c)   Subject to paragraphs (a) and (b) above, the outgoing party shall be
responsible for the cost of service provided up to the time of departure or the
time specified for departure, whichever is the longest. The balance, or
delinquent balance, of the account for which the outgoing party is responsible
will be transferred to the outgoing party's new location, if within the
jurisdiction of the village.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-52. Suspension of service.
   (a)   Any tenant may request termination of service upon vacating the
premises by notifying the village utilities department of such and requesting
termination. Upon termination by a tenant, the service to the premises shall be
connected in the name of the owner and no fee shall be charged to the owner.
   (b)   Service discontinued for nonpayment of bills will be restored only
after the bills are paid in full and a reconnect fee in accordance with an
established schedule of fees is paid for each meter reconnected.
   (c)   The village reserves the right to discontinue its service without
notice for the following additional reasons:
      (1)   To prevent fraud or abuse;
      (2)   Consumer's willful disregard of the village's rules;
      (3)   Emergency repairs;
      (4)   Insufficiency of supply due to circumstances beyond the village's
control;
      (5)   Legal processes;
      (6)   At the direction of public authorities;
      (7)   Strike, riot, fire, flood, storm, accident or any unavoidable
cause; or
      (8)   For other just cause.
   (d)   The village may, in addition to prosecution by law, permanently refuse
service to any consumer who deliberately tampers with a water meter or cross-
connects piping to the sewer system or facilitates other sources of
contamination.
   (e)   If a tenant is disconnected for nonpayment, the service shall be
connected in the name of the owner thereafter, with no connect fees charged to
the owner.
   (f)   If a tenant is disconnected for improper conduct, such as illegal
cross connections, etc., as outlined in this section, service shall not be
reconnected until the cause for the disconnection action by the village has
been corrected by the property owner.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-53. Abridgement or modification of rules.
   (a)   No promise, agreement or representation of any employee of the village
shall be binding upon the village except as it shall have been agreed upon in
writing, duly signed and accepted by the acknowledged officers of the village.
   (b)   No modification of rates or any of the rules and regulations shall be
made by any agent of the village, but shall only be by lawful action of the
village council.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-54. Construction.
   (a)   Compliance with law.  This chapter shall be construed and shall be
deemed amended so as to comply with the laws and regulations of North Carolina,
as the same may be amended from time to time, applicable to the subject matter
hereof.
   (b)   Headings. The paragraph headings and numbers in this chapter are for
convenience of reference only and are not to be considered in interpretation of
this chapter.
   (c)   Number and gender. Words used herein, regardless of the number and
gender specifically used, shall be deemed and construed to include any other
number, singular or plural, and any other gender, masculine, feminine or
neuter, as the context requires. Any reference to a person herein shall include
an individual, firm, corporation, partnership, trust, governmental authority or
body, association, unincorporated organization or any other entity.
   (d)   Severability. If any term or provision of this chapter is found void
or unenforceable by a court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining terms and provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Secs. 30-55 — 30-80. Reserved.
DIVISION 2.
CHARGES AND FEES
Sec. 30-81. Classification of users.
   (a)   All users are to be classified by the village for rate and fee
purposes by assigning each to a user classification category.
   (b)   The following shall constitute the village's user classifications for
the purpose of assigning charges and fees:
      (1)   Residential. The following structures, as defined in the village
zoning ordinance, single-family, duplex, triplex, quadraplex, condominium, zero
lot line structure, townhouse or apartments with dedicated water and /or sewer
accounts for each unit.
      (2)   Non-residential. Any user, other than a solely residential user,
including, but not limited to, laundromat, restaurant, bar/lounge, public pool
or pool house, ice cream shop, hardware store, gift shop, real estate office,
florist, general service office, repair shop, motels/hotels, pharmacy, clothing
store, beauty or barbershop, and other commercial or public use structures, and
all mixed use structures (as defined in the village zoning ordinance) that
include both residential and non-residential water and/or sewer accounts
whether those accounts have separate metering or not.
      (3)   Rates are based on design (REU's) Residential equivalent units.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2023-1101, 11-17-2023)
Sec. 30-82. Types of charges and fees.
   The charges and fees as established in the village's schedules of charges
and fees may include, but not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   Residential water and sewer connection charges.
      (2)   Residential irrigation connection charge.
      (3)   Non-residential water and sewer connection charges.
      (4)   New customer account fee for new water and/or sewer customer.
      (5)   Fire protection service fee.
      (6)   Plant modification charge.
      (7)   Residential water and sewer service.
      (8)   Non-residential water and sewer service.
      (9)   Water line surcharge.
      (10)   Capital recovery surcharge.
      (11)   Service reconnection charge.
      (12)   Portable toilet rental charge.
      (13)   Non-sufficient funds (NSF) check/transaction charge.
      (14)   Finance charge for late payment.
      (15)   Late fee.
      (16)   Collection agency fee.
      (17)   Labor, regular business-hours services, after-hours services, and
miscellaneous services.
      (18)   Equipment charges.
      (19)   Materials costs.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2009-0602, 6-19-2009)
Sec. 30-83. Method of determining user charges, fees.
   (a)   The village council will, not less than annually, review the actual
cost of operation and maintenance of the village's water and wastewater
treatment facilities to include the distribution and collection systems, the
administrative costs, and the volume REU (per 1,000 gallons) to reflect the
true cost of constituent treatment. The adjustments, if any, will become
effective at such time that a new published rate schedule is approved by
council. The council may review these rates and/or minimum charges and adjust
them accordingly at any time it deems adjustments are in the best interest of
the village. All current water and sewer related rates, charges, fees, etc.
that would be applicable per section
30-82 shall be provided in an established rate schedule, as approved and
amended by the village council from time to time.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-84. Tap fees and utility tap relocation.
   (a)   Water tap fees are calculated on the basis of meter size for
residential structures and per residential equivalent units (REU's) for non-
residential structures, provided in an established schedule, as approved and
amended by the village council from time to time.
   (b)   Sewer tap fees are calculated on the basis of grinder pump or no
grinder pump required, plus a plant modification charge that is based on
residential structure or nonresidential structure per REU.
   (c)   Requests for utility taps to be relocated on the same lot due to
construction interference shall be administered at an established per hour rate
for labor, equipment and the cost of materials.
   (d)   All residential and non-residential water and sewer connection charges
must be paid (in-full) prior to framing inspection.
   (e)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, where non-residential structures will
have separate metering for different uses, the property owner or their agent
may apply to the director of public services requesting a phased tap fee
schedule at or before the date requested for an initial framing inspection for
any portion of the project ready for tapping. The director of public services,
in consultation with the village building inspector, may establish and approve
a phased tap fee schedule that requires connection charges to be paid before
identifiable construction milestones prior to each separate meter being tapped.
The decision to approve a phased schedule request and the construction
milestones used to established the schedule are at the discretion of the
director of public services.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2009-0602, 6-19-2009; Ord. No. 2023-1101, 11-17-
2023)
Sec. 30-85. New customer account fee.
   (a)   New customer account fee, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be
made for each water or sewer account. If both the water and the sewer accounts
are established at the same time only a single charge will apply.
   (b)   Water and/or sewer furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot
only. Each consumer's water service must be separately metered at a single
delivery and metering point. Each commercial unit and each storeroom or stall
used for business purposes may have a separate meter.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-86. Meter reading; billing; collecting.
   (a)   Meters will be read and bills rendered monthly, but the village
reserves the right to vary the dates or length of period covered, temporarily
or permanently. Billing for sewer service shall be on the monthly flat rate
basis for residential. Non-residential is based on the amount of metered water
consumed within the billing period or a minimum rate.
   (b)   Bills for water and sewer will be calculated in accordance with the
village's published rate schedule then in effect.
   (c)   Charges for water service shall commence at the time of availability
of water and with the installation of the water meter.
   (d)   Charges for sewer service shall commence at the time of the inspection
and startup of the sewer system or the connection to gravity main.
   (e)   Bills are due on the billing date and may become delinquent in
accordance with such policies as may be adopted and revised by the village
council from time to time. If bills are not paid within the timeframe specified
by such policies, the village shall charge a finance charge for late payment as
provided in an established rate schedule, as approved and amended by the
village council from time to time. In addition to the finance charges, the
village may charge a late fee as provided in an established rate schedule, as
approved and amended by the village from time to time. The village may also
discontinue service on any account which remains delinquent for more than 60
days and the village may take other lawful action on the account.
   (f)   Subject to policies which may be adopted from time to time by the
village council, payments made to any account shall be applied in the following
order of priority:
      (1)   Accrued interest;
      (2)   Accrued late fees or similar charges;
      (3)   Collection agency, attorney's or other collection costs or
expenses;
      (4)   To the principal balance owed.
   (g)   Partial payments made on any bill which combines water and sewer
services shall be applied first to sewer billing, then to other charges
(including, but not limited to, water line surcharge, purchase of Brunswick
County water, service charges or other charges) and then to water billing.
   (h)   Should any property owner desire the water cut off at the meter for
convenience, the water department shall make such cut off. A fee in accordance
with an established fee schedule shall be charged for the restoration of
service, which fee shall be added to the regular utility bill. Should a request
for service restoration be performed during after-hours, an adjusted fee in
accordance with an established fee schedule shall be charged and added to the
utility bill. The village reserves the right to vary these fees from time to
time to cover the cost of providing such service.
   (i)   Failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent such bills from
becoming delinquent or relieve the consumer from responsibility for payment.
   (j)   A collection fee as provided in an established rate schedule, as
approved and amended by the village council from time to time, shall be charged
to any delinquent account turned over to a collection agency.
   (k)   The village shall impose a non-sufficient funds charge as provided in
an established rate schedule, as approved and amended by the village council
from time to time, in the event payment is refused for insufficient funds or
otherwise dishonored by the financial institution on which the payment is
drawn/made.
   (l)   To the extent permitted by law, all attorneys, experts or other
professional fees incurred by village to enforce any provision of this chapter
or collect any account shall be borne by consumer.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-87. Complaints and adjustments.
   (a)   If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his
claim to the village utilities department before the bill becomes delinquent.
Such claim, if made after the bill has become delinquent, shall not be
effective in preventing late charges and/or discontinuance of service as
provided in this article. The consumer may pay such bill under protest and the
payment shall not prejudice the claim.
   (b)   If the meter is out of order, fails to register accurately, or its
seal is broken, the property owner, occupant or tenant served by such a meter
shall be charged at the average rate of consumption for similar billing periods
as shown by the meter, when in order.
   (c)   If any owner, occupant or tenant served by a water meter is not
satisfied with the meter reading and shall desire that the meter be tested, the
meter shall be tested upon request. The cost of the meter test shall be borne
by the customer if the test shows the meter to be within the current American
Water Works Association (AWWA) standard. If the meter test shows readings
outside the standard, there shall be no charge to the customer for the test.
The charge for meter testing shall be determined and established from time to
time by the Director of Public Utilities. The charge shall be based upon the
average cost of testing meters of different sizes.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Secs. 30-88 - 30-110. Reserved.
DIVISION 3.
EXTENSIONS AND CONNECTIONS
Sec. 30-111. Extensions defined.
   For the purposes of this article, an extension of the village's water and/or
sewer system shall be defined to include any and all improvements deemed
necessary by the village to serve a particular property in consideration of
system-wide needs. Necessary improvements may include not only the construction
of new lines, but shall also include the replacement of existing lines, the
installation of pump stations, construction of oversized lines, and the
installation of necessary hydrants, valves and metering devices.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-112. Extensions of water and sewer systems.
   (a)   The extension of water and sewer lines to serve new development shall
be accomplished as follows:
      (1)   The developer will submit an application and plans for review and
approval by the village, its engineer (if any) and the applicable state
agencies.
      (2)   The developer will install the lines in accordance with the
approved plans and the installation must receive final approval by a North
Carolina professional engineer.
      (3)   Prior to or upon completion of the new extension, the developer
will furnish as-built drawings of the improvements, and shall deed to village
the complete facility in documents in recordable form and suitable to village,
to include all rights-of-way, easements, permits, franchises and authorizations
or other instruments needed for the operation and maintenance of the facility,
to the village. The developer shall not be eligible for reimbursement for costs
related to the extension or any related plans, permits, authorizations,
instruments or filings.
   (b)   Extension of water and sewer lines shall be accomplished as follows:
      (1)   An application and plans for the extension will be submitted for
review and approval by the village, its engineer (if any) and the applicable
state agencies.
      (2)   The lines will be installed in accordance with the approved plans.
      (3)   Prior to or upon completion of the new extension, all rights-of-
way, easements, permits, franchises and authorizations or other instruments
needed for the installation, operation and maintenance of the facility will be
deeded to the village in documents in recordable form and suitable to village.
      (4)   The total costs involved in a new extension, whether initiated by a
developer or the village, will be paid by the developer or by the parties
benefitting from the extension.
      (5)   The developer shall be responsible for all costs, fees and expenses
associated with an extension to serve new development.
      (6)   For extensions undertaken by the village to serve existing
developed property, assessments pursuant to G.S. 160A-216 et seq. shall be
utilized and may be based on any of the alternatives specified by G.S. 160A-218
or, in its discretion, the village may use such other fees or funding
mechanisms as provided by law. Benefitted properties shall be responsible for
all costs associated with the improvement.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-113. Additional extensions authorized.
   The village may make or authorize extensions or connections to or from any
improvements constructed at the expense of a developer without the permission
of the developer. Construction of improvements at the expense of a developer
shall not relieve such developer of the obligation to pay applicable fees,
costs and expenses under this chapter and applicable laws and regulations.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-114. Reasons for extension refusal.
   The village may refuse to extend or allow extension of service to property
where the village determines that extension of service is unreasonable or
impracticable because:
      (1)   The cost of service extension is determined to be excessive in
terms of the number of customers to be served or because of topographical,
engineering, technical or other problems.
      (2)   The provision of service will adversely affect the supply of water
to other customers or will adversely affect the village wastewater treatment
facility.
      (3)   The service extension would cause the village to be in violation of
any provision of the asset purchase agreement dated September 5, 2005 by which
the village acquired certain assets of Bald Head Island Utilities, Inc. on or
about December 30, 2005.
      (4)   Other good and sufficient reasons.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-115. Inspection by Village.
   (a)   All contracts and work related to connection or extension of the water
and sewer systems of the village not performed by village forces, whether
inside or outside of village, shall be subject to inspection by the village
utilities department. Upon making application for extensions or connections to
the village's water and sewer systems, the applicant agrees that the village
possesses the right to inspect all necessary improvements or appurtenances
thereto before such shall be connected to the systems of the village. The
village shall be given notice to inspect before pipes are covered and
connections made. The village may require any testing it deems appropriate to
determine that work performed complies with approved specifications and plans
with the expense of such testing being borne by the applicant or contractor.
If, in the judgment of the director of public services, there is a demonstrated
lack of competent supervision or work quality by a contractor, the director of
public services may at his option:
      (1)   Halt work until approved supervision is obtained and the work is
performed in accordance with village requirements and/or approved plans; or
      (2)   Provide constant inspection by village personnel at the expense of
the applicant or contractor.
   (b)   Inspection of a project performed by the village does not consist of
or imply supervision. The applicant or the contractor undertaking the
improvement is solely responsible for ensuring that the project is completed
properly and in compliance with approved specifications, plans and regulations.
The responsible party may be required, at its cost, to rearrange or redo any
work to bring it into conformity with such approved plans and specifications.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2021-0801, § 7, 8-20-2021)
Sec. 30-116. Extensions required within rights-of-way.
   Water mains shall be extended only within the rights-of-way of publicly
dedicated and opened streets. Sewer lines being constructed for direct service
to adjoining properties shall also be located within such rights-of-way, except
where topography or other reasons make this impracticable. In no case shall
lines be extended across private property unless adequate permanent easements
for such lines have been obtained.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Secs. 30-117—30-130. Reserved.
DIVISION 4.
WATER WELLS
Sec. 30-131. Installment regulated.
   (a)   No new potable, irrigation, or raw water well or closed loop system or
other structure penetrating into an aquifer shall be permitted on Bald Head
Island without the express written authorization of the village council.
   (b)   This section shall not affect wells currently in existence.
   (c)   No well may be located within a 100 foot radius from an existing
village production well and/or planned production well site as identified by
the village utilities director.
   (d)   Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor making the offender
liable for punishment in accordance with above section 30-1.
(Ord. No. 2007-1002, 10-26-2007; Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Secs. 30-132—30-150. Reserved.
DIVISION 5.
IS CHARGES TO WASTE WATER SYSTEM AND EFFLUENT DISPOSAL
Sec. 30-151. Sanitary sewer use policy; adoption and administration.
   The village council shall by resolution, within six months of adoption of
this chapter, adopt a sanitary sewer use policy which shall contain such
regulations and policies as may be necessary to comply with federal, state and
local law, and shall, from time to time, review such regulations and policies
and modify or amend them as necessary to ensure compliance.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-152. Restrictions on disposal of wastewater effluent.
   Disposal of wastewater effluent is prohibited within the boundaries of the
village by any person, firm, or other governmental entity other than the
village utilities department without the express written authorization of the
village council.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-153. Fats, oils, and greases control.
   (a)   Scope and purpose. To aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer
blockages and obstructions from contribution and accumulation of fats, oils,
and greases into said sewers system from industrial or commercial
establishments, particularly food preparation and serving facilities.
   (b)   Definitions.
      (1)   Cooking establishments. Those commercial establishments engaged in
activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available for consumption
foodstuffs and that use one or more of the following preparation activities:
cooking by frying (all methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sauteing,
rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting,
toasting or poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing,
and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot non-drinkable food
product in or on a receptacle that requires washing.
      (2)   Fat, oils, and greases. Organic polar compounds derived from animal
and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules.
These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures
established in 40 CFR 136, or successor provision, as may be amended from time
to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases".
      (3)   Grease trap or interceptor. A device for separating and retaining
waterborne greases and grease complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the
trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. These
devices also serve to collect settable solids generated by and from food
preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the
sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Grease traps and interceptors
are sometimes referred to herein as "grease interceptors".
      (4)   Non-cooking establishments. Those commercial establishments
primarily engaged in the preparation of precooked foodstuffs that do not
include any form of cooking. These include cold dairy and frozen foodstuffs
preparation and serving establishments.
      (5)   Minimum design capability. The design features of a grease
interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and
retain greases from grease-laden wastewaters discharged to the public sanitary
sewer.
      (6)   User. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution or discharge of wastewater into the village system, including
persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources such as those who
discharge hauled wastewater.
   (c)   Grease interceptor maintenance, record keeping, and grease removal.
   (1)   Grease interceptors shall be installed by users as required by the
director of public services or his designee. Grease interceptors shall be
installed at the user's expense, when such user operates a cooking
establishment. Grease interceptors may also be required in non-cooking or cold
dairy and frozen foodstuffs establishments when they are deemed necessary by
the director of public services for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing grease. No user shall allow wastewater discharge concentration from
subject grease interceptors to exceed 325 milligrams per liter, as identified
by EPA method 1664, or its successor method, or 275 milligrams per liter, as
identified by EPA method 413, or its successor method. All grease interceptors
shall be of the type designed and capacity approved by the director of public
services or his designee and shall be easily accessible for user cleaning and
village inspections. All such grease interceptors shall be inspected, serviced
and emptied of accumulated waste content as required in order to maintain
minimum design capability or effective volume of the grease interceptor, but
not less often than every 30 days. Users who are required to pass water through
a grease interceptor shall:
         a.   Provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time of 24 minutes at
actual peak flow or 12 minutes at the calculated theoretical peak flow rate as
predicted by the uniform plumbing code fixture criteria, between the influent
and effluent baffles with 20 percent of the total volume of the grease
interceptor being allowed for sludge to settle and accumulate, identified
hereafter as a "sludge pocket"'.
         b.   Remove any accumulated grease cap and sludge pocket as required,
but at intervals of not longer than 30 days at the user's expense. Grease
interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid materials such as grit,
rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc.,
which could settle into this pocket and thereby reduce the effective volume of
the grease interceptor.
         c.   Accept the following conditions: If any skimmed or pumped wastes
or other materials removed from grease interceptor are treated in any fashion
onsite and reintroduced back into the grease interceptor as an activity of and
after said onsite treatment, the user shall be responsible for the attainment
(Ord. of established grease numerical limit consistent with and contained in
(c)(1) on all discharges of wastewater from said grease interceptor in the
village sanitary sewer collection and treatment system.
         d.   Operate the grease interceptor in a manner so as to maintain said
device such that attainment of the grease limit is consistently achieved.
"Consistent" shall mean any wastewater sample taken from said grease
interceptor shall be subject to terms of numerical limit attainment described
in (c)(1). If an establishment desires, because of documented space
constraints, an alternate to an out-of-building grease interceptor, the request
for an alternative location shall contain the following information:
            1.   Location of village sewer main and easement in relation to
available exterior space outside building.
            2.   Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing
for all services at that site.
      e.   Understand and agree that: the use of biological additives as a
grease degradation agent is conditionally permissible, upon prior written
approval by the director of public services. Any establishment using this
method of grease abatement shall maintain the trap or interceptor in such a
manner that attainment of the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured
from the traps outlet, is consistently achieved.
      f.   Understand and agree that: the use of automatic grease removal
systems is conditionally permissible upon prior written approval by the
director of public services and Brunswick County department of health. Any
establishment using this equipment shall operate the system in such a manner
that attainment of the grease wastewater discharge limit, as measured from the
unit's outlet, is consistently achieved.
      g.   Understand and agree that: The director of public services reserves
the right to make determinations of grease interceptor adequacy and need, based
on review of all relevant information regarding grease interceptor performance,
facility site and building plan review and to require repairs to, or
modification or replacement of such traps.
      (2)   The user shall maintain written record of trap maintenance for
three years. All such records will be available for inspection by the village
at all times.
      (3)   No non-grease laden sources can be connected to sewer lines
intended for grease interceptor service.
      (4)   Except as provided herein for a period of one year following
adoption of this article, although installation of grease interceptors will be
required to be installed, no enforcement actions will be taken under this
section for failure to achieve limits on grease discharges from grease
interceptors. If, during this one-year period an obstruction of a village sewer
main(s)occurs that causes a sewer overflow to the extent that an impact on the
environment is realized and that said overflow or failure of the sanitary sewer
collection system to convey sewage can be attributed in part or in whole to an
accumulation of grease in the village's sewer main(s), the village will take
appropriate enforcement actions, as stipulated in the village's sewer use
ordinance or resolution, against the generator or contributor of such grease.
      (5)   Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall be
provided over each chamber and sanitary fee. The access manholes shall extend
at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent water
inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers
to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2021-0801, § 7, 8-20-2021)
Secs. 30-154 — 30-170. Reserved.
DIVISION 6.
WATER CONSERVATION STANDARDS
Sec. 30-171. Purpose.
   These water conservation standards are enacted by the village for the
purposes of:
      (1)   Reducing the rate of increase in overall water use through year-
round water conservation practices that will help maximize the community's
existing and planned water supply sources and help reduce seasonal peak day
demands that result in higher cost to purchase Brunswick County water which in-
turn means increased cost to the consumer.
      (2)   Such year-round practices shall include:
         a.   Reducing indoor use by encouraging the installation and
maintenance of ultra-low flow toilets, faucet aerators, low-flow showerheads
and similar devices, as well as other creative and commonsense indoor
conservation practices.
         b.   Reducing irrigation and irrigation-related water waste without
sacrificing landscape quality through the cultivation of lower water use
plants; improved landscape design and planting practices; more efficient
watering practices; and improved irrigation system design and maintenance.
         c.   Repair all leaks. Malfunctioning toilets and irrigation system
are the most common cause of high water use. Toilets can be checked by adding a
food coloring to the toilet tank and visually checking to see if the color
appears in the bowl, if it does the toilet is leaking. Irrigation systems
should be checked regularly for proper operation. Insure sprinkler heads are
intact and automatic controller and valves are operating correctly.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-172. Definitions.
   For the purpose of these standards, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Automatic controller. A mechanical or electronic device capable of operating
an irrigation system and its component valve stations according to a pre-
determined schedule of irrigation frequency and duration.
   Irrigation system. Any permanently installed system of pipes, hoses, or
other conveyance devices and appurtenances that provides water to living plant
material through spray heads or other emission devices located at, above, or
below the ground surface. For the purposes of these standards, a sprinkler,
soaker hose, or other device connected to its water source via a moveable
above-ground garden hose is not considered to be an irrigation system.
   Non-residential. Any user, other than a residential user, including, but not
limited to, laundromat, restaurant, bar/lounge, public pool or pool house, ice
cream shop, hardware store, gift shop, real estate office, florist, general
service office, repair shop, motels/hotels, pharmacy, clothing store, beauty or
barbershop, and other commercial or public use structures, and all mixed use
structures (as defined in the village zoning ordinance) that include
residential and non-residential water and/or sewer accounts that are not
separated.
   Potable water. Treated water provided by the village utilities department
that is suitable for drinking, cooking, and other domestic use. Water that is
collected indoors in containers from indoor faucets or spigots.
   Public right-of-way. The area of land owned or maintained by municipal,
county, or state government primarily for the use of the public for the
movement of people, goods, vehicles, or storm water. For the purposes of these
standards, the public right-of-way shall include curbs, streets, sidewalks, and
storm water drainage inlets, but shall not include adjacent landscaped areas
that may also be located within the legally delineated public right-of-way.
   Raw water. Water drawn from wells, reservoir or other water source before
treatment.
   Residential. The following structures, as defined in the village zoning
ordinance, single-family, duplex, triplex, quadraplex, condominium, zero lot
line structure, townhouse or apartments with dedicated water and /or sewer
accounts for each unit.
   Runoff. Water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is
applied. Runoff occurs when water is applied too quickly (application rate
exceeds infiltration rate), particularly if there is a severe slope. These
standards do not apply to stormwater runoff which is created by natural
precipitation rather than human-caused or applied water use.
   Service area. The geographic area in which the village provides or is
authorized to provide water and/or sewer service.
   Shut-off nozzle. A device attached to the end of a hose that completely
shuts off the flow, even if left unattended.
   Spray irrigation. The application of water to landscaping by means of a
device that projects water through the air in the form of small particles or
droplets.
   Sprinkler head. A device that projects water through the air in the form of
small particles or droplets.
   Water waste. The non-beneficial use of village potable water. Non-beneficial
uses include but are not restricted to:
      (1)   Landscape water applied in such a manner, rate and/or quantity that
it overflows the landscaped area being watered and runs onto adjacent property
or public right-of-way; or landscape water applied during periods of rainfall
or when soil moisture is already adequate.
      (2)   The use of water for washing vehicles, equipment, or hard surfaces,
such as parking lots, aprons, pads, driveways, or other surfaced areas, in such
quantities to flow onto adjacent property or the public right-of-way.
      (3)   Water applied in sufficient quantity to cause ponding on impervious
surfaces. Water lost through plumbing leaks that can be readily identified and
corrected.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-173. Water waste prohibited, penalties for violating standard.
   (a)   Water waste prohibited.  No person, party, or entity shall use, cause,
waste, or permit to be wasted any village supplied potable water, in violation
of the standards set out herein.
   (b)   Penalties. The village may discontinue water service to any customer
where, after notice of a prohibited use is delivered to the service address,
the village supplied potable water continues to be used or wasted in violation
of the water conservation standards set out herein.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-174. Determination of a water supply shortage or emergency.
   (a)   Drought condition shortage. The village shall base its determination
of existing or potential water shortage conditions on its analysis of existing
and anticipated demand, availability of supplemental supplies, as well as other
elements of reasonable professional judgment and management.
   (b)   Natural and man-made disasters and catastrophic equipment and plant
failure shortage. Any other circumstances, including service losses caused by
equipment or facility failure, human error, deliberate act, weather, or other
natural disaster, which constrain the village's water supply, treatment, or
distribution capacity to less than that reasonably needed by its customers,
shall constitute a water supply shortage up to and including a water supply
emergency, requiring immediate action by the village.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-175. Required actions under water supply shortage or emergency
conditions.
   In the event of a water supply shortage, the following shall apply:
      (1)   Village supplied potable water may not be used for any outdoor
purposes, except for emergency fire suppression or other activities necessary
to maintain public health, safety, or welfare.
      (2)   The use of village supplied potable water for heating and/or
cooling purposes shall be reduced in all but the most essential facilities to
the extent allowable in consideration of indoor air quality standards, weather
conditions, and health and safety requirements.
      (3)   Water service may be discontinued or reduced to designated users or
in designated portions of the village service area in order to preserve the
availability of water for essential public health and safety requirements such
as fire protection, clinics and other critical community needs.
      (4)   The village shall make use of media releases and other reasonable
means of publicizing the water supply advisory and the need for immediate
voluntary conservation.
      (5)   Golf course irrigation is excluded from the foregoing prohibition,
to the fullest extent allowed by state law; provided, however, in the event of
local village emergency and to the extent necessary in the interest of public
health, safety, or welfare, the village may prohibit irrigation by potable
water for the period of the emergency.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2014-0501, 5-23-2014)
Secs. 30-176 — 30-180. Reserved.
DIVISION 7.
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
Sec. 30-181. Purpose.
   The purpose of this cross connection article is:
      (1)   To protect the public potable water supply of the Village of Bald
Head Island (herein "village") from the possibility of contamination or
pollution which could backflow into the public water system, due to back-
siphonage or backpressure, by isolating such pollution or contaminants within
the customer's private water system.
      (2)   To define the authority of the Village of Bald Head Island,
utilities department (herein "utilities department") as the water purveyor
entitled to eliminate all cross connections, new or existing, within its public
water system.
      (3)   To provide for a continuing program of inspections and testing of
existing cross connections, and those which may be installed in the future.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-182. Definitions.
   Air gap. An unobstructed vertical distance through the atmosphere between
the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water from any source to a
tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flood level rim of the device.
An approved air gap separation shall be at least double the diameter of the
supply pipe. In no case shall the air gap separation be less than two inches.
An approved air gap may be considered as a backflow prevention assembly.
   Backflow.  Any reverse flow of water, gas or any other liquid substance into
the public water system of the Village of Bald Head Island from any source due
to an unprotected cross connection.
   Backflow administrator. An employee of the utilities department, trained and
certified by the State of North Carolina, designated by the director of public
services to administer and enforce this article.
   Backflow prevention assembly (approved). An assembly that has been
investigated and approved by the backflow administrator and has been approved
to meet the design and performance standards of the American Society of
Sanitary Engineers (ASSE), the American Water Works Association (A WW A), or
the Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the
University Of Southern California.
   Back pressure. Any elevation of pressure in the downstream piping system
caused by pumps, elevation of piping, or steam and/or air pressure above the
supply pressure at the point of consideration, which would cause a reversal of
the normal direction of flow of water.
   Backsiphonage. A reversal of the normal direction of flow of water in the
pipes due to a negative pressure (vacuum)being created in the supply line with
the backflow source subject to atmospheric pressure.
   Certified tester. Any individual person who holds a certificate of
completion from a certified training program in the testing and repair of
backflow prevention assemblies and cross connection control.
   Containment. The prevention of backflow from a private water system by an
approved, properly functioning backflow prevention assembly which is installed,
operated, and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this article.
   Contamination. An impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which
creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the
spread of disease.
   Cross connection. Any actual or potential connection or piping arrangement
between the public or a customer's potable water supply and any other source or
system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the potable
system any used water, industrial fluids, gas, or any substance which could be
harmful or hazardous to the potable water supply or system.
   Customer. Any person, firm, or corporation using or receiving water from the
utilities department.
   Double check valve assembly. An assembly composed of two single,
independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing shut-off
valves located at each end of the device and suitable connections for testing
the water tightness of each check valve.
   Hazard.
      (1)   Hazard (imminent). An actual threat of contamination to the public
water system that could cause serious illness or death.
      (2)   Hazard (low). No observed threat of damage to the physical
components comprising the public water system or to a customer's potable water
system, or of pollution to the public water system or to a customer's potable
water system.
      (3)   Hazard (moderate). An actual or potential threat of damage to the
physical components comprising the public water system or to a customer's
potable water system, or of pollution to the public water system or to a
customer's potable water system.
      (4)   Hazard (severe). A potential threat of contamination to the public
water system or to a customer's potable water system that could cause serious
illness or death.
   Potable water. Water from any source which has been approved for human
consumption by the State of North Carolina, Department of Environment and
Natural Resources, Division of Environmental Health, Public Water Supply
Section.
   Private water system. Any water system located on the customer's premise,
whether supplied by public potable water or an auxiliary water supply. The
system or systems may be either a potable water system or an industrial piping
system.
   Public water system. The potable water system owned and operated by the
Village of Bald Head Island. This includes all storage tanks, distribution
mains, lines, pipes, connections, meters and other facilities conveying potable
water from the water treatment plant to the service connections of each
customer.
   Reduced pressure zone assembly. An approved, properly functioning assembly
containing two, independently acting, approved check valves with a
hydraulically operating, mechanically independent pressure differential relief
valve located between the check valves and at the same time below the first
check valve. The assembly must include properly located test cocks and tightly
closing shut-off valves located at each end of the assembly.
   Service connection. The terminal end of a service connection from the public
potable water system, immediately after the water meter, i.e., where the water
purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of
delivery to the customer's private water system.
   Used water. Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable
water system to a customer's private water system after it has passed through
the point of delivery and is no longer under the control of the water purveyor.
   Water purveyor. Owner or operator of a public potable water system providing
approved potable water supply to the public.
   Water supply (unapproved). Any water supply, which has not been approved for
human consumption by the State of North Carolina, Department of Environment and
Natural Resources, Division of Environmental Health, Public Water Supply
Section.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2021-0801, § 8, 8-20-2021)
Sec. 30-183. Responsibility.
   (a)   Responsibility: utilities department.
      (1)   The utilities department will be primarily responsible for
preventing any contamination or pollution of the public water system. This
responsibility begins at the point of origin of the public water system supply
and includes all of the public water distribution system, and ends at the
service connection, under the Federal or State Safe Drinking Water Act. The
backflow administrator shall exercise vigilance to ensure that the consumer/
customer has taken the proper steps to protect the public potable water system.
      (2)   When it has been determined by an inspection of the customer's
private water system that a backflow protection system is required for the
protection of the public water system, the backflow administrator shall notify,
in writing, the owner of any such building or premises, to correct within a
time set by this article, any plumbing installed or existing that is in
violation of this article.
      (3)   The backflow administrator will select an approved backflow
prevention assembly to be installed at the service connection. The owner shall
be notified that the installation of a backflow prevention assembly may create
a closed system, and as a result thermal expansion may occur. In these
circumstances the owner must understand and assume all liability and
responsibilities for that phenomenon.
   (b)   Responsibility: customer.
      (1)   The customer has the responsibility of preventing contaminants and
pollutants from entering the customer's private water system or the public
water system operated by the Village of Bald Head Island. The customer, at its
own expense, shall install, operate, and maintain all backflow prevention
assemblies specified within this article.
      (2)   If a tenant customer does not maintain the private water system,
and has no authority to bring the system into compliance with the provisions of
this article, the Village of Bald Head Island may assert any available action
against any proper party to assure the private water system is brought into
compliance with this article.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-184. Right of entry; authorization.
   (a)   Any authorized representative from the utilities department shall have
the right to enter any building, structure or premises during normal business
hours to perform any duty imposed upon him/her by this article and in
accordance with the North Carolina State Plumbing Code, and the North Carolina
Administrative Code. Those duties may include sampling and testing of water, or
inspection and observation of all piping systems connected to the public water
supply. Refusal to allow these representatives to enter for these purposes will
result in disconnection of water service or other remedy provided by ordinance
or applicable law.
   (b)   On request, the consumer shall furnish to the water purveyor any
pertinent information regarding the water supply system on such property where
cross connection and backflow are deemed possible.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-185. Law; unprotected cross connection prohibited.
   (a)   No water service connection to any private water system shall be
installed or maintained by the utilities department unless the water supply is
protected as required by this article and in accordance with the North Carolina
State Plumbing Code, and the North Carolina Administrative Code. Service of
water to any premises may be discontinued by the utilities department if a
backflow prevention assembly required by this article is not installed, tested
and maintained, or if a backflow prevention assembly has been removed or
bypassed or if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises. Service
will be restored after all such conditions or defects are corrected.
   (b)   No customer shall allow an unprotected cross connection to be made or
to remain involving the customer's private water system.
   (c)   No connection shall be made to an unapproved auxiliary water supply
unless the public water supply is protected against backflow by an approved
backflow prevention assembly, appropriate to the degree of hazard.
   (d)   No customer shall fail to maintain in good operating condition any
backflow prevention assembly, which is part of the customer's private water
system and is required by this article.
   (e)   No customer shall fail to submit to the utilities department any
records, which are required by this article.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-186. Installation.
   (a)   Installation and testing requirements.
      (1)   The purpose of this section is to require that, when a cross
connection or health hazard has been identified, all water flowing from the
public water system into that private water system must flow through an
approved backflow prevention assembly. Further, each backflow prevention
assembly must be properly located, installed, maintained, and tested so that
the backflow prevention assembly is effective in protecting the public water
system from any possible contamination or pollution.
      (2)   The installation or replacement of a backflow prevention assembly
for domestic water use shall only be performed by a licensed plumber or the
utilities department. The installation, replacement or repair of a backflow
prevention assembly on a dedicated fire sprinkler service shall only be
performed by a licensed fire sprinkler contractor. All backflow prevention
assemblies shall be tested by a certified backflow technician.
      (3)   All construction plans and specifications for premises which will
receive service from the Village of Bald Head Island public water system shall
be made available to the backflow administrator for review and approval; to
determine the degree of hazard; and to determine any backflow prevention
assembly required to be installed.
      (4)   All facilities zoned commercial that have existing water services
with the Village of Bald Head Island and which request certificate of
occupancy, whether for new construction or change of use, shall be inspected
for compliance of backflow prevention and cross connection prevention. Any
facility not having backflow protection or changing the degree of hazard shall
be brought into compliance before the backflow administrator may approve
issuance of the certificate of occupancy.
      (5)   The backflow administrator will determine whether a customer must
install a backflow prevention assembly. Any unapproved backflow prevention
assembly must be replaced with an approved backflow prevention assembly, within
the following time period after notification by the backflow administrator.
      Severe health hazard      7 days
      Moderate health hazard   30 days
      Low health hazard      60 days
   If a severe health hazard or any threat of contamination or pollution to the
Village of Bald Head Island public water system is detected, the backflow
administrator may require the installation of the required backflow prevention
assembly immediately, or within a shorter time period than specified above. If
installation is not completed within the specified time period, water service
may be discontinued or other action taken as authorized by ordinance or law.
      (6)   All backflow prevention assemblies must be installed and maintained
on the customer's premises as part of the customer's private water system at or
near the service connection and before the service line is connected to any
other pipes, except as authorized by the backflow administrator.
      (7)   Any branch of plumbing installed on the private water system that
may be of a greater hazard than the supply line, (examples: irrigation systems
or fire pump systems, etc.) shall be protected with the appropriate backflow
prevention device, as determined by the backflow administrator.
      (8)   Any customer installing a reduced pressure zone (RPZ) or double
check valve assembly (DCVA) must provide the following information to the
backflow administrator within ten days after installation:
         a.   Owner;
         b.   Service address where assembly is installed;
         c.   Date of installation;
         d.   Type of assembly;
         e.   Manufacturer;
         f.   Model number;
         g.   Serial number;
         h.   Test results/reports.
      (9)   Each backflow prevention assembly that is required must function
properly at time of installation. Each customer will be required to maintain,
and repair each assembly required as part of their private water system. For
any assembly, installation, test or repair, the customer, at its expense, will
have a certified tester test the assembly and forward the Results to the
backflow administrator within ten days of completion of the test or repair.
      (10)   Each customer must maintain a complete copy of test or repair for
no less than five years. All test and repair records must he maintained on
forms approved by the backflow administrator.
   (b)   Installation location requirements.
      (1)   Backflow prevention assemblies must be located in a place where it
is readily accessible for regular testing, maintenance, repair, and inspection.
Bypass lines parallel to a backflow prevention assembly shall have an approved
backflow prevention assembly that is equal to that on the main line.
      (2)   Reduced pressure zone assembly (RPZ).
         a.   Above ground or indoor installation is preferred and encouraged.
         b.   Below ground installation is strongly discouraged, and shall only
be allowed in special cases as approved by the backflow administrator. The
vault shall have positive drainage with adequate gravity drainage to atmosphere
and must be in a location where no portion of assembly can become submerged at
any time or under any circumstances or conditions.
         c.   Fifteen inches minimum clearance from vault floor and walls.
         d.   Horizontal installation unless manufacturer states otherwise.
         e.   Installation in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations.
         f.   Located where it is readily accessible for regular testing,
maintenance, and inspection.
      (3)   Double check valve assembly (DCVA).
         a.   Above ground or indoor installation is preferred and encouraged.
         b.   Below ground installation is strongly discouraged, and shall only
be allowed in special cases as approved by the backflow administrator. The
vault shall have positive drainage with adequate gravity drainage to atmosphere
and must be in a location where no portion of assembly can become submerged at
any time or under any circumstances or conditions.
         c.   Fifteen inches minimum clearance from vault floor and walls.
         d.   Vertical or horizontal installation acceptable.
         e.   Installation in accordance with manufacturer's recommendations.
         f.   Located where it is readily accessible for regular testing,
maintenance, and inspection.
      (4)   Air gap (AG).
         a.   Above ground installation only.
         b.   Must be in a location where no portion of assembly can become
submerged at any time under any circumstances or conditions.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-187. Degree of hazard.
   (a)   Determination.
      (1)   No water service shall be provided or connection made until the
backflow administrator has been provided information or has surveyed the
private water system to determine the degree of hazard and make a determination
of a backflow prevention assembly to be installed to protect the public water
supply.
      (2)   Any customer making any modification to the private water system's
use or configuration which may change the degree of hazard, shall notify in
writing the backflow administrator before any modification is made. If the
backflow administrator determines that such modification requires a greater
degree of backflow prevention assembly, that assembly must be installed prior
to any modification of use or configuration.
      (3)   If the backflow administrator or his designee is unable to survey
any portion of a private water system to determine the degree of hazard, a
reduced pressure zone assembly will be required.
   (b)   Minimum backflow prevention assembly requirements.
 
1 Degree of hazard RPZ DCVA AG
  Severe           X        X
  Moderate/low         X
 
   AG = Air Gap
   DCVA = Double Check Valve Assembly
   RPZ = Reduced Pressure Zone Assembly
      (2)   Facilities that require a backflow prevention assembly:
         a.   Low hazard: DCVA
            1.   All residential structures will be considered a low hazard and
shall have a minimum of a dual check valve assembly installed at the meter
service at the time the meter is installed or replaced. If a higher degree of
hazard is found, the appropriate backflow prevention assembly, as determined by
the backflow administrator shall be installed. If no other backflow prevention
assembly is specified a double check valve assembly must be installed on all
private water systems regulated by the State of North Carolina.
            2.   All commercial connections that serve only domestic water use
shall be designated low hazard unless listed below, or otherwise determined by
the backflow administrator. All low hazard occupancies shall have a minimum of
a double check valve assembly installed at the meter service at the time the
meter is installed or replaced.
         b.   Moderate hazard: DCVA
            1.   Connection to tanks, lines, and vessels that handle non-toxic
substances.
            2.   Fire sprinkler systems without chemical injection or booster
pumps.
            3.   Most commercial establishments.
            4.   Automatic service stations.
            5.   Bakeries, restaurants, etc.
            6.   Beauty shops without health hazards.
            7.   Other facilities as determined by the backflow administrator.
         c.   Severe Hazard: RPZ or Air Gap
            1.   Wastewater treatment plants.
            2.   Fire sprinkler systems with chemical injection or booster
pumps.
            3.   Connection to tanks, lines, boilers or vessels that handle
sewage, lethal substances, toxic or radioactive substances.
            4.   Lawn irrigation systems.
            5.   Connection to an unapproved water system or auxiliary water
supply.
            6.   Buildings with five or more stories above ground.
            7.   Hospitals and other medical facilities.
            8.   Exterminators and lawn care companies.
            9.   Car wash facilities.
            10.   Laundries.
            11.   Swimming pools.
            12.   Waterfront facilities.
            13.   Schools and colleges.
            14.   Oil and gas production, storage, or transmission facilities.
            15.   Other facilities as determined by the backflow administrator.
   This is not intended to be an exhaustive list, only a partial one. Any other
types of facilities or services not listed above may also be required to
install an approved backflow prevention assembly if determined by the backflow
administrator. All assemblies and installations shall be subject to inspection
and approval by the backflow administrator or designee.
      (3)   Filling of tanks/tankers or any other container from a village
owned fire hydrant is strictly prohibited unless it has been equipped with the
proper meter and approved backflow prevention. Any unauthorized connection to a
fire hydrant is considered an illegal cross connection to the village public
water system and will be subject to legal action or remedy.
      (4)   Imminent hazard. If it has been determined that a customer's
private water system has an imminent hazards; that customer must install an
approved backflow prevention assembly specified by the backflow administrator.
This assembly must be installed within 24 hours of notification from the
backflow administrator. If the customer fails to install the specified assembly
within the allowed time period, water service to the customer's private water
system may be terminated and other action may be taken as authorized by
ordinance or law. In the event the backflow administrator is unable to notify
the customer within 24 hours of determining that an imminent hazard exists, the
backflow administrator may terminate water service until the specified assembly
is installed. These actions may be carried out, without limitation, under the
Safe Drinking Water Act and the N.C. State Plumbing Code.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-188. Notice of contamination or pollution.
   In the event the customer has reason to believe that a backflow incident has
occurred between the customer's private water system and the public water
system, the customer shall immediately notify the utilities department so that
appropriate actions can be taken to isolate and/or remove the contamination or
pollution.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Sec. 30-189. Violations and civil penalties.
   (a)   Notification of violation.
      (1)   A written notice must be presented to any customer/person who has
been found to be in violation of any part of this article.
      (2)   Such notice must explain the violation and give the time period
within which the violation must be corrected. The time period set to correct a
violation shall not exceed 30 days after receiving the notice, unless otherwise
specified in this article or by applicable law. If the violation is determined
to be an imminent hazard by the backflow administrator, the customer shall be
required to correct the violation immediately.
      (3)   In the event a customer found to be in violation of this article
fails to correct the violation within the specified time, or fails to pay any
civil penalties expense assessed under this article, water service will be
terminated.
   (b)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Unprotected cross connection involving a private water system,
which is of an imminent hazard: $1,000.00 per day, not to exceed $ 10,000.00.
      (2)   Unprotected cross connection involving a tank/tanker or other
container hooked to a fire hydrant: $1,000.00 per occurrence.
      (3)   Unprotected cross connection involving a private water system,
which is of a moderate hazard or severe hazard: $500.00 per day, not to exceed
$5,000.00.
      (4)   Submitting false records which are required by this article:
$1,000.00 per incident.
      (5)   Failure to submit records which are required by this article:
$500.00 per incident.
      (6)   Failure to test or maintain backflow prevention assemblies as
required by this article: $100.00 per day.
      (7)   In addition to the foregoing, this article may be enforced by any
and all civil and criminal penalties applicable under the village code of
ordinances, remedies, applicable law or by suits in law or equity.
      (8)   This article shall be construed so as to comply with state and
federal regulations issued from time to time on the subject matter hereof and
shall be deemed amended to the extent inconsistent therewith.
(Ord. of 10-26-2007)
Chapter 31
RESERVED
Chapter 32
ZONING*
*   Cross References: Any zoning map amendment saved from repeal, §
1-9(10); buildings and building regulations,
ch. 6; environment,
ch. 10; floods,
ch. 14; streets, sidewalks and other public places,
ch. 24; subdivisions,
ch. 26.
   State Law References: Municipal authority to zone, G.S. 160A-381 et seq.
Article I. In General
Sec.
32-1. Purpose.
Sec.
32-2. Authority.
Sec.
32-3. Jurisdiction.
Sec.
32-4. Interpretation and conflict.
Sec.
32-5. Zoning affects all land and every building and use.
Sec.
32-6. Required yards not to be used by building.
Sec.
32-7. Relationship of building to lot.
Sec.
32-8. Street access.
Sec.
32-9. Reduction of lot and yard areas prohibited.
Sec.
32-10. Business uses of manufactured offices and trailers.
Sec.
32-11. Definitions.
Sec.
32-12. Food service trailer temporary use permit for special events.
Secs. 32-13—32-40. Reserved.
Article II. Administration
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
32-41. Zoning enforcement officer.
Sec.
32-42. Application for permit.
Sec.
32-43. Certification of occupancy/compliance.
Sec.
32-44. Landscape permits and building permits.
Sec.
32-45. Administrative procedures.
Secs. 32-46--32-60. Reserved.
Division 2. Enforcement and Penalties
Sec.
32-61. Enforcement authority.
Sec. 32-62. Reserved.
Sec.
32-63. Civil remedies.
Sec.
32-64. Equitable relief.
Sec.
32-65. Combination of remedies.
Sec.
32-66. Procedure and remedies.
Secs. 32-67--32-80. Reserved.
Division 3. Changes and Amendments
Sec.
32-81. Changes and amendments.
Sec.
32-82. Action by the applicant.
Sec.
32-83. Action by the planning board.
Sec.
32-84. Action by the village council.
Sec.
32-85. Protest to an amendment.
Secs. 32-86--32-100. Reserved.
Division 4. Planning Board
Sec.
32-101. Establishment.
Sec.
32-102. Procedures.
Sec.
32-103. Duties generally.
Sec.
32-104. Appeals and variances.
Sec.
32-105. Appeals in the nature of certiorari.
Sec.
32-106. General provisions.
Secs. 32-107--32-120. Reserved.
Article III. Zoning Districts and Regulations
Sec.
32-121. Zoning districts established.
Sec.
32-122. District boundaries and zoning map.
Sec.
32-123. Interpretation of district boundaries.
Sec.
32-124. Interpretation of district regulations.
Sec.
32-125. Descriptions and purposes of the districts.
Sec.
32-126. Permitted and special uses.
Sec.
32-127. Dimensional density and structure requirements.
Sec.
32-128. Site development plan.
Sec.
32-129. Homeowners’ association amenity regulation.
Secs. 32-130--32-160. Reserved.
Article IV. Accessory Uses
Sec.
32-161. Dwellings as accessory uses.
Sec.
32-162. Retail sales and services as accessory uses.
Sec.
32-163. Ornamental structures, fences and walls.
Sec.
32-164. Home occupations.
Secs. 32-165--32-190. Reserved.
Article V. Supplemental Regulations
Sec.
32-191. Enforcement and interpretation.
Secs. 32-192--32-220. Reserved.
Article VI. Nonconforming Uses
Sec.
32-221. Purpose and intent.
Secs. 32-222--32-250. Reserved.
Article VII. Special Uses
Sec.
32-251. Purpose.
Sec.
32-252. Application and fees.
Sec.
32-253. Procedures for determining special use permit applications.
Sec.
32-254. General provisions concerning special use permits.
Sec.
32-255. Commercial filming permits.
Secs. 32-256--32-290. Reserved.
Article VIII. Planned Unit Development
Sec.
32-291. Purpose and intent.
Sec.
32-292. Definitions.
Sec.
32-293. Districts in which allowed.
Sec.
32-294. Minimum area of development.
Sec.
32-295. Design standards.
Sec.
32-296. Allowable uses.
Sec.
32-297. Recreational and open space requirements.
Sec.
32-298. Residential density.
Sec.
32-299. Density bonuses.
Sec.
32-300. Development standards and improvement requirements.
Sec.
32-301. Phasing of development.
Sec.
32-302. Elements of the planned unit development.
Sec.
32-303. Special requirements.
Sec.
32-304. Master plan application approval.
Sec.
32-305. Site specific plan approval.
Sec.
32-306. Amendments to master plan and site specific plans.
Sec.
32-307. Enforcement provisions.
Sec.
32-308. Procedures for establishing a moratorium.
Secs. 32-309--32-330. Reserved.
Article IX. Signs
Division 1. Generally
Sec.
32-331. Title.
Sec.
32-332. Purpose.
Sec.
32-333. Authority.
Sec.
32-334. Jurisdiction.
Sec.
32-335. Usage of words and terms.
Sec.
32-336. Definitions.
Sec.
32-337. Word interpretations.
Sec.
32-338. Calculation of sign area.
Sec.
32-339. Violations.
Sec.
32-340. Enforcement and remedies.
Sec.
32-341. Citation.
Sec.
32-342. Amendments.
Sec.
32-343. Prohibited signs.
Sec.
32-344. Nonconforming signs.
Sec.
32-345. Roof mounted marina signs.
Secs. 32-346—32-360. Reserved.
Division 2. Permits
Sec.
32-361. Permit required.
Sec.
32-362. Application for permit.
Sec.
32-363. Issuance of permits.
Sec.
32-364. Fees.
Secs. 32-365--32-380. Reserved.
Division 3. Construction and Maintenance
Sec.
32-381. Design, construction and maintenance.
Sec.
32-382. Reconstruction of damaged signs or sign structures.
Sec.
32-383. Removal of sign upon termination of business.
Sec.
32-384. Dilapidated signs.
Secs. 32-385--32-400. Reserved.
Division 4. General Sign Regulations
Sec.
32-401. Signs permitted in all districts.
Sec.
32-402. Sign regulations for residential uses.
Sec.
32-403. Sign regulations for commercial and not-for-profit uses.
Sec.
32-404. Supplemental sign regulations.
Sec.
32-405. Hardship cases.
ARTICLE I.
IN GENERAL
Sec. 32-1. Purpose.
   This chapter is hereby adopted in order to:
   (1)   Secure safety from fire, panic, and other dangers;
   (2)   Promote health and the general welfare;
   (3)   Provide adequate light and air;
   (4)   Prevent the overcrowding of land;
   (5)   Avoid undue concentration of population;
   (6)   Facilitate the adequate provisions of public requirements;
   (7)   Conserve the value of buildings and encourage the most appropriate use
of land throughout the village; and
   (8)   Protect the area's ecology through full cooperation with county, state
and local authorities.
(Ord. No. 29, § 1.1, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-2. Authority.
   This chapter is s adopted pursuant to the authority vested in the village by
G.S. 160D-201 and limited by the charter incorporating the village.
(Ord. No. 29, § 1.2, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-3. Jurisdiction. 
   The provisions of this chapter shall, to the extent permitted by law, apply
within the corporate limits of the village.
(Ord. No. 29, § 1.3, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-4. Interpretation and conflict. 
   In applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion of public safety, health, convenience,
prosperity and general welfare. It is not intended by this chapter to interfere
with, change or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between
parties; provided, however, that where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the height of
buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by other
ordinances, rules, regulations or by easement, covenants or agreements, the
provisions of this chapter shall govern.
(Ord. No. 29, § 1.4, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-5. Zoning affects all land and every building and use.
   Upon and after adoption of this chapter, no building or land shall be used
and no building or part thereof shall be erected, moved, or structurally
altered except in conformity with the regulations specified herein for the
district in which it is located.
(Ord. No. 29, § 7.1, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-6. Required yards not to be used by building.
   The minimum yards or other open spaces required by this chapter for each and
every lot shall not be encroached upon or considered as meeting the yard and
open space requirements of any other lot.
(Ord. No. 29, § 7.2, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-7. Relationship of building to lot.
   Every building erected, moved, or structurally altered, shall be located on
a lot and in no case shall there be more than one principal building and its
customary accessory buildings on the lot except in the case of a designed
complex of professional, residential, or commercial buildings in an appropriate
zoning district. Detached garages and carports must meet the same setback
requirements as the principal building, just as if they were attached.
(Ord. No. 29, § 7.3, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-8. Street access.
   No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut a street or have
access to a street, provided that in a business district or in a planned
development in a residential district, a building may be erected adjoining a
parking area or dedicated open space which has access to a street used in
common with other lots.
(Ord. No. 29, § 7.4, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-9. Reduction of lot and yard areas prohibited.
   No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be
reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set forth in this
chapter. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter shall
meet at least these minimum requirements.
(Ord. No. 29, § 7.5, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-10. Business uses of manufactured offices and trailers.
   No manufactured office or trailer shall be used in any manner for business,
commercial, or residential purposes, except in conformity with the provisions
of applicable law, this article and any Permitted and Special Use Table. A
construction trailer may be used during the period of construction of
improvements of property upon which the construction trailer is located. A
manufactured office or trailer may be used on a temporary basis during an
emergency in a commercial zoning district for a specific time period granted by
the zoning official and only if the use operated within the structure is a
permitted use in that zoning district. All commercial trailers must be parked
overnight in commercial zones and screened from view from public right-of-ways.
Pursuant to section
32-12, a properly permitted food service trailer may be used on a temporary
basis in conjunction with a special event.
(Ord. No. 29, § 7.6, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2002-006, § 1, 4-20-2002; Ord. No. ZO-
03-04, 6-18-2004; Ord. No. 2015-0402, 4-17-2015; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-
2021)
Sec. 32-11. Definitions.
   Except as specifically defined in this section, all terms contained in this
chapter shall have their customary definitions. Terms used in this chapter
shall be defined as follows:
   Abutting means having property or district lines in common. Lots are also
considered to be abutting if they are directly opposite each other and
separated by a street or alley.
   Access means a way of approaching or entering a property from a public
street or right-of-way. Access also includes ingress, the right to enter, and
egress, the right to leave.
   Accessory building or use means a building or use not including signs, which
is:
   (1)   Conducted or located on the same lot as the principal building or use
served;
   (2)   Clearly incidental to, subordinate in area and purpose to, and serves
the principal use; and
   (3)   Either in the same ownership as the principal use or is clearly
operated and maintained solely for the comfort, convenience, necessity, or
benefit of the occupants, employees, customers, or visitors of or to the
principal use.
   AEC means area of environmental concern as designated and regulated by the
coastal resource commission.
   Alley means a public or private right-of-way primarily designed to serve as
a secondary access to the side or rear of those properties whose principal
frontage is on a street and is not intended for general traffic.
   Architectural review board (ARB) means the architectural review board or
committee established by and operating under the auspices of Bald Head
Association, a state nonprofit corporation, which is referred to in this
chapter as the ARB.
   Baffled light means any artificial light which is attached to a building and
is shielded from horizontal view.
   Bald Head Island Design Guidelines means a publication to assist property
owners in planning their buildings as well as their site development plan and
landscape plan.
   Bar, lounge, tasting room, tavern, wine shop means an establishment that
sells alcoholic beverages that offers no food service or that has alcoholic
beverage sales in excess of 70% of the business’ total annual sales. Such
establishment shall not include a brewery, cidery, distillery, or winery.
   Brewery means an establishment primarily engaged in the production and
distribution of beer and other fermented malt beverages, and may include
accessory uses such as tasting room, restaurant, retail, demonstration areas,
education and training facilities, or other uses incidental to the brewing
business and open and accessible to the public. Breweries exceeding 800 square
feet of production area shall be regulated as a manufacturing use.
   Brewery, cidery, distillery, winery means an establishment primarily engaged
in the production, packaging, and/or distribution of beer and other fermented
malt beverages, liquors, or wines under a single or established set of brand
names, and may include accessory uses such as tasting room, retail sales,
demonstration areas, education and training facilities, food services or other
uses incidental to the brewing business and open and accessible to the public.
Such establishments exceeding 800 square feet of production area shall be
regulated as a manufacturing use.
   Building means any structure built for support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals or property of any kind. The term "building" shall be
construed as if followed by the words "or parts thereof" including porches,
decks, carports, garages, sheds, roof extensions, overhangs, and any other
projections.
   Building, height of, means the vertical distance from the lowest natural
point on the ground beneath a building and attached structures to the highest
point of the roof.
   Building permit means a permit issued by the village to allow construction
according to the approved building plans submitted-by the contractor or owner
of the described property as required by G.S. 160D-1110.
   Building plans means the detailed architectural drawings and specifications
of a building proposed to be erected on a lot which shall show as a minimum the
dimensions, elevations, interior layout, type of construction and exterior
appearance, design and finish of the building. The building plans shall be
accompanied by a topographic survey of the lot showing the elevation contours
not more than every 20 feet as measured from front to rear and side to side
lines of the lot, see section 32-44 (c)for a description of other material to
accompany building plans in applying for a building permit.
   Building site means an area of disturbed land and vegetation required for
placement of a structure,
its access ways, and utilities, including, but not limited to, areas disturbed
for parking lots, power lines, driveways, septic tank nitrification fields and
hiking trails.
   Certificate of occupancy/compliance means official certification that the
structure may be used or occupied following connection with permanent
electrical power (G.S. 160D-1116).
   Clinic, medical services means a facility operated by one or more
physicians, or other licensed practitioners of the healing arts. but not
exceeding four physicians or other licensed practitioners, for examination and
treatment of persons solely on an outpatient basis.
   Club or lodge (private nonprofit, civil, fraternal) means a nonprofit
organization of persons, who are bona fide members paying dues, which owns,
hires, or leases a building, or portion thereof; the use of such premises being
restricted to members and their guests.
   Commercial filming activity means the process of recording any photographic
image, still or moving, by any technology available therefor when the image is
recorded for hire or redistribution for monetary gain when such activity shall
involve the use of equipment of any type which may not be physically
transported by hand without the use of mechanical devises. Commercial filming
activity shall further include any activity ancillary thereto or in support
thereof, including but not limited to transportation, use or storage of any
equipment, vehicles or other property used in connection therewith.
   Community boat ramp means a launching ramp owned by the property owners'
association for use by property owners and their guests.
   Community boating facility means a private, nonprofit boating facility
including a dock, pier and/or launching ramp on property having water frontage;
the use of which is intended to serve more than one residential lot. The right
to use such facility must be conferred by an easement appurtenant to the
residential unit or lot it is intended to serve or must be controlled by a
property owner's association having jurisdiction over the common elements in a
residential project in which the lot or unit is a part. No commercial
activities of any kind shall be allowed within the confines of the facility.
   Condominium means a parcel of real estate, portions of which are designated
for separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for common
ownership solely by the owners of these portions where undivided interest in
the common elements are vested in the unit owners.
   Construction trailer means a structure, not to exceed 16 feet in length, on
the job for purpose of storing materials and tools and which will be removed
immediately upon completion of construction.
   Dwelling, duplex, means a building on a single lot or parcel containing two
dwelling units, and where the building is designed to be or is occupied by two
families living independently from each other.
   Dwelling, multifamily, means a building containing three or more dwelling
units, and where the building is designed to be or is occupied by three or more
families living independently from each other.
   Dwelling, single-family-attached, means two or more single-family dwelling
units, each sharing at least one party wall along a common property line with
each other and/or with another single-family dwelling unit, and where the end
units meet the applicable minimum side yard setback requirements on their
unattached sides.
   Dwelling, single-family-detached, means a building containing one dwelling
unit only, where the building is designed to be occupied by one family and
having no roof, wall or floor in common with another dwelling unit.
   Dwelling unit, means a single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   Dwelling, zero lot line, means a dwelling located on a lot in such a manner
that one side of the structure abuts a pre-designated side lot line, and where
the structure does not share a party wall with an adjacent structure along the
same lot line.
   Emergency repairs means any repairs necessary to protect the structure from
damage from the weather elements or which are necessary to protect occupants or
other persons from imminent injury. Such repairs include any repairs to allow
the existing electrical heating, cooling, or sanitary equipment to operate
properly.
   Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption
living together as a single housekeeping unit and having a recognized head of
household. For the purposes of this chapter such persons may include gratuitous
guests and domestic servants employed on the same premises. Family also may be
two to five unrelated persons sharing a common household.
   Filmmaker means the person, firm, corporation or other entity conducting any
commercial filming activity.
   Floor area, gross, means the total square footage on all floors within the
building walls.
   Forest canopy means the light intercepting layer formed by all of the tree
tops and ultimate leaf bearing branches in a forest: the uppermost layer of
vegetation in a forest. In the Bald Head Island and Middle Island forest, the
forest canopy may be kept to near constant height by the pruning effect of salt
mist nearer the ocean, or it may become irregular in height where salt impact
is less.
   Forest subcanopy means a light intercepting understory layer formed by shade
tolerant saplings, shrubs and small trees beneath the canopy of a forest. The
Bald Head Island subcanopy species include dogwood, holly, cherry, laurel,
waxmyrtle and beautyberry.
   Freestanding baffled lighting means artificial lighting, attached to a flat
surface such as a fence, wall or tree, which is directed downward and shielded
from horizontal view.
   Garage, private, means a building used as an accessory to or a part of the
mail building permitted in any residential district, and providing for the
storage of vehicles.
   Groundwater recharge area means a catchment basin or watershed underlain by
layers of alternating permeable and impermeable strata such that excess
rainfall not lost is evaporation or runoff is retained and stored in
subterranean porous layers of soil. Essentially the entire Bald Head Island and
Middle Island forests act as groundwater recharge areas since porous sandy
soils permit little runoff of excess precipitation. For the purposes of this
chapter components of these systems include ponds, wetland swells, bay forest,
dunes and marsh.
   Handicapped person means a person with a temporary or permanent physical,
emotional, or mental disability including but not limited to mental
retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairments,
emotional disturbances and orthopedic impairments but not including mentally
ill persons who are dangerous to others as defined in G.S. 122C-3(11)B.
   Home occupation means any occupation or profession carried on within a
dwelling by one or more occupants thereof, providing that such use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, that
no more than 25 percent of the total floor area is used for such purposes, that
there is no outside or window display, that no mechanical or electrical
equipment is installed or used other than is normally used for domestic,
professional, or hobby purposes, or for infrequent consultation or emergency
treatment and providing that no person not a resident of the dwelling nor a
family member is employed in connection with the home occupation. To be
"employed in connection with the home occupation" means to be a natural person
engaged to perform any service on the premises of a home occupation on a full-
time, part-time, contract basis, or independent basis, whether or not the
person performing the service is designated an employee, independent
contractor, agent, or otherwise, and whether or not the said person is paid a
salary, wage, or compensation by the operator of said business. "Employed" does
not include circumstances where a person is exclusively on the premises for
repair or maintenance of the premises or equipment on the premises, or for the
delivery of goods to the premises, nor does "employed" include the
circumstances where a person is exclusively on the premises as a patron or
customer.
   Hotel, motel or inn means a building or other structure kept, used,
maintained, advertised as or held out to the public to be a place where
sleeping accommodations are supplied for pay to transient or permanent guests
or tenants, where rooms are furnished for the accommodation of such guests; and
may have one more dining rooms or restaurants, where meals are served, shops,
and attendant sports and recreational facility. The term hotel, motel or inn
includes bed and breakfast establishments.
   Impervious coverage means the area of land on a lot, which is covered by
surfaces including roof area in such a manner that water cannot drain through
such surfaces. The term "impervious coverage" does not include open deck.
walkways, and driveways of wood in which the boards are spaced one-fourth inch
apart.
   Inoperative vehicle means any vehicle, designed to be self-propelled, which
by virtue of broken or missing component parts, is no longer capable of self-
propulsion.
   Junk means old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash,
rubber, debris, waste, or junked dismantled or wrecked vehicle, or parts
thereof, iron steel, and other old or scrap ferrous or nonferrous material.
(G.S. 136-143).
   Land area means the total square footage within a property boundary.
   Landscape permit means a permit to allow excavation, grading, filling or
removing of vegetative covers according to section 32-44.
   Loading space, off-street, means space logically and conveniently located
for bulk pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be
used, and accessible to such vehicles. Required off-street loading space is not
to be included as off-street parking space in computation of required off-
street parking space.
   Lot means a parcel of land recorded as a lot occupied or intended for
occupancy by a main building or group of main buildings and accessory
buildings, together with such yards, open spaces, lot width and lot area as
required by this chapter, and having not less than the minimum required
frontage upon a street, either shown on a plat of record, or considered as a
unit of property and described by metes and bounds. For the purpose of this
chapter, the word "lot'' shall be taken to mean any number of contiguous lots
or portions thereof, upon which one or more main structures for a single use
are erected or are to be erected.
   Lot, corner, means a lot at the intersection of two streets.
   Lot coverage means the area of a lot that is covered by impervious or
partially impervious covers including buildings, pavement, and recreation
facilities but not including decking.
   Lot, interior, means a lot other than a corner lot. Lot line means the line
bounding a lot.
   Lot, through, means an interior lot having frontage on two streets.
   Lot width means the straight-line distance between the points where the
building setback line intersects the two side lot lines.
   Low profile luminaries means any light fixture set on a base which raises
the source of light no higher than 48 inches off the ground and designed in
such a way that light is directed downward from a hooded light source.
   Manufactured home means a dwelling unit that:
   (1)   Is not constructed in accordance with the standards set forth in the
state building code; and
   (2)   Is composed of one or more components, each of which was substantially
assembled in a manufacturing plant and designed to be transported to the home
site on its own chassis bearing HUD inspection stickers. (G.S. 143-143.9(6)).
   Marina, commercial, means any water area with a structure including but not
limited to dock, basin, floating dock, etc. which is utilized for docking or
otherwise mooring vessels and constructed to provide temporary or permanent
docking space for more than ten boats.
   Maritime forest means woodlands that have developed under the influence of
salt spray on barrier islands and estuarine shorelines. The woodlands develop
as an end result of primary plant succession on coastal barrier islands.
Development generally takes place on stabilized dune systems located on the
sound side of islands whose width, topography, and orientation provide
sufficient protection from storm exposure. These forests contain a unique
assemblage of species adapted to survive and reproduce under the harsh
conditions associated with a coastal barrier system such as salt spray, wind
shear, sandy soils with few nutrients and low water availability. Maritime
forests are located on the most protected and usually the most attractive
portions of the barrier islands. In general on Bald Head Island these forests
are sheltered from the south by the spinal dune ridge and salt spray sheer
zones on the east and west. Middle Island's maritime forest is sheltered by
salt spray sheer zones on all sides.
   Maritime forest protection overlay district means the area within the
corporate limits of the village which contains maritime forests.
   Modular home means a dwelling unit constructed in accordance with the
standards set forth in the state building code and composed of components
substantially assembled in a manufacturing plant and transported to the
building site for final assembly on a permanent foundation.
   Multiple site and multifamily site mean any proposed use of land which shall
entail development of a given site such that its use or intended use
contemplates one or more dwellings or one or more lots.
   Nonconforming lot means a lot existing at the effective date of this chapter
or any amendment to it (and not created for the purpose of evading restrictions
of this chapter) that cannot meet the minimum dimensional requirements of the
district in which the lot is located.
   Nonconforming use means the use of a structure or land which does not
conform to the use regulations of this chapter for the district in which is it
located, either at the effective date of this chapter or as a result of
subsequent amendments which may be incorporated into this chapter.
   Open space means the land area which is not part of the building pad or the
parking space.
   Ordinance means this chapter, text and map including any amendments.
Whenever the effective date of the ordinance is referred to, the reference
includes the effective date or any amendment to it.
   Parking lot means an area or plot of land used for the storage or parking of
vehicles.
   Parking space means a storage space of not less than 72 square feet for one
vehicle (six feet by 12 feet).
   Planned unit development means a development of a lot or parcel of land
which includes mixed used of residential, commercial, necessary utility
facilities and recreational use in a unified plan of development.
   Planning board means the public agency empowered to prepare, review, and
maintain a comprehensive plan; to facilitate and coordinate citizen engagement
in the planning process; to develop and recommend policies and ordinances
related to development; to make recommendations to council with respect to all
zoning text and map amendments, and to perform any other related duties that
the village council may direct. In addition to these powers, the planning board
shall convene when necessary as a quasi-judicial decision-making board to hear
and decide special use permits, variances, and appeals of administrative
decisions by a zoning official charged with the enforcement of any ordinance
adopted as part of this chapter. The village council shall appoint all members
to the planning board.
   Planting plan means a plan showing site plan elements as well as proposed
location, size, quantity, and variety of new plants.
   Plat means a map showing the location, boundaries, and ownership of
individual properties.
   Pole light means any light fixture set on a base or pole where the point of
light is higher than 48 inches off the ground.
   Premanufactured structure means a structure used for other than dwelling
purposes, which is constructed or manufactured at a location other than the lot
on which it is located.
   Previous coverage means the portion of the lot not defined as lot coverage.
   Principal building means a building in which is conducted the principal use
of the lot on which the building is situated, as related to the requirements of
this chapter. In no way shall a camper or trailer be considered a principal
building.
   Rental unit means a building or portion thereof designed, arranged or used
for permanent living quarters offered for rent on an annual or seasonal basis
by the owner or a rental agency. This use as a rental unit will not be
considered commercial for the purpose of this chapter.
   Residential private pier means a dock, pier, launching ramp supporting
boating activity extending from one or more residential lots into water
adjacent thereto; the use of which shall be limited to members of the families
of the lot owners or their tenants and/or their invited guests.
   Restaurant, café means an establishment that prepares and sells food and
drink that may or may not have alcoholic beverage sales. If served, in no case
can alcoholic beverage sales exceed 70% of the business’ total annual sales.
   School means an organization offering education at the kindergarten,
elementary, or secondary levels that is authorized to operate as a school
pursuant to G.S. Chapter 115C.
   Setback means the required distance between every structure and the lot
lines of the lot on which it is located.
   Sewage disposal system means an approved sewage disposal system serving a
building including private, municipal and sanitary district sewage systems
located and constructed according to specifications of the county health
department in consultation with the division of health services and/or the
division of environmental management of the department of environment, health,
and natural resources.
   Single-family dwelling means a structure containing one dwelling unit
designed for and used or held ready for use to house a single family.
   Site development plan means a scaled drawing of a building site containing
all of the information required under section
32-128 of this chapter to be submitted and inspected by the zoning official
prior to the issuance of a building permit.
   Site plan means a detailed plan showing plantings, driveways, parking,
lighting, and site grading of proposed development.
   Soil erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan designed to ensure
the stabilization and subsequent revegetation of all areas that have been
disturbed to the extent that bare land has become exposed.
   Special event means any show, concert, festival, bazaar, or similar
activity, which does not occur more than once in a calendar quarter. Such
activities may include, but are not limited to, activities associated with a
recognized state or federal holidays such as the Fourth of July, Labor Day, and
Memorial Day.
   Start of construction means setting pilings or pouring a foundation for a
structure.
   Street means a thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to
abutting property.
   Street line means the line between the street right-of-way and abutting
property.
   Street, private, means any road or street which is not publicly owned and
maintained and is used for access by the occupants of the development, their
guests, and the general public.
   Structural alterations means any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders except for repair or
replacement.
   Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires
location in or on the land or attachment to something having a permanent
location in or on the land.
   Townhouse means a single-family dwelling unit constructed in a row of
attached units separated by property lines and with open spaces on at least two
sides.
   Trailer means any vehicle or structure originally designed to transport
something or intended for human occupancy for short periods of time. Trailers
shall include, without limitation, the following:
      Camping trailer means a folding structure manufactured of metal, wood,
canvas, plastic, or other materials, or any combination thereof, mounted on
wheels and designed for travel, recreation, or vacation use.
      Construction trailer means a structure, not to exceed a total length of
20 feet, on the job for purpose of storing materials and tools and which will
be removed immediately upon completion of construction.
      Food service trailer means any trailer used to prepare or deliver food
for commercial purposes. Smokers or cookers designed to be pulled by any
vehicle, and push carts selling food for commercial purposes shall be included
in this definition.
      Passenger trailer means any trailer designed to be pulled by any vehicle
for the purpose of transporting pedestrians. This includes, without limitation,
island tours services and trams.
      Recreational vehicle means a self-propelled vehicle or portable structure
mounted on such a vehicle designed as a temporary dwelling for travel,
recreation, and vacation.
      Tow trailer means a structure designed to be hauled by another vehicle
and to transport vehicles, boats, water craft, landscaping materials, or
freight. A utility trailer up to 60 inches also shall be included in the
definition of tow trailer.
      Travel trailer means a structure that is:
         (1)   Intended to be transported over the streets and highways either
as a motor vehicle or attached to or hauled by a motor vehicle; and
         (2)   Designed for temporary use as sleeping quarters, but that does
not satisfy one or more of the definitional criteria of a manufactured home.
   Tree means any woody plant with at least one trunk with a caliper (diameter)
of three inches or more than four feet above the ground.
   Tree removal means cutting down a tree or removal of a tree or any act which
causes a tree to die within a period of two years, including but not limited
to, damage inflicted upon the tree or its root system by machinery, storage of
materials and soil compaction; changing the natural grade above the root system
or around the trunk; excessive pruning; paving with concrete, asphalt, or other
impervious material within such proximity as to be harmful to the area.
   Use, special, means a use which is permitted in a particular zoning district
upon presentation of competent, material, and substantial evidence establishing
compliance with one or more general standards requiring that judgment and
discretion be exercised as well as compliance with specific standards to
address site specific health, safety, compatibility or other public concerns in
the district. Such use must receive final approval by the planning board after
a public evidentiary hearing. The term includes uses previously referred to as
conditional uses under these ordinances.
   Use, permitted, means a use which is permitted as a right in a district for
which a zoning permit may be issued by the zoning enforcement officer.
   Utility facilities means equipment needed to store water and treat water and
sewage and other facilities to meet the need of Bald Head Island, including
television and telephone cables, electrical cables, transformers and other
distribution equipment.
   Utility services means all lines, lift station, pumping station, piping,
etc. necessary to provide water and sewer service; including water wells and
septic mound systems and all cable television, electrical and telephone lines.
   Variance means a relaxation of the terms of this chapter where such variance
will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions
peculiar to the property and not the result of the action of the applicant, a
literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue
hardship. As used in this chapter, a variance is authorized only for height,
area, and size of a structure or size of yards and open spaces. Establishment
or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance,
nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformity in the
zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district.
   Veterinary clinic means any facility maintained and operated by a licensed
veterinarian for the diagnosis, treatment or other care of the ailments of
dogs, cats, or other comparable domesticated animals. These facilities may
include accessory boarding quarters for animals and offer related services such
as obedience classes, training, grooming and/or behavioral counseling.
   Water supply system means an approved water supply system including county,
municipal and sanitary district water systems designated to serve particular
subdivisions at full development and constructed to specifications of the
county health office in consultation with the division of health services and/
or the division of environmental management or the department of environment,
health, and natural resources.
   Wetlands means any area defined by or determined by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers or other appropriate governmental authority, to be and constitute
Section 404, Wetlands, under the applicable federal or state statutes.
   Yard means an open space on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and
unobstructed from the ground upward, except by trees or shrubbery or as
otherwise provided therein.
   Yard, front, means a yard across the full width of the lot, extending from
the front line of the building to the front line of the lot, including the area
of steps, eaves, and covered porches, but not including the areas of uncovered
porches.
   Yard, rear, means a yard extending across the full width of the lot and
measured between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the main
building.
   Yard, side, means a yard between the building and the side line of the lot
extending through from the front yard to the rear yard or, where no rear yard
is required, to the rear line of the lot.
   Zero lot line means a lot line which has no requirement that any structure
constructed adjacent thereof be located any minimum distance from that line.
   Zoning means a police power measure, enacted primarily by units of local
government in which the community is divided into districts or zones within
which permitted and special uses are established as are regulations governing
building bulk placement and other development standards. Requirements vary from
district to district but they must be uniform within districts. The zoning
ordinance consists of two parts: a text and a map.
   Zoning map means an official map kept at village hall showing the boundary
lines of the various zoning districts.
   Zoning official means the building inspector as the person charged with
enforcement of this chapter as shall from time to time be designated by the
village council.
   Zoning permit means the permit issued by the zoning official authorizing any
change in the use of the building.
(Ord. No. 29, § 2.1, 8-17-1991; Ord. of 3-18-2000; Ord. No. 2000-21, 9-16-2000;
Ord. No. ZO-02-04, 6-18-2004; Ord. No. 2006-1101, 11-17-2006; Ord. No. 2009-
0503, 5-15-2009; Ord. No. 2012-1001, 10-19-2012; Ord. No. 2015-0402, 4-17-2015;
Ord. No. 2016-10-01, 10-21-2016; Ord. No. 2020-1002, § 1, 10-23- 2020; Ord. No.
2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021; Ord. No. 2022-0603, § 1, 6-17-2022; Ord. No. 2024-
1003, § 1, 10-11-2024)
   Cross Reference—Definitions generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 32-12. Food service trailer temporary use permit for special events.
   (a)   Food service trailers may be used on a temporary basis in conjunction
with special events provided that a food service trailer temporary use permit
has been obtained from the building inspector in accordance with the provisions
of this section. This article and any Permitted and Special Use Table
notwithstanding, use of food service trailer pursuant to this section shall be
limited to commercially zoned areas and the premises of a property owners
association, Bald Head Island Club, Shoals Club, Village or non-profit
organization under Internal Revenue Code § 501 or equivalent. Food service
trailers shall not be used on private residential property.
   (b)   An application for a food service trailer temporary use permit shall
be submitted no less than one week prior to the date of the special event and
shall contain or have attached to it the following information:
   (1)   The tax parcel number of the property on which the food service
trailer is to be located.
   (2)   Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the applicant; owner of the
property on which the food service trailer is to be located; and the owner of
the food service trailer.
   (3)   A scaled drawing, plat map, or survey of the property involved, on
which is accurately shown the proposed placement and dimensions of the food
service trailer in relation to the property and any structures or fixtures
located thereon.
   (4)   The special event for which the temporary use is requested and the
time period, not to exceed three days, for which the applicant intends to use
the food service trailer, along with a listing of the hours each day during
which food will be served from the trailer.
   (5)   Other information as the building inspector may require to determine
full compliance with this and other applicable codes.
   (c)   A fee in an amount currently in effect by action of the village
council will be paid at the time of application. Upon the filing of an
application for a temporary food service trailer permit, the building inspector
shall examine the plans and specifications, and as deemed necessary, may
inspect the premises upon which the food service trailer is proposed to be
located. If the proposed food service trailer is in compliance with all the
requirements of this Article and other applicable law, a temporary use food
service permit shall be issued. Any temporary use permit issued in accordance
with this article shall be for no more than three days.
(Ord. No. 2015-0402, 4-17-2015; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Secs. 32-13--32-40. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION *
 
Notes
* *Cross Reference—Administration, ch. 2.
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 32-41. Zoning enforcement officer.
   (a)   The zoning official is hereby authorized and it shall be his duty to
enforce the provisions of this chapter. This official shall have the right to
enter upon the premises at any reasonable time necessary to carry out his
duties. lt is the intention of this chapter that all questions arising in
connection with enforcement and interpretations of matters governed by this
chapter shall be presented first to the zoning official. Appeal from his
decision may be made to the planning board. The building inspector shall be and
hereby is appointed as the zoning officer.
   (b)   In administering the provisions of this chapter, the zoning official
shall:
   (1)   Make and maintain records of all applications for permits listed and
requested in this chapter, and records of all.
   (2)   File and safely keep copies of all plans submitted and the same shall
form a part of the records of his office and shall be available for inspection
at reasonable times by any interested party.
   (3)   Conduct inspections of premises and upon finding that any of the
provisions of this chapter are being violated, notify in writing the person
responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it.
   (c)   Where the zoning official charged with making a final determination on
enforcement and interpretations of matters governed by this chapter would have
a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact from the
outcome of the decision or if the applicant or other person subject to that
decision is a person with whom the zoning official has a close familial,
business, or other associational relationship then the zoning official shall
notify the village manager who shall make such final determination.
(Ord. No. 29, § 3.1, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
   Cross Reference—Officers and employees, § 2-61 et seq.
Sec. 32-42. Application for permit.
   It shall be unlawful for the zoning official to issue a building or
landscape permit for any purpose regulated by this chapter until he has
inspected such plans in detail and found them in conformity with this chapter.
To this end, the zoning official shall require that every application for a
building or landscape permit be accompanied by a site development plan as
defined in section 32-128 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 29, § 3.2, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-43. Certification of occupancy /compliance.
   No new building or part thereof shall be occupied overnight and no addition
or enlargement of any existing building shall be occupied and no existing
building, after being altered or moved, shall be occupied and no change of use
shall be made in any existing building or part thereof, until the zoning
official has issued a certificate of occupancy/compliance. The zoning official
may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy when he finds that actual
occupancy of the building would not be dangerous, unhealthy, or unsanitary for
any persons and that the building may be occupied on a specified temporary
basis upon conditions which the zoning official finds would bring the building
into full compliance with this chapter and other applicable village, county,
and state regulations for occupancy thereof within a specified time period. In
applying for and obtaining a certificate of occupancy/compliance, the following
additional requirements shall be made:
   (1)   The building site shall be cleaned and building debris removed.
   (2)   Any damage to roads, utilities, and public facilities shall have been
repaired and such repairs approved by the development services department and/
or any utility company affected.
   (3)   The applicant presents to the zoning official a valid septic tank or
sewage treatment facility completion certificate.
   (4)   A foundation survey showing the location of the foundation or a final
as-built survey having been signed by a licensed surveyor in the state shall be
presented showing the actual location of the foundation or structure with
reference to all lot lines.
(Ord. No. 29, § 3.3, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2009-0701, 7-17-2009; Ord. No. 2021-
0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-44. Landscape permits and building permits.
   (a)   Issuance of landscape permit.
   (1)   No lot or tract within the village may be cleared, excavated, graded
or filled until the building inspector has issued a landscape permit, whether
or not such activity is in connection with a proposed construction.
   (2)   Special consideration must be given to preserving as much natural area
as possible and to preserving all plants of special concern as designated in
subsection (k) of this section.
   (3)   The site development plan required by subsection (c) of this section
prior to the issuance of a permit shall clearly define those areas where
existing dunes, berm and vegetative cover shall remain undisturbed and shall
include plans for restabilizing any revegetation areas disturbed. Disturbance
of the natural vegetation shall only be permitted in those circumstances in
which such disturbance is reasonably necessary to allow safe construction of
the proposed dwelling and its appurtenant facilities, such as septic tank and
driveway. Such special consideration must be given to preserving as much
natural area as possible.
   (4)   Provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall require issuance
of a landscape permit under this article for the maintenance of roads within
the village right-of-way and hand clearing of three-inch and smaller caliper
trees.
   (5)   Cutting of any tree or trees larger than three inches in caliper at
four feet above grade without first obtaining a proper landscape permit will
require the offender to obtain a permit, pay the required fine, and mitigate
the loss of such tree or trees. Pruning tree branches and/or limbs larger than
five inches in caliper without first obtaining a proper landscaping permit will
require the offender to obtain a permit, pay the required fine, and mitigate
the loss of such branches and/or limbs.
   (6)   In the case of competing trees, the building inspector shall make the
decision of which tree to remove. The removal of dead trees with a three-inch
caliper or greater, shall not require a permit but shall require the approval
of the building inspector prior to removal. If a decision by the building
inspector is disputed, the property owner must provide sufficient evidence to
show the tree is dead, represents a danger to individuals or property, or the
tree is diseased and will not live.
   (7)   Failure to comply with the requirements of the approved site plan
shall be considered a violation and shall be subject to the immediate issuance
of a stop work order by the building inspector and to the other procedures and
remedies of subsection (k) of this section.
   (b)   Issuance of building permit. No building or other structure shall be
erected, moved, extended, or structurally altered until the building inspector
has issued a permit for such work.
   (c)   Application for permit; requirements. Each application to the building
inspector for a permit under subsections (a)and (b) of this section shall be
accompanied by a site development plan pursuant to section
32-128 of this chapter and building plans, all county, state and federal
permits required by law or regulation and such other relevant information as he
may require. Each residential lot shall have the lot lines clearly marked on
the ground and certified as correct by a registered professional engineer or
land surveyor prior to applying for a building permit. All new construction
permitted must be located with a distance of 1,000 feet of a pressurized fire
hydrant.
   (d)   Survey markers located on relevant points. Surveyors control markers
shall be located on each property line, including street right-of-way, at the
point of closest approach of the planned structure to that line. No
construction shall begin on site until the markers required by this chapter
have been properly established and examined and approved by the building
inspector. Failure to construct any structure in accordance with these markers
shall be a cause for the building inspector to issue a stop work order and to
revoke a building permit previously issued.
   (e)   Areas of environmental concern. Each application for a building permit
shall include information as to the location of applicable areas of
environmental concern. Prior to issuance of a building permit the building
inspector shall ascertain whether the proposed structure or facility conforms
to the state regulations for areas of environmental concern issued pursuant to
the coastal area management act.
   (f)   On-site inspection. Before a permit is issued under subsections (a) or
(b) of this section, an on-site inspection of the property shall be made by the
building inspector.
   (g)   Posting of permits prior to starting work. Before work is started on
any property, the required permit or permits shall be posted in a prominent
place on the property.
   (h)   Expiration of permit if work not started in specified time. Each
permit issued pursuant to subsection (b) and (c) of this section shall expire
six months after the date of its issuance unless work authorized by the permit
has been started.
   (i)   Landscape permit; when required. A permit from the building inspector
shall be required to remove, relocate, grade, excavate, fill or disturb sand,
soil, dirt or earth or remove any naturally occurring trees, shrubbery, grass
or other naturally occurring vegetation if such removal is in accordance with
site plans for construction of a structure, for which plans a building permit
either has been issued by the building inspector, only upon a determination by
the building inspector, that the activity requested by the applicant is
necessary to achieve one of the following purposes:
   (1)   Erection or protection of a structure or improvement on the property;
   (2)   Promote the growth and health of vegetation without significantly
destabilizing the soil thereon or otherwise damaging the ecology of the
property.
   (j)   Designation and protection of plants of special concern.
   (1)   It shall be the policy of the village to protect to the maximum extent
feasible those trees and shrubs native to the maritime forest and dune areas of
the village. All improvements shall be designed in such a way so as to minimize
the destruction of plants of special concern and to preserve and to protect
those remaining as much as practicable. Where relandscaping is required by this
chapter, relandscaping shall be accomplished as much as feasible through the
use of those plants which naturally occur within this area, including plants of
special concern.
   (2)   The village hereby designates the following plants as plants of
special concern.
   (k)   Replacement of damaged shrubs; time limit; violation. Any sand, soil,
dirt or earth which has been removed, relocated, graded, excavated, added to,
filled or disturbed in violation of this chapter and any naturally occurring
vegetation which has been killed, damaged, destroyed or removed in violation of
this chapter shall be restored or replaced within 60 days of notice from the
building inspector. Each day after the 60-day period that the violator fails to
perform such restoration or replacement shall constitute a new and separate
violation. Any such replacement shall, where feasible, be accomplished through
the use of plants which naturally occur within this area, with emphasis upon
use of plants of special concern
(Ord. No. 29, § 3.4, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2001-019, 9-15-2001; Ord. No. 2006-
0902, 9-15-2006; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-45. Administrative procedures.
   (a)   Public hearing. Any case involving an appeal, variance, or request for
a special use permit requires a formal evidentiary public hearing to be held by
the planning board and any involving a change of zoning district,
classification or other zoning ordinance changes requires a legislative public
hearing to be held by the village council after receiving a recommendation from
the planning board. The planning board or council shall fix a reasonable time
for the hearing and give the public notice as required by law as well as due
notice to the parties in interest. At the hearing, any person or party may
appear in person or by agent or attorney. The board shall take action on a
matter within a reasonable time after the termination of the proceedings.
   (b)   Appeals. Appeals may be taken to the planning board by any person
aggrieved or by any officer, department or board of the village affected by any
decision of the zoning official. Such appeals shall be filed with the village
clerk by notice specifying the grounds for appeal. Appeal shall be filed within
90 days from the date of the action being appealed. The village clerk shall
transmit any properly filed appeal to the planning board. The officer from whom
the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the planning board all papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken together
with any additional written reports or documents as he deems pertinent. The
planning board may, after a public hearing, so long as such action is in
conformity with the terms of this chapter reverse or affirm, wholly or in part,
or may modify any order, requirements, decision or determination as ought to be
made and to that end shall have the powers of the zoning official from whom the
appeal is taken.
(Ord. No. 29, § 3.5, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Secs. 32-46--32-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Sec. 32-61. Enforcement authority.
   This chapter shall be enforceable in accordance with provisions available in
the G.S. 160A-175.
(Ord. No. 29, § 4.1, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-62. Reserved.
Sec. 32-63.   Civil remedies.
   (a)   If a building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed or
altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or land
is occupied or used in violation of the General Statutes of North Carolina,
this chapter or other regulation made under authority conferred thereby, the
village may apply to the district court, civil division or any other court of
competent jurisdiction for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of
abatement commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or
cease the unlawful use of the property.
   (b)   ln addition to an injunction, the court may enter an order of
abatement as part of the judgment in the case. An order of abatement may direct
that buildings or other structures on the property be closed and demolished or
removed; that noxious grass and weeks be cut; that improvements or repairs be
made; or that any other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property
into compliance with this chapter. If the defendant fails or refuses to comply
with an injunction or with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the
court, he may be cited for contempt and the village may execute the order o
abatement. The village shall have a lien on the property for the cost of the
executing an order of abatement.
   (c)   In addition to the civil remedies set forth herein:
   (1)   A person who fails or refuses to stop work on any structure
immediately upon issuance of a stop order; or
   (2)   A person who occupies a structure overnight without issuance of a
certificate of occupancy; shall be liable for a civil fine in the amount of
$2000.00. In addition to this amount, which shall be payable to the village,
the violator shall pay all court costs and all reasonable attorney's fees
required to produce a civil judgment to enforce this provision, this provision
being enacted in accordance with the provisions of G.S. 160A-175(b).
(Ord. No. 29, § 4.3, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2011- 0402, 4-15-2011; Ord. No. 2021-
0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-64. Equitable relief.
   The village may apply: to the superior court, civil division or other court
of competent jurisdiction for an appropriate equitable remedy. It shall not be
a defense to the village application for equitable relief that there is an
adequate remedy at law.
(Ord. No. 29, § 4.4, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-65. Combination of remedies.
   The village may choose to enforce this chapter by any one, all, or
combination of the procedures in this article.
(Ord. No. 29, § 4.5, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-66. Procedure and remedies.
   (a)   Upon violation of any provision of this chapter, including but not
limited to, both the failure to procure a landscape permit as required under
section 32-44(a), and the removal of plants, including plants of special
concern, after issuance of a landscape permit, which plants were not shown as
designated for removal or alteration upon the plans submitted to the zoning
official for issuance of such a landscape permit and in addition to all other
remedies allowed by law for violation of this chapter, the specific remedies
set out in this section and section 32-44(k) shall be applicable.
   (b)   Whenever the zoning official has probable cause to believe that a
builder, contractor, subcontractor or other person, trade or business has
undertaken work or activity in violation of this chapter or in violation of the
terms of a permit or other development approval issued pursuant to this
chapter, a written notice of violation may be issued. The notice of violation
shall be delivered to the holder of the permit and to the landowner of the
property involved, if the landowner is not the permittee, by personal delivery,
electronic delivery, or first-class mail. Any person receiving notice shall
have five days to respond to this notice. Upon expiration of the five days
within which response is to be made, the zoning official shall decide whether a
violation has occurred and shall notify the permit holder or landowner of his
decision. If there has been a violation, he shall declare the holder of the
permit and the landowner of the property involved, if the landowner is not the
permittee, and any builder, contractor, subcontractor and any other person, to
be in violation of this section.
   (c)   If a determination is made that a violation has occurred, the
applicable permit may be suspended by order of the zoning official and all
work, other than that required to remedy the violation, shall cease on the
project until the violation has been corrected to the satisfaction of the
zoning official, at which time and upon receipt of written notice from the
zoning official that the error has been remedied, building may resume. It shall
be specifically understood that failure to build in accordance with the site
development plan pursuant to which the permit was issued or failure to comply
in all respects with state and municipal building codes and ordinances shall be
a violation of the terms of issuance of any applicable permit. Notice of
violation shall specifically state the nature of the violation or violations
claimed. Should construction be completed prior to any appropriate and required
corrective action, no certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the village
until such time as all required corrections have been performed.
(Ord. No. 29, § 4.6, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Secs. 32-67—32-80. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Sec. 32-81. Changes and amendments.
   The village council may, on its own motion, upon recommendation of the
planning board, or upon petition by any interested person, amend, supplement,
change, modify, or repeal the regulations or district boundaries established by
this chapter. A petition by an interested person shall be submitted to the
village council through the planning board, which shall consider its merit and
make a recommendation to the village council. In no case shall final action by
the council be taken on amending, changing, supplementing, modifying or
repealing the regulations or district boundaries hereby established until a
public nearing has been held by the council at which the parties in interest
and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. The planning board may also
hold one or more hearings prior to making its recommendations.
(Ord. No. 29, § 5.1, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-82. Action by the applicant.
   (a)   Initiation of amendments. Proposed changes or amendments to the zoning
map or text of this chapter may be initiated by the village council, planning
board or any interested party.
   (b)   Application. An application for any change or amendment shall contain
a description and/or statement of the present and proposed zoning regulations
or district boundary, and the names and addresses of the owner or owners of the
property involved. Such application shall be considered at the next meeting of
the planning board held at least 30 days after the filing but no more than 75
days after the filing.
   (c)   Fees. There shall be a nonrefundable fee, according to the schedule
adopted by the village for each application for an amendment, to cover costs of
advertising and other administrative expenses involved.
   (d)   Public hearing notices. When a change in the zoning classification of
a piece of property is requested, the applicant shall provide to the zoning
official, a list of names and addresses, as obtained from the tax listings and
tax abstract, of all abutting property owners and all owners of property under
consideration for rezoning along with three sets of business (#10) envelopes
stamped with a first class stamp and addressed to each person on the list.
These addressed envelopes and the list shall be submitted at least 15 business
days prior to the public hearing of the planning board. The zoning official
shall verify the list, then mail notices of the public hearing to each person
on the list at least ten but not more than 25 days prior to the date of the
hearing and shall certify that fact to the village. Such certification shall be
deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud. For zoning map amendments notice
shall also be made by posting the property concerned at least ten days prior to
the date of any hearing thereon. The second set of envelopes shall be used for
notification of the recommendation of the planning board. The third set
submitted will be used for notification of the village hearing.
(Ord. No. 29, § 5.2, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-83. Action by the planning board.
   (a)   Every proposed amendment, supplement, change, modification or repeal
of this chapter shall be referred to the planning board for its recommendation
and report. The planning board shall hold a hearing making its recommendation.
   (b)   The following policy guidelines shall be followed by the planning
board concerning zoning amendments:
   (1)   The proposal will place all property similarly situated in the area in
the same category, or in appropriate complementary categories;
   (2)   There is convincing demonstration that all uses permitted under the
proposed district classification would be in the general public interest and
not merely in the interest of an individual or small group;
   (3)   There is convincing demonstration that all uses permitted under the
proposed district classification would be appropriate in the area included in
the proposed change. (When a new district designation is assigned, any use
permitted in the district requirements and not merely uses which applicants
state they intend to make of the property involved); and
   (4)   There is convincing demonstration that the character of the
neighborhood will not be materially and adversely affected by any use permitted
in the proposed change.
   (c)   A petition to amend the district boundaries or regulations established
by this chapter shall be considered by the planning board at it next regular
monthly meeting or any called special meeting, provided it has been filed,
complete in form and content, at least 30 days prior to such meeting.
Otherwise, consideration may be deferred until the following monthly meeting.
   (d)   The planning board shall render its recommendation on any properly
filed petition within 30 days after the public hearing if one is held and shall
submit its recommendation including its reasons therefor, to the village
council.
   (e)   The planning board shall advise and comment on whether the proposed
amendment is consistent with any comprehensive plan that has been adopted and
any other officially adopted plan that is applicable. The planning board shall
provide a written recommendation to the governing board that addresses plan
consistency and other matters as deemed appropriate by the planning board, but
a comment by the planning board that a proposed amendment is inconsistent with
the comprehensive plan shall not preclude consideration or approval of the
proposed amendment by the governing board.
(Ord. No. 29, § 5.3, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2006-1003, 10-26-2006; Ord. No. 2006-
1004, 10-26-2006; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-84. Action by the village council.
   (a)   Hearing; notice. Before taking such lawful action as it may deem
advisable, the council shall consider the planning board's recommendations on
each proposed zoning amendment. If no recommendation is received from the
planning board within 60 days after the planning board hearing, the proposed
amendment shall be deemed to have been formally recommended by the planning
board. The village council shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the public
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area of
Bald Head Island at least once each week for two successive weeks prior to the
hearing according to state regulations and by mailing notices to adjoining
property owners in the envelopes provided by the applicant at least ten but not
more than 25 days prior to the date of the hearing. For zoning map amendments
notice shall also be made by posting the property concerned at least ten days
prior to the date of the hearing. The applicant, the planning board and the
zoning administrator shall be given written copies of the council's decision
and the reasons therefor.
   (b)   Procedure.
   (1)   A village council member shall not vote on any zoning map or text
amendment where the outcome of the matter being considered is reasonably likely
to have a direct substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the
member.
   (2)   Before taking such lawful action, the village council shall consider
the planning board's recommendation on each proposed amendment. Prior to
adopting or rejecting any zoning amendment, the village council shall adopt a
statement describing whether its action is consistent or inconsistent with an
adopted comprehensive plan. Additionally, when adopting or rejecting any
petition for a zoning map amendment, village council shall adopt a statement
analyzing the reasonableness of the proposed rezoning taking into account,
among any other applicable factors, (i) the size, physical conditions, and
other attributes of the area proposed to be rezoned; (ii) the benefits and
detriments to the landowners, the neighbors, and the surrounding community;
(iii) the relationship between the current actual and permissible development
on the tract and adjoining areas and the development that would be permissible
under the proposed amendment; (iv) why the action taken is in the public
interest; and (v) any changed conditions warranting the amendment.
(Ord. No. 29, § 5.4, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2006-1005, 10-26-2006; Ord. No. 2021-
0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-85. Protest to an amendment.
   (a)   In order to protest any amendment to this chapter, a form provided by
the zoning official and signed by the owners of 20 percent or more either of
the area of the lots included in the proposed change, or of those immediately
adjacent thereto, either in the rear thereof or on either side thereof,
extending 100 feet therefrom, or of those directly opposite thereto extending
100 feet from the street frontage of such opposite lots, shall be filed with
the zoning official. Thereafter, such amendments shall not become effective
except by a favorable vote of three-fourths of all the members of the village
council. These provisions shall not, however, apply to any amendment which
initially zones property added to the coverage of this chapter. No protest
against any change in or amendment to the regulations or district boundaries
established by this chapter shall be valid or effective under the provisions of
section 32-84 unless it is in the form of a written petition actually bearing
the signatures of the requisite number of property owners and stating that the
signers do protest the proposed change or amendment and unless it shall have
been received by the zoning official in sufficient time to allow at least two
normal workdays excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, before the
date established for a public hearing on the proposed change or amendment to
determine the sufficiency and accuracy of the petition.
   (b)   Protest petitions only apply to zoning map amendments and are not
applicable to text amendments.
   (c)   For the purposes of this section, vacant positions on the council and
members who are excused from voting shall not be considered 'members of the
council' for calculation of the requisite supermajority.
   (d)   A petitioner can withdraw their protest any time up to the voting time
on the rezoning.
(Ord. No. 29, § 5.5, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2006-1006, 10-26-2006; Ord. No. 2021-
0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Secs. 32-86—32-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. PLANNING BOARD
Sec. 32-101. Establishment.
   (a)   The village council shall appoint a planning board consisting of five
members and two alternates to hear appeals of administrative decisions,
variance requests, special use permits, or any other quasi-judicial decision
permitted by G.S. Chapter 160D and to provide a recommendation to village
council on proposed amendments, supplements, changes, modifications or repeals
of this chapter. The term of each regular member and alternate is three years
commencing on July 1 of the year of appointment, except that in appointing the
initial planning board under this ordinance, council shall appoint two regular
members and one alternate to an initial two-year term that expires June 30,
2023, in order to create staggered terms. There are no term limits for service
on the planning board. Council may fill vacancies for the unexpired term only.
   (b)   The two alternates shall substitute in the absence or temporary
disqualification of any regular member or to fill a vacancy pending appointment
of a member. When substituting, such alternates shall have the same voting
privileges as a regular member.
   (c)   A member of the planning board shall not vote on any quasi-judicial
decision in a manner that would violate an affected persons' constitutional
rights to an impartial decision maker. Impermissible violations of due process
include, but are not limited to, a member having a fixed opinion prior to
hearing the matter that is not susceptible to change, undisclosed ex parte
communications, a close familial, business, or other associational relationship
with an affected person, or a financial interest in the outcome of the matter.
A member of the planning board shall note vote on any advisory or legislative
decision regarding a development regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter
where the outcome of the matter being considered is reasonably likely to have a
direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the member. A
member of the planning board shall note vote on any zoning amendment if the
landowner of the property subject to a rezoning petition or the applicant for a
text amendment is a person with whom the member nas a close familial, business,
or other associational relationship. If an objection is raised to a planning
board member's participation at or prior to the hearing or vote on a particular
matter, whether quasi-judicial, advisory, or legislative, and that member does
not recuse himself or herself, the remaining members of the board shall by
majority vote rule on the objection.
(Ord. No. 29, § 6.1, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2006-1007, 10-26-2006; Ord. No. 2021-
0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-102. Procedures.
   (a)   Officers. The planning board shall hold an organizing meeting annually
in the month of August. At that meeting, the planning board shall elect one of
its members to serve as chair and preside over the board's meetings and one
member to serve as vice-chair to serve as acting chair in the absence of the
chair. The persons so designated shall serve in these capacities for one year
and shall be eligible for reelection. Vacancies in these offices may be fille
for the unexpired term only.
   (b)   Meetings.
   (1)   Other than the organizing meeting, meetings of the planning board
shall be held at the call of the chair and at such other times as the majority
of the board may determine. All meetings of the planning board shall be open to
the public. The board shall keep minutes of its procedures, snowing the vote of
each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, an indication
of such fact and final disposition of all matters before the board, all of
which shall be of public record. The concurring vote of four-fifths of the
members of the board shall be necessary to grant a variance. A majority of the
members shall be required to make an advisory or legislative decision or decide
any other quasi-judicial matter or to determine an appeal made in the nature of
certiorari.
   (2)   Vacant positions on the planning board and members who are
disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered
members of the planning board for calculation of the requisite majority if
there are no qualified alternates available to take the place of such members.
   (c)   Quasi-judicial procedures.
   (1)   Notice of hearing. The planning board shall set a hearing on an appeal
of an administrative decision, a variance request, a special use permit, or any
other quasi-judicial matter within a reasonable time, not to exceed 60 days,
following receipt of an appropriate notice or application. The planning board
shall give notice of the hearing to the person or entity whose appeal or
application is the subject of the hearing; to the owner of the property that is
the subject of the hearing if the owner did not initiate the hearing; and to
the owners of all parcels of land abutting the parcel of land that is the
subject of the hearing. The notice(s) shall be sent by registered mail at least
ten days, but not more than 25 days, prior to the date of the hearing. Within
that same time period, the village shall prominently post a notice of the
hearing on the site that is the subject of the hearing or upon an adjacent
street.
   (2)   Administrative materials and evidence.
      a.   All applications, reports, and written materials relevant to the
matter being considered shall be transmitted in written or electronic form to
the planning board and to the appellant or applicant and to the landowner if
that person is not the appellant or applicant at least five days prior to the
hearing. Such materials shall become part of the hearing record unless objected
to and excluded.
      b.   The chair or any member temporarily acting as chair is authorized to
rule on jurisdictional and evidentiary issues, including, but not limited to,
the timeliness of an appeal or the standing of a party. The chair's rulings may
be appealed to the full planning board at the hearing.
      c.   All testimony before the planning board in a quasi-judicial matter
must be under oath and recorded. The chair or any member temporarily acting as
chair or the village clerk are authorized to administer oaths to witnesses in
any matter coming before the planning board.
      d.   The planning board through its chair or any member temporarily acted
as chair may subpoena witnesses and compel the production of evidence as
permitted by state law.
   (3)   Voting.
      a.   A simple majority shall be required to decide all quasi-judicial
matters or to determine an appeal made in the nature of certiorari, except that
the concurring vote of four-fifths of the members shall be necessary to grant a
variance.
      b.   Vacant positions on the planning board and members who are
disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered
members of the planning board for calculation of the requisite majority if
there are no qualified alternates available to take the place of such members.
   (4)   Decisions.
      a.   The planning board shall determine contested facts and make its
decision within a reasonable time, not to exceed 15 days following the date of
the hearing. Every quasi-judicial decision shall be based upon competent,
material, and substantial evidence in the record. Each quasi-judicial decision
shall be reduced to writing, reflect the planning board's determination of
contested facts and their application to the applicable standards, and be
approved by the planning board and signed by the chair or other duly authorized
member of the board.
      b.   A quasi-judicial decision is effective upon filing the written
decision with the village clerk.
      c.   The zoning official shall deliver the decision of the planning board
within a reasonable time by personal delivery, electronic mail, or first-class
mail to the appellant or applicant, landowner, and any person who has submitted
a written request for a copy prior to the date the decision becomes effective.
Following delivery, the zoning official shall certify to the village clerk that
proper notice has been made.
(Ord. No. 29, § 6.2, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2006-1008, 10-26-2006; Ord. No. 2021-
0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-103. Duties generally.
   The planning board shall exercise all duties that may be assigned to
planning boards under G.S. 160D-301 and boards of adjustment under G.S. 160D-
302. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it is the express intent of this chapter
that all questions of interpretation and enforcement shall first be presented
to the zoning official or his authorized representative, and that such
questions shall be presented to the planning board only on an appeal from the
decision of the zoning official or his authorized representative, and that
recourse from the decision of the planning board shall be to the courts as
provided by law.
(Ord. No. 29, § 6.3, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-104. Appeals and variances.
   (a)   Generally.
   (1)   The planning board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by
the zoning official in the enforcement of this chapter. The board may, so long
as such action is in conformity with the terms of this chapter, reverse or
affirm wholly or partly or may modify the order, requirement, decision or
determination and to that end shall have the powers of the zoning official from
whom appeal is taken.
   (2)   The planning board shall authorize in specific cases variance from the
terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where,
owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter will result in undue hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall
be observed and substantial justice done.
   (b)   Appeals.
   (1)   An appeal from the decision of the zoning official may be taken to the
planning board by any person, firm, or corporation with an ownership, leasehold
or other property interest in the property that is subject of the decision
being appealed, an option or contract to purchase the property that is the
subject of the decision being appealed, or by any officer or department of the
village. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days after the decision by the
zoning official, by filing with the village clerk and with the planning board a
notice of appeal, specifying the grounds thereof. Any other person with
standing to appeal has 30 days from receipt from any source of actual or
constructive notice of the determination within which to file an appeal.
   (2)   An appeal stays enforcement of the action appealed from and accrual of
any fines assessed during the pendency of the appeal and any subsequent civil
actions, unless the zoning official certifies to the board after notice of
appeal has been filed that, because of the facts stated in an affidavit, a stay
would cause imminent peril to life or property or, because the violation is
transitory in nature, a stay would seriously interfere with enforcement of the
this chapter, in which case, proceedings shall not be stayed other than by a
restraining order, which may be granted by a court of record to whom an appeal
has been made. If enforcement proceedings are not stayed, the appellant may
file with the zoning official a request for an expedited hearing of the appeal,
and the planning board shall meet to hear the appeal within 15 days after the
request is filed.
   (3)   When hearing an appeal, the planning board may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the decision appealed from and shall make any
order, requirement, decision, or determination that ought to be made. The
planning board shall have all the powers of the official who made the decision.
   (c)   Variances.
   (1)   Public hearing and certain conditions required. In order to grant a
variance, the planning board must conduct an evidentiary public hearing and
find the following conditions to be met:
      a.   There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the
particular piece of property in questions because of its size, shape, or
topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures in that same
district;
      b.   Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the applicant
any special privileges that are denied to other residents of the zoning
districts in which the property is located;
      c.   A literal interpretation of the provisions of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other residents of the
zoning district in which the property is located;
      d.   The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and
intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to the
general welfare;
      e.   The special circumstances are not the result of the actions of the
applicant; and
      f.   The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make
possible the legal use of the land, building or structure.
      g.   Where applicable, the planning board may also consider whether
granting a variance is necessary and appropriate to make a reasonable
accommodation under the Federal Fair Housing Act for a person with a
disability.
   (2)   Evaluation of impact of grant. In considering all proposed variances
from this chapter, the planning board shall, before making any finding in a
specified case, first determine that the proposed variance will not constitute
any change in the zone shown on the zoning map and will not impair an adequate
supply of light and air to adjacent property, or materially increase the public
danger of fire and safety, or materially diminish or impair established
property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
   (3)   No variance for prohibited uses. No permitted use of land in other
districts shall be considered grounds for the issuance of a variance. Under no
circumstances shall the planning board grant a variance to allow a use not
permissible under the terms of this chapter in the district involved, or any
expressly or by implication prohibited by the terms of this chapter in the
district.
   (4)   Attachment of conditions. In granting a variance the planning board
may attach thereto such conditions regarding the location, character, and other
features of the proposed building, structure, or use as it may deem advisable
in furtherance of the purposes of this chapter. In order for such conditions to
be effective the applicant or landowner must consent to the same in writing.
Violation of such conditions and safeguards when made a part of the terms under
which the variance is granted, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
punishable under sections
32-61 through
32-65 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 29, § 6.4, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-105. Appeals in the nature of certiorari.
   Any person, firm, or corporation with standing under G.S. 160D-1402 may
appeal a quasi-judicial decision of the planning board in the nature of
certiorari to the superior court, provided such appeals shall be taken within
30 days after the decision of the planning board is filed with the village
clerk, or after a written copy thereof is delivered to the applicant, whichever
is later.
(Ord. No. 29, § 6.5, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-106. General provisions.
   No land owned br the State of North Carolina may be included within an
overlay district or a special use or special use district without the approval
by the Council of State as required by G.S. 160D-913.
(Ord. No. 2006-1009, 10-26-2006; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Secs. 32-107—32-120. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. ZONING DISTRICTS AND REGULATIONS*
Sec. 32-121. Zoning districts established.
   (a)   In order to implement the intent of this chapter and the charter,
there are hereby created zoning districts with the following designations:
   (1)   PD-1 Planned Development 1;
   (2)   PD-2 Planned Development 2;
   (3)   PD-2C Planned Development 2 Commercial;
   (4)   PD-3 Planned Development 3;
   (5)   PD-3C Planned Development 3 Commercial;
   (6)   PD-3C-1 Lighthouse-Chapel Overlay District;
   (7)   PD-4 Planned Development 4;
   (8)   MFPO Maritime Forest Protection Overlay; and
   (9)   NC Neighborhood Commercial.
   (b)   The creation of the zoning districts in subsection (a) of this section
is a recognition of the charter and an attempt to implement the master plans,
which have been developed for Bald Head Island's unique environmental setting
and the island's current development character.
   (c)   In setting out the respective districts, careful consideration is
given to the suitability of each and every district of the particular
regulations applied thereto. Also considered are the necessary, proper and
comprehensive arrangements of various land uses and densities of population in
accordance with well-thought-out master plans for the physical development of
the area.
(Ord. No. 29, § 8.1, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-122. District boundaries and zoning map.
   The boundaries of the districts are shown upon the map accompanying the
ordinance from which this chapter is derived and made a part hereof, entitled
"Zoning Map, Village of Bald Head Island, North Carolina." The zoning map and
all the notations, references and all amendments thereto, and other information
shown thereon is hereby made a part of this chapter the same as if such
information set forth on the map were all fully described and set out in this
chapter. The zoning map properly attested is on file in the office of the
village clerk and is available for public inspection.
(Ord. No. 29, § 8.2, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-123. Interpretation of district boundaries.
   Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any district
shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
   (1)   Use of property lines. Where district boundaries are indicated as
approximately following street lines, and lot lines, such lines shall be
construed to be such boundaries. Where streets, watercourses, and similar areas
with width are indicated as the district boundary, the actual district boundary
line shall be the centerline of such area.
   (2)   Use of the scale. In unsubdivided property or where a zone boundary
divides a lot, the location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by
dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the map.
   (3)   Zoning official. In case any further uncertainty exists, the zoning
official shall interpret the intent of the map as to the location of such
boundaries.
   (4)   Planning board. The decision of the zoning official may be appealed to
the planning board by an affected property owner.
(Ord. No. 29, § 8.3, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-124. Interpretation of district regulations.
   Regulations for each district shall be enforced and interpreted according to
the following rules:
   (1)   Uses by right and special uses. All listed permitted uses are
permitted by right according to the terms of this chapter. Special uses are
permitted subject to compliance with the additional regulations specified.
   (2)   Minimum regulations. Regulations set forth in this chapter shall be
minimum regulations. If the requirements set forth in this chapter are at
variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations
or ordinances, the more restrictive or higher standard shall govern.
   (3)   Restrictive covenants and deed restrictions. Unless restrictions
established by covenants and deed restrictions running with the land are
prohibited by the provisions of this chapter, nothing contained in this chapter
shall be construed to render such covenants or restrictions inoperative.
(Ord. No. 29, § 8.4, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-125. Descriptions and purposes of the districts.
   (a)   PD-1 planned development 1 district.
   (1)   Planned development 1 district is established as a district in which
the principal use of the land is for dwellings. It is the intent that this
district encourage the construction and continued use of the land for single-
family residential dwellings. This district is intended to continue the use of
and enjoyment of the lighthouse, golf course, tennis courts, property owners
clubhouse and other leisure activities ana their attendant uses. Furthermore,
this district benefits by having all lots adjacent to common areas which are to
be enjoyed by all property owners or limited common areas which are necessary
to serve a few adjoining lots.
   (2)   Uses of this district shall not include any commercial or trade
activity except that associated with a golf course or private clubhouse and
limited activities attendant to an inn facility.
   (3)   It is the intent of this district to preserve and protect as much as
possible the natural environment by minimizing lot coverage and maximizing
common areas and open spaces.
   (b)   PD-2 planned development 2 district.
   (1)   Planned development 2 district is established as a district in which
the principal use of the land is for residential dwellings, the preservation
and protection of a sizable maritime forest and, in general, development
compatible with planned development 1 district.
   (2)   Furthermore, it is the intent of this district to protect the natural
environment by limiting the maximum lot coverage, providing common areas
adjacent to all lots, clustering residential nodes, and preserving a sizeable
maritime forest area without intrusions. However, this area may include utility
facilities necessary for development of the island.
   (c)   PD-2C planned development 2 commercial district. This district is
established as a district in which the principal uses of the land are for
commercial, municipal and utility service areas for the entire island. This
district is intended to provide:
   (1)   A town hall service area;
   (2)   Commercial service areas;
   (3)   A pedestrian-oriented commercial center;
   (4)   A property owner's clubhouse and related sports activities and their
attendant uses; and
   (5)   Transient inns and their attendant facilities.
   (d)   PD-3 planned development 3 district. Planned development 3 district is
established as a district in which the principal use of land is residential but
with some offices allowed and bed and breakfast without commercial restaurant
facilities.
   (e)   PD-3C planned development 3 commercial district. Planned development 3
commercial district is established as a district in which the principal use of
land is for mixed use which includes residential uses, commercial services,
offices, marina and marina related uses, club facilities, transient inn uses
and leisure activities and their attendant uses. Furthermore, it is the intent
of this district to encourage the construction and continued use of land
necessary for the embarkation and debarkation of ferry passengers.
   (f)   PD-4 planned development 4 district. Planned development 4 district is
established as a district in which the principal use of the land is for single-
family residential dwellings on large lots, leisure activities and the
protection of the natural environment.
   (g)   MFPO maritime forest protection overlay district. The specifications
and standards of this district were established in order to permit development
that is compatible with the environmentally sensitive nature of the Bald Head
Island and Middle Island maritime forests, and to preserve land in a natural
state where such land is considered to be a vital link in the local groundwater
replenishment cycle and where the destruction of natural vegetation could have
a harmful effect on the stability of the soil and its resistance to erosion.
More specifically, the maritime forest protection overlay district is designed
to protect natural features and functions of the area in the interest of
health, safety and general welfare of the residents and visitors to Bald Head
Island and Middle Island. Such features include, but are not limited to,
saltspray sheer zone vegetation, forest wetlands, relic dunes, and dune ridges.
   (1)   Applicability. The provisions of this district shall, to the extent
permitted by the law, apply to those areas within the corporate limits of the
village that may be, from time to time, designated on the official map or maps
designating certain areas thereon as maritime forest protection overlay
district adopted by the village. This overlay district is intended to provide
additional protection to the maritime forest, while allowing all uses contained
in the PD district, in which the overlay occurs, to be allowed. The golf course
from the fairways, tees, and greens to adjacent rights-of-way or lot lines are
expected from this overlay district.
   (2)   Performance standards. The following performance standards apply to
all uses within the maritime forest protection overlay district. These
performance standards are in addition to or over and above the requirements of
the applicable zoning district.
      a.   Prestaking or preconstruction lot clearing. Some clearing of
understory trees and shrubs may be required to prepare a site for sale or
survey or to stake the proposed building site. Permission to clear such
understory, trees and shrubs shall not be required by the building inspector,
but shall be limited to such vegetation with a three-inch caliper at four feet
above grade.
      b.   Lot alteration. No alteration of a lot or building site shall occur
prior to the issuance of a building permit. Trees shall not be removed except
as necessary for the construction of the principal structure, accessory use,
parking area, driveway access and septic tank/nitrification field system. Soil
disturbing activities and site alteration shall not exceed the minimum
necessary to provide for the location of the principal use structure, any
accessory use improvements, driveway access, and utility service improvements.
No specimen tree (a 24-inch diameter trunk at four feet above ground level)
shall be removed unless construction is impractical without the removal of such
tree.
      c.   Construction containment. The area of construction shall be limited
to five feet outside of the perimeter of structure construction and two feet
outside of a driveway referred to in this chapter as "limit of construction." A
lay down yard for construction material must be shown on plans submitted for
approval as well as the limits of construction. Both of these areas shall be
surrounded by a construction fence which shall be maintained until all
construction is completed. Movement of construction equipment or placement of
material outside of this containment is prohibited.
      d.   Wetland buffer. Natural wetlands and ponds shall not be filled. No
paved area or any part of a ground absorption wastewater treatment system shall
be located within 20 feet of any stream, pond, or wetland. Pilings for a
residence may be placed in the wetlands boundary as long as no fill is placed
in the wetlands. For lots platted before April 1, 1991, fill is allowed to the
extent permitted by applicable regulatory agency, only if the property is
unbuildable or unaccessible without the fill permit. Open decking or boardwalks
may be built over wetlands where approved by the local GAMA permit officers and
division of coastal management or other appropriate governmental agency or
authority.
      e.   Off-street parking, driveways and carports. Parking areas on a lot
shall be located under the principal structure whenever possible. All off-
street parking improvements and driveways shall be designed to minimize
impervious lot coverage. Driveway widths shall be limited to ten feet.
      f.   Clearing and pavement width for roads, streets, and culs-de-sac.
         1.   The total combined width of paved area within a right-of-way for
a road or street shall not exceed 22 feet.
         2.   The total width of paved area within a cul-de-sac at the end of a
road or street shall not exceed 30 feet; nor more than 30 feet of any road or
street right-of-way, regardless of the total width of such right-of-way shall
be cleared of plant or tree growth. Notwithstanding the provisions of this
section, the width of paved area and the width of cleared right-of-way for
intersections of streets or roads and culs-de-sac may exceed the permitted
limits set out hereinabove to accommodate an appropriate turning radius, as
determined by the village council, for vehicular traffic, including without
limitation, emergency vehicles, fire protection and fighting equipment or
vehicles and construction vehicles.
      g.   Plant material installation. There shall not be planted on any lot
any shrubbery, trees, herbs, grasses or other flora unless same appears on the
list of permissible shrubbery, trees, herbs, grasses or other flora to ensure
that no plant material foreign to the natural ecology of the maritime forest
protection overlay district which may be harmful to such ecology will be
introduced into the maritime forest protection overlay district. Bald Head
Island design guidelines recommendations and standards for development will be
helpful to property owners in planning the installation of plant material.
   (3)   Technical regulations. Within the maritime forest district the
following dimensional, setback, height, and other requirements shall be in
effect.
      a.   Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall be applicable:
 
Single-family Lots of or over 9,000 square feet
Front yard           35 feet minimum
Side yard            10 feet minimum
Rear yard            10 feet minimum
Side yard corner lot 15 feet minimum
 
 
Single-family Lots up to 9,000 square feet
Front yard 25 feet minimum
Side yard  5 feet to 20 feet (15 feet combined minimum of the setbacks from
           joint property lines)
Rear yard  10 feet minimum
 
 
Residential Cluster Lots
Front yard 10 feet minimum
Side yard  0 feet
Rear yard  10 feet minimum
 
   (h)   PD-3C-1 lighthouse-chapel overlay district. The specifications and
standards of this district are established in order to permit development that
is compatible with the pastoral environment of this district.
   (i)   NC neighborhood commercial district. The neighborhood commercial
district (NC) is primarily intended to accommodate very low intensity office,
and personal service uses within residential areas. The district is established
to provide convenient locations for businesses, which serve the needs of island
residents and visitors without disrupting the character of the neighborhood.
The neighborhood commercial district is a transitional land use zoning district
in which the principal use of land is residential with some office and service
uses allowed to serve the surrounding residential districts and in which
traffic and parking congestion can be reduced to a minimum in order to preserve
residential values and promote the general welfare of the surrounding
residential districts.
   (1)   Buffer requirements. Nonresidential uses which abut undeveloped lots
or lots utilized for residential purposes shall maintain a ten-foot undisturbed
vegetative buffer along rear and side property boundaries.
   (2)   Parking and driveway requirements.
      a.   Minimum number of required off-street parking spaces, by land use.
 
Residential Uses        Required Spaces
Single-family dwellings 2 per dwelling unit
Duplex dwellings        2 per dwelling unit
 
Nonresidential Uses Required Spaces
Nonresidential Uses                   Required Spaces
Library                               1 per 400 sq. ft.
Real estate office                    1 per 500 sq. ft.
Offices other than real estate        1 per 500 sq. ft.
Utility services                      1 per 500 sq. ft.
Clinics                               1 per 500 sq. ft.
Chapel                                1 per 3 sanctuary seats
Utility facilities, public or private 1 per 500 sq. ft.
 
      b.   Location and design of parking areas and driveways.
         1.   All parking areas shall be located and designed so as to avoid
undue interference with the use of public streets and alleys.
         2.   There shall be a maximum of one driveway per lot. In the case
that adjacent lots are under single ownership, shared driveways shall be
utilized in an attempt to provide the minimum number of access points possible.
   (3)   Maximum floor area ratio. The total square footage of floor area
permitted in the neighborhood commercial zoning district shall be determined as
a ratio to the total square footage of the land area of the site. The ratio
shall be .20. The floor area shall be the sum of the areas on all floors of the
building measured from the outside faces of the exterior walls, including
halls, lobbies, stairways, elevator shafts. enclosed porches and balconies, and
belowgrade floor areas.
   (4)   Recombination of lots. Lots may not be recombined for the purpose of
increasing the size of the structure built on the lot. The maximum floor area
ratio would apply to the largest lot existing prior to the recombination.
   (5)   Prohibited uses and structures.
      a.   Commercial, retail sales.
      b.   Restaurants, cafes and other food services.
   c.   Warehousing, storage, and distribution facilities.
   d.   All uses and structures not of a nature specifically or provisionally
permitted in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 29, § 8.5, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-126. Permitted and special uses.
   The following uses are listed as permitted (P) or special (S) use in each
zoning district. Prohibited uses are either not listed or a blank space appears
in the column. Such permitted or special uses as set forth in this section
shall be the only uses to which any land or structures located thereon shall be
put and shall be the exclusion of all other uses whether listed in this section
or not, with the exception of commercial filming activity as permitted by Sec.
32-255. (See article VII of this chapter for provisions governing special uses
and commercial filming activity.)
Uses PD-1 PD-2 PD-2C PD-3 PD-3C PD-3C-1 PD-4 NC
Uses                                 PD-1 PD-2 PD-2C PD-3 PD-3C PD-3C-1 PD-4 NC
RESIDENTIAL HOUSING TYPES
Accessory uses to residential        P    P    P     P    P             P    P
dwelling
Chapel                               P    S                     P            S
Dwelling, duplex                     S    S          P    P                  S
Dwelling, multi-family (including    P    S    P     P    P
townhouse, condos)
Dwelling, single-family, attached or P    P    P     P    P             P    P
detached
Home offices and occupation          P    P          P                  P    P
Trailer, tow                         P    P    P     P    P     P       P    P
Zero lot line dwellings              P    P    P     P
NONRESIDENTIAL
Accessory structures                 P    P    P     P    P             P    P
Bar, lounge, tasting room, tavern,             S          S
wine shop
Bicycle shop including rental and                    P          P
repair
Brewery, cidery, distillery, winery            S          S
Brewery, with less than 800 square             S
feet of production area
Clinics, medical services                      P          P                  P
Clubhouse, public or private         P    S    S     S    P             S
Commercial filming activity                    S          S
Commercial, retail services                    P          P     S
Freestanding baffled lighting                  S          S     S
Restaurant, cafe                               S          S
School                                         S
RESIDENTIAL HOUSING TYPES
Golf course, including pro shop and  P    P
related services
Government offices and facilities    S    S    P     S    P     P       S    S
Library                              P    P    P     P    P     S            P
Lodging facilities, including inn,   P         P     P    P
hotel and motel
Marina and marina related                            P    P             S
Offices, other than real estate                P          P     S            P
Pre-manufactured structure                     P
Real estate offices                            P          P     S       S    P
Recreational facilities              S    S    S     S    S     S       S
Restaurants, cafes, and other food   P         P          S
services (limited to club)
Trailer, construction (on job site)  P    P    P     P    P     P       P    P
Trailer, food service                          S
Trailer, passenger                             P          P
Trailer, tow                                   P          P
Utility facilities, public or        S    S    S     S    S             S    S
private
Utility services, public or private  P    P    P     P    P     P       P    P
Veterinary clinic                              S
Water transportation including
docks, piers, ticket booths, vehicle                      P             S
parking, etc.
 
(Ord. No. 29, § 8.6, 8-17-1991; Ord. of 3-18-2000; Ord. No. 2006-1102, 11-17-
2006; Ord. No. 2009-0502, 5-5-2009; Ord. No. 2012-0301, 3-16-2012; Ord. No.
2015-0403, passed 4-17-2015; Ord. 2016-10-01, 10-21-2016; Ord. No. 2020-1002, §
2, 10-23-2020; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021; Ord. No. 2022-0603, § 2, 6-
17-2022; Ord. No. 2024-1003, § 2, 10-11-2024)
Sec. 32-127. Dimensional density and structure requirements.
   (a)   Dimensional requirements by district. The dimensional requirements
table (Table 1 of this section) lists dimensional density maximums and minimum
structure requirements for each zoning district.
   (b)   Corner visibility. No planting, fence or other obstruction to
visibility at elevations of three to seven feet above street level shall be
erected, maintained or allowed to exist within 15 feet of the intersection of
any street right-of-way lines.
   Table 1: Dimensional Requirements
Residential:
Dimension Requirements for Dwelling PD-1 PD-2 PD-2C PD-3 PD-3C PD-3C-1 PD-4 NC
Units
Dimension
Requirements  PD-1    PD-2    PD-2C  PD-3           PD-3C PD-3C-1 PD-4   NC
for Dwelling
Units
Minimum Lot
Size Square   9,500   7,000   900                   400   5,000   20,000 9,500
Feet
Maximum
Number of
Dwelling      4.6/14  6.2/14  14                    14    8       2.1    4.6
Units per
Acre (SF/MF)                         All References
Minimum Front                        to Type I, II,
Yard Setback  35'/10' 10'/10' 10'    III, IV, V,    10'   10'     35'    30'
(SF/MF)                              VI, VII, and
Minimum Side                         VIII, lots in
Yard Setback  10'/0'  10'/0'  10'/0' the PD-        5'/0' 10'     10'    15'/0'
(SF/MF)                              3 Zoning
Minimum Side                         District shall
Yard Setback  15'     15'     15'    refer to the   15'   10'     25'    20'
on Corner                            Urban Code of
Lots                                 the Harbour
Minimum Rear  10'     10'     10'    Association    5'    10'     10'    15'
Yard
Maximum
Building      35'/45' 35'/45' 35/45'                50'   45'     35'    35'
Height (1)
(SF/MF)
Maximum Lot   25%                                                        30%
Coverage (2)
 
Harbour Lots
referenced in section 32-127, note (3)
 
Type I-V and VII & VIII Lots  3,200
Minimum Lot Size Square Feet
Type VI Lot                   900
Minimum Lot Size Square Feet
Type I-V and VII & VIII Lots  13.61
(Maximum Units Per Acre)
Type VI Lot                   48.4
(Maximum Units Per Acre)
 
Note:   For the Type I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, and VIII lots, for minimum lot
size and applicable setbacks refer to the Urban Code recorded in those
restrictive covenants for the Bald Head Harbour.
Non-Residential
 
Dimension
Requirements for   PD-1  PD-2  PD-2C PD-3           PD-3C PD-3C-1 PD-4   NC
Non-Residential
Units
Minimum Lot Size   9,500 7,000 900   400            400   5,000   20,000 9,500
Square Feet
Minimum Front Yard 35'   10'   15'                  0'    10'     35'    30'
Setback
Minimum Side Yard  10'   10'   5'                   0'    10'     10'    15'
Setback                              Refer to Urban
Minimum Side Yard                    Land Code
Setback on Corner  15'   15'   10'                  5'    10'     25'    20'
Lots
Minimum Rear Yard  10'   10'   10'                  0'    10'     10'    15'
Setback
Maximum Building   45'   45'   45'   45'            50'   45'     35'    35'
Height (1)
 
   Note: For use of the above-referenced dimensional requirements table, the
following rules shall apply:
   (1)   The building height is measured from the lowest natural point on the
ground beneath a building and its attached structure to the highest point on
its roof. Where any elevation beneath the building footprint falls below an
elevation of five feet above mean sea level (amsl), the lowest elevation shall
be considered five feet amsl.
   (2)   Up to 300 square feet can be screened porch provided roof of porch
forms integral part of roof line of main structure.
   (3)   All references in this Table 1 of this section to Types I, II, III,
IV, V, VI, VII, and VIII lots shall refer to the designation of such lots as
set forth in those restrictive covenants for the Bald Head Harbour, recorded in
book 697, page 267, and book 722 at page 952 of the county registry, and as
shown on those maps of the same recorded in map cabinet S, page 142 and map
cabinet U, page 157, map cabinet U, page 41, map cabinet U, page 66, and map
cabinet S, page 300, of the county registry. N/A-Not applicable.
   (4)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in this
chapter, in zones PD-3 and PD-3C, to the extent that an automatic fire
sprinkler system shall be installed in the primary living unit sought to be
permitted for construction on any lot, encroachments as more fully described in
this chapter shall be allowed in such setbacks. These encroachments shall
include roof overhangs, bay windows, utility system enclosures or screens,
fences, trellises, walkways, and similar appurtenant structures. Furthermore,
should any garage (structure intended for storage of electric powered vehicles,
whether or not inclusive of a crofter or other habitable space) include an
automatic fire sprinkler system, the structure shall be allowed within the
applicable setback. In no event shall any overhang or encroachment extend
across any property line, or over any street right-of-way. A fire sprinkler
system shall be defined and installed as per NFPA 13; 13 (R), 13 (D).
   (5)   Amendments to this chapter, dated January 22, 1999, shall not apply to
any subdivision approval for residential cluster housing use, as to which all
requirements of this chapter, as of the date of approval of such subdivision,
shall be applicable.
(Ord. No. 29, § 8.7, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2006-1001, 10-20-2006; Ord. No. 2007-
1001-2, 10-26-2007; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28- 2021; Ord. No. 2025-0403, §
1, 4-11-2025)
Sec. 32-128. Site development plan.
   A site development plan drawn to scale shall contain the following
information for both multifamily and single-family dwelling and commercial
properties:
   (1)   Multifamily:
      a.   The name of planned development;
      b.   The exact boundary lines of the planned development fully
dimensioned by lengths and bearings, and the location on intersecting boundary
lines of adjoining lands;
      c.   Scale denoted both graphically and numerically;
      d.   The plans for utility layouts, including sewers, storm sewers, water
distribution lines, natural gas, telephone and electric service, illustrating
connections to systems and/or sewage disposal systems. Plans must show line
sizes, the location of fire hydrants, blow-offs, manholes, pumps, force mains,
and gate valves;
      e.   Street names;
      f.   The location, purpose, and dimensions of areas to be used for
purposes other than residential;
      g.   Minimum building setback lines;
      h.   The names of owners of adjoining properties and any adjoining
subdivisions of record (or proposed and under review);
      i.   The location and dimensions of all rights-of-way, utility or other
easements, riding trails, natural buffers, pedestrian or bicycle paths, and
areas to be dedicated to public use with the purpose of each stated;
      j.   Right-of-way lines, and pavement widths of all streets and the
location and width of all adjacent streets and easements;
      k.   Property lines, building or other structures, watercourses, bridges,
culverts, storm drains, and water retention or detention areas on the land to
be subdivided;
      l.   Sufficient engineering data to determine readily and reproducible on
the ground every straight or curved boundary line, street line, lot line,
right-of-way line, easement line, and setback line, including dimensions,
bearing, or deflection angles, radii, central angles and tangent distances for
the centerline of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the
boundary or curved streets. All dimensions shall be measured to the nearest
one-tenth of a foot and all angles to the nearest minute;
      m.   The accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments, markers
and control points;
      n.   The deed restrictions or any other similar covenants proposed for
the planned development, if any;
      o.   The date of the survey and plat preparation;
      p.   North arrow and declination;
      q.   The name and location of any property, within the planned
development or within any contiguous property, that is listed on the U.S.
Department of Interior's National Register of Historic Places; likewise any
property that has been designated by local ordinances as an historic property
pursuant to 160D-940 et seq.
      r.   The name, address, and telephone number of owner, registered
surveyor, land planner, architect, landscape architect, and professional
engineer responsible for the subdivision and the registration number and seal
of the professional engineer and registered surveyor;
      s.   Flood hazard areas according to most recent FEMA flood insurance
rate map stating date of map adoption;
      t.   Topographic information showing vertical contour every two feet;
      u.   Show boundaries of areas of environmental concern (CAMA), show
boundaries of outstanding resource waters (DEM), and show COE 404 wetlands;
      v.   Total number and location of proposed dwelling units and other
structures; total residential floor area; total height; total open space area;
      w.   An inventory of all trees of caliper greater than 12 inches at four
feet above ground level, those existing and those to be removed;
      x.   Provisions for open space;
      y.   Any other information requested by the village planning board or
council.
   (2)   Single-family. For all single lot development proposals, a site
development plan, drawn to scale, shall contain the following information:
      a.   A perimeter survey showing:
         1.   The lot boundaries, the bearing and distance of each;
         2.   The location of applicable front, side and rear yard lines;
adjacent streets;
         3.   Any and all existing structures showing the location thereof on
the survey, as well as distances from the closest lot line;
         4.   Any and all proposed structures or proposed alteration or
extension of an existing structure;
         5.   All existing and proposed structures and intended use;
         6.   Topographical information showing vertical contours every two
feet;
         7.   Boundaries of areas of environmental concern as defined in the
Coastal Area Management Act;
         8.   The 404 line as established by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
and any other pertinent information necessary to determine compliance with the
Coastal Area Management Act, Federal Emergency Management Act, and any other
local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances or regulations applicable to the
lot;
         9.   Proposed location of driveway;
      b.   The location and square footage of the proposed structure or
addition thereof and its total height;
      c.   The total square footage of the lot;
      d.   The total square footage of the lot covered by impervious cover;
      e.   The type of sewage disposal system and proposed source of potable
water;
      f.   A detailed site plan for the lot, which shall show the locations and
types of naturally occurring vegetation and growth, including all trees thereon
with a trunk equal to or greater than 12 inches in width at a height four feet
above the ground, and the locations thereof. The drawing shall include the
limit of construction line and proposals for restoration or relandscaping of
any area of vegetation disturbed by the proposed use;
      g.   Such other information as may be required by the zoning officer
concerning the lot as may be necessary to determine compliance of the proposed
development of the site with this chapter; and
      h.   Planting plan.
   (3)   Nonresidential commercial. For nonresidential (commercial)all elements
under subsection (1) a. through x. of this section.
   (4)   Vesting approval. Vesting provision-approval of a site development
plan by the village council will vest a property with zoning rights applicable
at that time. Such vesting approval is valid for a period of two years. This
vesting is intended to carry out provisions of G.S. 160D-108.1 and site
development plans as used in this chapter constitute site specific development
plans under the statute.
(Ord. No. 29, § 8.8, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-129. Homeowners’ association amenity regulation.
   Property, including but not limited to beach clubs, clubhouses, and other
amenities, owned by, a nonprofit homeowners' association ("homeowners'
association amenity property'), which is held for the use, benefit, and
employment of all members of the association and in which each member of the
association has an equal irrevocable right to use and enjoy the homeowners'
association amenity property, such irrevocable right to use and enjoy the
homeowners' association amenity property being appurtenant to taxable real
property owned by a member of the association, shall be allowed, subject to the
other restrictions within this chapter, within the various zoning districts of
the village but only if the taxable property owned by the member(s) of the
homeowners' association to which the property is appurtenant is located within
the village.
(Ord. No. 2011-1201, 12-16-2011; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Secs. 32-130—32-160. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. ACCESSORY USES
Sec. 32-161. Dwellings as accessory uses.
   (a)   Dwellings may have accessory uses in residential districts if located
inside the principal home used as a residence by the owner or relatives and for
which no rent is charged. Manufactured homes shall not be used as accessory
residences in any residential district.
   (b)   Dwellings may be accessory uses in the PD-3 district if located inside
the principal building.
(Ord. No. 29, § 9.1, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-162. Retail sales and services as accessory uses.
   Retail sales and services are permitted as accessory uses when clearly
incidental to the principal use. In institutional settings such activities may
include gift and book shops, coffee shops, lounges, pro shops, and beauty shops
and barbershops.
(Ord. No. 29, § 9.2, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-163. Ornamental structures, fences and walls.
   (a)   Specifications. Ornamental structures not to exceed ten feet in
height, fences and walls not to exceed four feet in height, and ground-level
wooden walkways not to exceed 18 inches in height, may be constructed or
erected on any property, or within any applicable building setback provided
these structures do not impede site path visibility. Fences and walls shall be
limited to four feet in height except that, in the following locations, fences
and walls shall not exceed six feet in height:
   (1)   Within any nonresidential zone, when the purpose of the fence is to
provide security or is to screen from rights-of-way or adjoining properties
nonresidential activities or uses; or
   (2)   To provide screening between a residentially zoned property and a
nonresidentially zoned property.
   (b)   Scientific or ecological studies. Notwithstanding any provision in
this chapter to the contrary, fences or similar structures constructed for
purposes of scientific or ecological study or analysis are allowed, subject to
the following conditions:
   (1)   The zoning official determines that the purpose of the fence or
similar structure is in the best interest of the village;
   (2)   The location, height and style of fencing is appropriate for the
intended use as determined by the zoning official;
   (3)   The applicant has procured permission to construct the fence from the
appropriate landowner; and
   (4)   The zoning official determines that the fence or structure will have
no adverse impact on adjoining properties.
   (c)   Maritime forest protection overlay district. In the maritime forest
protection overlay district, no disturbance, damage or destruction of trees,
and only minor disturbance, damage or destruction of naturally occurring
vegetation and growth shall result from the construction or placement of the
proposed ornamental structures, walls, walkways or fences.
   (d)   Permit required. A permit for the permitted uses in this section must
be procured prior to construction.
   (e)   Sand fencing construction standards. The purpose of the following
regulations is to promote the most effective method of sand accretion utilizing
sane fencing, and to minimize the fencing's impact on nesting sea turtles and
emerging hatchlings:
   (1)   Sand fencing erected seaward of the peak of the primary dune or
protective storm berm shall be erected at angles of at least 45 degrees to the
shoreline, facing the predominate wind direction. Individual fence sections
should not exceed 25 feet in length spaced parallel to each other at least nine
feet apart. If sand fence sections are erected in segments ten feet in length
or less, parallel to each other, they may be spaced no less than seven feet
apart. Such sand fencing shall be installed landward of the mean high water
mark to avoid damage by wave action. No fencing may be installed that
unreasonably restricts public use of hard sand beach areas.
   (2)   Sand fencing erected within 150 feet landward of the peak of the
primary dune or protective storm berm shall be erected in a continuous line
parallel to the shoreline, with no breaks or openings allowed in the fencing,
except for beach access points. There must be a minimum of 20 feet maintained
between the closest point of fencing constructed landward and seaward of the
peak of the primary dune or protective storm berm.
   (3)   In the absence of a primary dune or storm berm within an area of
privately owned property reasonably appropriate for dune recreation, the
building inspector may establish the appropriate location for sand fence
erection.
   (4)   Continuous sand fencing erected landward of the peak of the primary
dune or protective sand berm must be kept intact without gaps, or it shall be
immediately removed or repaired. It shall be the responsibility of the building
inspector to notify the owner of any derelict or nonconforming sand fencing,
and to require immediate remedy.
   (5)   Sand fencing erected for the purpose of delineating beach access
points is exempt from the provisions of this section. A permit for sand fencing
must be procured prior to construction.
(Ord. No. 29, § 9.3, 8-17-1991; Ord. of 4-15-2000; Ord. of 4-16-2010; Ord. No.
2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-164. Home occupations.
   (a)   The use must be conducted entirely within the dwelling by a member of
the immediate family residing on the premises. No persons outside of the
immediate family members will assist or be employed. No more than 25 percent of
the floor space within the dwelling may be used in connection with such
occupation.
   (b)   No chemical equipment or product shall be used except those which are
normally used for purely domestic or household purposes. No equipment or
process shall be used in such home occupation which creates noise, noxious
odors, glare, fumes or other nuisance or electrical or mechanical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the lot, if the occupation is conducted in
a single-family housing unit, or outside the housing unit if conducted in other
than a single-family housing unit. In the case of electrical interference, no
equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference
in any radio or television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations
in line voltage off the premises. No equipment or process shall be used which
creates electromagnet disturbances off the premises.
   (c)   No commodity or product display shall be visible from the exterior of
the dwelling.
   (d)   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or
premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation,
including, without limitation, the displaying of any type of sign.
   (e)   The activity involved shall not noticeably detract from the outward
residential character of the neighborhood.
   (f)   Pedestrian traffic, vehicle traffic, and any other activity associated
with a home occupation shall not significantly disrupt the peace and
tranquility of the residential neighborhood.
   (g)   Any equipment is to be stored inside an enclosed shelter, shed or
garage. There shall be no outside storage.
   (h)   If, at any time there is any noncompliance with the provisions of this
chapter relating to limited home occupations, then the zoning official will
serve notice of violation and order to cease.
   (i)   A property owner proposing a home occupation must first file an
application for such proposed use with the zoning official and affirm that he
has read and understands the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 29, §
9.4, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Secs. 32-165--32-190. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS
Sec. 32-191. Enforcement and interpretation.
   Regulations for each district shall be enforced and interpreted according to
the following rules.
   (1)   User by right. All listed permitted uses are permitted by right (P) or
special standard (S) in each zoning district according to the table of uses
contained in section
32-126.
   (2)   Minimum regulations. Regulations set forth in this chapter shall be
minimum regulations. If the requirements set forth in this chapter are at
variance with the requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations
or ordinances, the more restrictive or higher standard shall govern.
   (3)   Restrictive covenants and deed restrictions. Unless restrictions
established by covenants and deed restrictions running with the land are
prohibited by the provisions of this chapter, nothing contained in this chapter
shall be construed to render such covenants or restrictions inoperative.
   (4)   Dimensional requirements and other regulations.
      a.   General building restrictions. Construction on numbered single-
family lots within the development shall be governed by the following general
minimum requirements:
         1.   All buildings shall be constructed in such a manner as to comply
with the North Carolina Coastal Area Management Act and all regulations
propounded pursuant thereto and the Federal Emergency Management Act and all
regulations propounded pursuant thereto.
         2.   The exterior of all approved buildings located within this
subdivision shall have been completed within six months after construction
shall have been commenced and failure to complete the exterior of such
buildings within the six-month period shall operate as a forfeiture of the
permit granted.
      b.   Prohibited uses. It is the intent and purpose of the village to
create a residential and commercial community of the highest quality and, at
the same time, endeavor to retain the natural, unspoiled beauty now existing on
the island; and, to that end, the following restrictions shall apply:
         1.   No fuel tanks or storage receptacles shall be exposed to public
view. Trash and garbage receptacles may be located at appropriate locations on
any lot so long as they are appropriately enclosed or screened as to exclude
their exposure to the public.
         2.   Each lot owner within the development shall maintain and preserve
his property in a clean, orderly and attractive appearance. Upon the failure on
the part of any such owner to adhere to such proper, clean, orderly and
attractive maintenance of his property, and upon ten days' written notice, the
village may file a suit against such owner for specific performance.
         3.   No open or exposed storage, including junk or abandoned items of
personal property, shall be maintained on any property within the village; no
trash or refuse, including leaves shall be burned in an open incinerator within
the development except by special permit.
         4.   No animals, livestock or poultry of any kind shall be raised,
bred, or kept within the village, except that dogs, cats, or other household
pets may be kept, provided that they are not kept, bred or maintained for any
commercial purpose, and are kept under control by the owner at all times.
         5.   In an effort to effectively control obnoxious insects and pests,
the village reserves the right to enter upon any residential lot and use such
measures as are generally recommended for effecting such controls.
         6.   The drilling of private wells for residential irrigation or
potable water purposes where a public or private utility service is available
is expressly prohibited.
      c.   Regulations affecting construction.
         1.   Prior to the initiation of any construction of any structure by
any person, such person shall:
            i.   Obtain a building permit;
            ii.   Place marl on access driveway; and
            iii.   Erect snow fence and stabilize at limits of construction
immediately after installation of pilings.
         2.   Each structure constructed shall meet each of the following
criteria in addition to complying with all applicable state and local laws and
regulations applicable thereto prior to the issuance by the building inspector
of a certificate of compliance:
            i.   All inspections conducted and passed by the building
inspector:
            ii.   All landscaping is complete and conforms to the preapproved
plans and permit thereof;
            iii.   Water and sewer available;
            iv.   Minimum eight-inch by eight-inch pilings shall be required as
supporting members for any structure;
            v.   The "contractor" shall provide an eight-foot-wide minimum
driveway with a "trafficable surface". If marl surfaces or other loose material
are used for the driveway, it shall all be edged with concrete, wood, brick or
another approved material. A concrete apron, 16 feet wide at the street,
tapering to the width of the driveway, is required. A pressure treated pine or
equivalent wood edging, a minimum of four inches by six inches, shall be used
at all times to encase the required concrete apron: and
            vi.   Two guest parking spaces off the street;
            vii.   Six feet deep by six feet wide at road by eight feet wide at
drive all weather apron;
            viii.   All exterior lights shall be baffled lights, low profile
luminaries, permitted pole lighting, or approved freestanding baffled lighting
and located more than 100 feet landward of the stable line of natural
vegetation. New construction of commercial uses, and improvements to existing
commercial uses shall install adequate lighting to promote safety measures, due
to increased population and traffic in such areas, as determined by the village
manager or building inspector. Provisions for such lighting shall be installed
prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the commercial structure.
Floodlights, or other unshielded lights are strictly prohibited. All lighting
must comply with chapter 10, article III, of this Code.
            ix.   All trash can receptacles must be animal-proofed and
immediately accessible from the driveway;
            x.   Beach walks four feet wide and no more than one foot above
grade and must comply in all respects with section 28-34 of this Code;
            xi.   All utility elements (HVAC, solar, etc.) screened to match
house screening and colors and shall be located above the base flood elevation
except that electric meter boxes may be located below base flood when such
evacuation would require placing meter face more than six feet above grade;
            xii.   No visible antennas;
            xiii.   All new construction will install water saving devices in
plumbing fixture units; and
            xiv.   A certificate of elevation shall be obtained and forwarded
to the building inspector as soon as the governing structure is in place.
(Ord. No. 29, §§ 10.1--10.4, 8-17-1991; Ord. of 3-18-2000; Ord. No. 2006-001,
1-20-2006; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Secs. 32-192--32-220. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. NONCONFORMING USES *
 
Notes
* *   Cross References: Buildings and building regulations, ch. 6.
Sec. 32-221. Purpose and intent.
   After August 17, 1991, pre-existing structures or lots of record and
existing and lawful uses of any building or land which does not meet the
minimum requirements of this chapter for the district in which they are located
or which would be prohibited as new development in the district in which they
are located shall be considered as nonconforming. It is the intent of this
chapter to permit these nonconforming uses to continue until they are removed,
discontinued, or destroyed, but not to encourage such continued use, and to
prohibit the expansion of any nonconformance.
   (1)   Substandard lots of record and structures. Any lot of record or
structure existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, which does not meet
one or more of the minimum requirements of this chapter for the district in
which it is located, shall be subject to the following exceptions and
modifications:
      a.   Adjoining lots. When two or more adjoining lots with continuous
frontage are in one ownership at any time after the adoption of this chapter,
and such lots individually are less than the minimum square footage required in
the district in which they are located, then such group of lots shall be
considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted area and width
for the district in which located.
      b.   Lot not meeting minimum lot size requirements. Except as set forth
in this chapter, in any district in which single-family dwellings are
permitted, any lot or record existing at the time of the adoption of this
chapter which has dimensions which are less than required by this chapter may
be used as a building site for a single-family dwelling providing the lot area
and width are not less than 80 percent of the requirements in the district. If
the lot is smaller or narrower, a variance may be requested of the planning
board.
      c.   Yard requirements modified. Except as set forth in subsection (1)a
of this section, where a lot has width or depth less than that required in the
district in which it is located, the zoning official shall be authorized to
reduce the yard requirements for such lot by not more than 20 percent.
Additional or other forms of yard modification may be permitted with a variance
granted by the planning board.
      d.   Enlargement of nonconforming structures. Any building which is
nonconforming solely because of its encroachment in a required yard area may be
extended in any lawful manner that does not further encroach in that yard.
   (2)   Nonconforming uses of buildings. The nonconforming use of a building
may be extended throughout the building provided no structural alterations,
except those required by law or ordinance or ordered by an authorized officer
to secure the safety of the building, are made therein but no such use shall be
extended to occupy any land outside such building. If the nonconforming use of
such building is discontinued for a continuous period exceeding 180 days, every
future use of such premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter; provided that this provision shall not apply to any nonconforming
commercial or industrial use which normally operates less than 90 calendar days
in any given calendar year. The nonconforming use which normally operates less
than 90 calendar days in any given year (i.e., seasonal operation) shall not be
resumed after 365 days have passed without operation. This provision shall not
prevent the restoration of a nonconforming building, or a building used for
nonconforming use which has been destroyed to the extent of not more than 50
percent of its replacement value, but only if such building is restored within
one year of the date of its destruction.
   (3)   Nonconforming uses of land. The nonconforming use of land shall not be
enlarged or increased, nor shall any nonconforming use be extended to occupy a
greater area of land than that occupied by such use at the time of the passage
of this chapter. If any nonconforming use of land, other than for the location
of a mobile home or mobile office is discontinued for a continuous period
exceeding 120 days, any future use of land shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. If the nonconforming use of land for location of a
mobile home or mobile office is discontinued, either by destruction of the
mobile home or by removal thereof, any further use of land shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter except as provided in subsection
(1)d. of this section.
(Ord. No. 29, §§ 11.1--11.3, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Secs. 32-222--32-250. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII.  SPECIAL USES
Sec. 32-251. Purpose.
   The development and execution of this chapter is based on the division of
the village into districts within which the use of land and buildings and the
bulk and location of buildings and structures in relation to the land are
substantially uniform. It is recognized, however, that there are some land uses
which are basically in keeping with the intent and purposes of the district
where permitted, but which may have an impact on the area around them which can
only be determined by review of the specific proposal. These uses may be
established, under certain standards and with proper controls, in such a manner
as to minimize any adverse effects. In order to ensure that these uses, in
their proposed locations, would be compatible with surrounding development and
in keeping with the purposes of the district in which they are located, their
establishment shall not be as a matter of right, but only after review and
approval of a special use permit as provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 29, § 12.1, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-252. Application and fees.
   Applications for special use permits, signed by the applicant. shall be
addressed to the planning board. A fee in an amount currently in effect by
action of the village council will be paid at the time of application. Each
application shall contain or be accompanied by such legal description maps,
plans, and other information so as to completely describe the proposed use and
existing conditions.
   (1)   Structures. Location of all structures within 50 feet of the property,
location and depth, if known, of any existing utility lines in the property or
along any adjacent street.
   (2)   Other requirements.
      a.   Location of property boundaries, location of any easements for
utility lines or passage which cross or occupy any portion of the property for
proposed lines.
      b.   Detailed construction plans shall be submitted prior to issuance of
a building permit.
      c.   The applicant shall submit with its application a list of names and
addresses of all abutting property owners along with one set of envelopes
stamped and with typed addresses to each person on the list. In the absence of
evidence to the contrary, the applicant may rely on the county tax listing to
determine owners of abutting property. These addressed envelopes and the list
must be submitted to the zoning official as part of an application prior to
scheduling a public hearing.
      d.   A site development plan as set forth in section
32-128 of this chapter shall be provided with each application.
(Ord. No. 29, § 12.2, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-253. Procedures for determining special use permit applications.
   The special uses, as specified in the various districts may be permitted
only after approval by the planning board following a public evidentiary
hearing. The planning board shall follow the quasi-judicial procedures set
forth in section
32-102(c) when scheduling and hearing an application for a special use permit.
(Ord. No. 29, § 12.3, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-254. General provisions concerning special use permits.
   (a)   Compliance with other codes. Granting of a special use permit does not
exempt the applicant from complying with all of the requirements of building
codes and other ordinances.
   (b)   Revocation. In any case where the conditions of a special use permit
have not been or are not being complied with, the zoning official shall give
the permittee notice in writing that the conditions of the special use permit
have been violated, specifying the manner in which such conditions have been
violated and ordering compliance therewith within ten days of the date that
such notice shall be mailed to the permittee and the landowner if not the
permittee at the address set forth on the original special use permit
application or such other address as the zoning official has on file. If, at
the end of such ten-day period, the conditions of the permit have not been met
by the permittee, the zoning official shall give to the permittee written
notice of his intent to seek revocation of the special use permit. Such notice
shall be in writing and shall specify the conditions of the permit which have
been violated by the permittee and shall specify a time and place for a public
evidentiary hearing before the planning board to consider the revocation
request. Such revocation hearing shall follow all quasi-judicial procedures
applicable to an approval as set forth in section
32-102(c). Following the hearing, the planning board shall revoke, modify, or
leave intact the original special use permit according to its findings. Such
permit shall be revoked only if the planning board finds that specific
standards set by the permit have been violated and that such standards are and
remain material to the permit and that such violation adversely affects the
surrounding or adjacent zoning districts. The special use permit may be
modified as the planning board shall, in its discretion, deem to be appropriate
if the planning board shall find that specific standards of the permit have
been violated but that such violated standard has, due to a change in
circumstances, become not material or that the violated standard does not
adversely affect the surrounding or adjacent zoning district.
   (c)   Expiration. In a case where a special use permit has not been
exercised within the time limit set by the planning board, which period may not
be shorter than 12 months, or within twelve months if no specific time limit
has been set, then without further action, the permit shall be null and void.
Exercised, as set forth in this section, shall mean that binding contracts for
the construction of the main building have been let; or in the absence of
contracts that the main building is under construction to a substantial degree;
or that prerequisite conditions involving substantial investment are contracted
for, in substantial development, or completed. When construction is not a part
of the use, exercised shall mean that the use is in operation in compliance
with the conditions set forth in the permit.
   (d)   Duration of special use. Any conditions imposed on a special use
authorized and exercised shall be perpetually binding upon the property unless
expressly limited by the special use permit or subsequently changed or amended
by the planning board after a public hearing.
   (e)   Conditions and guarantees. Prior to the granting of any special use
the planning board may stipulate such conditions and restrictions upon the
establishment, location, or construction, maintenance, and operation of the
special use as it deems necessary for the protection of the public and to
secure compliance with the standards and requirement specified in this chapter.
In order for such conditions to be effective the permittee must consent to the
same in writing. In all cases in which special uses are granted, the planning
board shall require such evidence and guarantees as it may deem necessary to
ensure that the conditions stipulated in connection therewith are being and
will be complied with.
   (1)   Such conditions may include a time limitation.
   (2)   Conditions may be imposed which require that one or more things be
done before the use requested can be initiated. For example, "that a solid
board fence be erected around the site to a height of six feet before the use
requested is initiated."
   (3)   Conditions of a continuing nature may be imposed. For example,
"exterior loud speakers shall not be used between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and
9:00 a.m."
(Ord. No. 29, § 12.4, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2006-1010, 10-26-2006; Ord. No. 2021-
0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-255. Commercial filming permits.
   (a)   Commercial filming activity allowed. Notwithstanding any other
provisions in the village code of ordinances, pursuant to this section,
commercial filming projects shall be allowed in all zoning districts within the
village limits.
   (b)   Requirements. Any proposed commercial filming activity must comply
with and be permitted pursuant to the village commercial filming guidelines, as
may be modified from time to time by the village council, a copy of which may
be obtained at village hall.
   (c)   Penalties. Commencing commercial filming activities without a permit
may result in fine of $5,000.00, which must be paid to the village at village
hall within ten days of receiving a citation for such unpermitted filming
activity. Failure to comply with the commercial filming permit and/or the
village commercial filming guidelines may result in a fine of $5,000.00, which
must be paid to the village at village hall within ten days of receiving a
citation for such failures, or suspension, modification, or termination of the
commercial filming permit. Each continuing day during which a violation occurs
shall be deemed a separate offense. Violations under this section shall not be
punishable as a misdemeanor under G.S. 14-4.
Ord. No. 29, § 12.5, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2006-1011, 10-26-2006; Ord. No. 2012-
0301, 3- 16-2012; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
   Cross-reference–See Appendix C of the Code of Ordinances for Commercial
Filming Guidelines, Filming Permit Application and Fee Schedule.
Secs. 32-256—32-290. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
Sec. 32-291. Purpose and intent.
   (a)   The purpose and intent of these planned unit development regulations
is to promote innovative design in development by providing flexibility in
regard to permitted uses and bulk regulations. These regulations are designed
to promote the development of attractive, desirable communities of place, where
residents and visitors can work and live in a development pattern that
integrates residential and nonresidential uses in a design that is accessible
to pedestrians and encourages the use of alternative modes of transportation
and shared parking and offers greater conveniences to the residents of the
village.
   (b)   It is the intent and policy of the village to encourage planned unit
developments because of the extensive planning that is required prior to
development. Planned unit developments allow the village to plan for large
areas and to manage the impacts of growth on the provision of government
services and infrastructure.
   (c)   It is the intent of the village to encourage the use of this section
in conjunction with the other elements of this chapter in order to encourage
the development of new communities.
   (d)   It is the intent of the village to provide flexibility in design in
order to achieve, to the greatest possible degree, land development which is
responsive to the natural and environmental assets and liabilities of any given
site. Environmentally sensitive features should be protected and development
concentrated in more suitable or less sensitive areas in order to preserve the
island's unique natural resources. Development should be located and undertaken
in a manner that will be the least disruptive to the natural functions of the
environmentally sensitive lands. The maintenance and restoration of trees and
other elements of the environmentally sensitive lands is an integral part of
any planned unit development activities.
(Ord. No. 29, § 13.1, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-292. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicated a different meaning:
   Commercial use means the occupancy, use, or intended use of land or
structures or any portion thereof for the transaction of business, whether
wholesale or retail, or the rendering or receiving of services. Warehousing, if
directly related to on-site commercial activity, shall be considered to be
commercial use.
   Master plan means a development plan depicting an entire proposed planned
unit development, including proposed phases, which is submitted for council
approval in accordance with this chapter.
   Mixed-use development means a project which integrates a variety of land
uses including but not limited to residential, commercial, office, retail,
public, or entertainment, in a compact urban form.
   Mixed-use structure means a structure that will contain both commercial, on
at least one floor, and residential within the same structure.
   Open space means any portion of a parcel or area of land or water which is
open and primarily undisturbed by structures, including areas maintained in a
natural and undisturbed character. The only aboveground structures which are
allowed within an open space are walkways and structures related thereto, such
as benches, all of which are intended to accommodate casual, pedestrian use,
and minor utility structures for pumps, wells and similar purposes.
   Recreational use means the occupancy, use, or intended use of land or
structures or any portion thereof by persons for relaxation, amusement, play or
the like.
   Residential unit means an enclosure of one or more rooms providing permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation designed and/
or constructed for permanent occupancy by one family. Accessory uses, including
crofters, to the extent it is under the same ownership and on the same lot as
the principle residential unit shall be deemed a part of the principle use.
   Residential use means the buildings for residence such as attached or
detached single-family dwellings, apartment complexes, condominiums,
townhouses, cottages, etc., and their associated outbuildings such as garages,
storage buildings, gazebos, etc.
   Single-family dwelling, attached, means a structure containing more than one
single-family dwelling unit in which the units are physically attached and each
has its own separate exterior entranceway and a separately owned lot.
   Single-family dwelling, detached, means a structure containing one dwelling
unit that is freestanding.
   Site specific plan means a development plan depicting a specific phase of
development of an approved planned unit development master plan. The site
specific plan contains more detailed information than the master plan, as this
plan is submitted to village staff for final review, approval, and recordation
of a specific phase. Site specific plans shall be submitted for preliminary as
well as final approval in accordance with the two step site specific approval
process defined in section 32-305 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 29, § 13.2, 8-17-1991; Ord. No 2000-21, 9-16-2000; Ord. No. 2005-012,
7-15-2005; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
   Cross reference—Definitions generally, §
1-2.
Sec. 32-293. Districts in which allowed.
   Planned unit developments are permissible in all zoning districts, provided
that an application for the planned unit development is submitted, reviewed,
and approved in accordance with this chapter. The planned unit development
district is an overlay district which is applied only at the request of the
applicant.
(Ord. No. 29, § 13.3, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-294. Minimum area of development.
   The parcel proposed for development as a planned unit development shall be a
minimum of ten contiguous acres.
(Ord. No. 29, § 13.4, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-295. Design standards.
   Planned unit developments are exempt from this chapter and chapter 26,
subdivisions, with the exception of the following:
   (1)   Wetlands. Acologically sensitive lands, such as marsh, Carolina Bays,
pocosins and swamps, when in the ownership of the owner/applicant, are to be
preserved whenever possible for the public interest. For such lands, as long as
such areas are left undisturbed, they shall be included in the gross density.
   (2)   Maximum ground coverage.
      a.   Maximum ground coverage of sites developed as residential structures
and accessory uses shall be 30 percent of the gross site area for these uses.
      b.   Maximum ground coverage of sites developed as nonresidential shall
be 50 percent of the site specific area for these uses.
      c.   Applicant may exceed restrictions if applicant can effectively
demonstrate, through an innovative engineered design, that the protection
provided by the design would be equal to or exceed the protection by the
limitations of 30 and 50 percent as specified in subsections (2)a and (2)b of
this section.
   (3)   Streets/internal trafficways. A basic characteristic of a planned unit
development is that the internal trafficways or streets, whether public or
private, do not follow fixed linear geometric lines as do most streets, but
instead are curvilinear and of meandering character. This is intended to
provide for the further protection of trees, landscape specimens, and other
environmentally sensitive concerns by building around these areas and for
deliberate slower paced traffic movements and making generous use of features
that promote lower vehicular speeds. Creative design of trafficways is
encouraged. All planned unit developments must adhere to chapter 26,
subdivisions, article III, design standards, of this Code. Prior to the
approval of a final plat, the developer shall have installed all required
improvements, or guaranteed their installation in accordance with chapter 26,
subdivisions, article IV, final approval, of this Code.
   (4)   Setbacks. Minimum setbacks and distances between structures shall be
as follows: minimum distance between internal structures shall be as required
by the North Carolina Department of Insurance, and a minimum setback of 25 feet
shall be required from any peripheral property line of the planned unit
development except, where the peripheral property line is the boundary between
the planned unit development and the State of North Carolina Maritime Forest
Preserve, the required minimum setback shall be 20 feet. A minimum of ten feet
shall be required for all front property lines.
   (5)   Utilities. Each development shall be capable of service with a water
system and a sewage disposal system meeting standards and requirements of the
state. When a development is within 1,000 feet of a water or sewer system, and
the system has the capacity to provide the necessary water and sewer, the
developer shall connect to such system and shall design a water distribution
system for the subdivision meeting any requirements of state and village
ordinances. Except as otherwise allowed by this chapter, all utilities and
easements for each planned unit development must be provided in accordance with
subsection 26-124(f)(4). Notwithstanding that provision, or any other provision
of this section, and with the approval of the village manager, water and sewer
line installations may be located under the paved surfaces of public roads if
such construction is reasonably necessary to preserve natural features of the
land, including trees. All utilities shall be installed underground.
(Ord. No. 29, § 13.5, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2000-21, § 1, 9-16-2000; Ord. No. ZO-
01-04, 6-18-2004; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-296. Allowable uses.
   (a)   Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, notwithstanding
the permitted or special uses specified as allowed in the underlying zoning
district, a planned unit development may contain any or all of the following
uses:
   (1)   If the parcel proposed for development as a planned unit development
is less than 20 acres, only residential use of any type permitted by article
III of this chapter and associated recreational uses, will be allowed.
   (2)   If the parcel proposed for development as a planned unit development
is equal to or greater than 20 acres, any use not otherwise prohibited in the
village may be allowed, provided that no more than ten percent of the gross
acreage of the planned unit development shall be used for commercial use.
   (b)   All uses that are set out in an approved master land use plan shall
thereafter be treated as permitted uses within the planned unit development.
   (c)   A minimum of 70 percent of the total number of allowable residential
units in an approved planned unit development shall be single-family. Thirty
percent may be developed as residential uses other than single-family.
Notwithstanding this requirement, once a master plan is approved in accordance
with this provision, the number of single-family residential units approved may
be reduced, as long as the number of non-single-family residential uses is not
increased, notwithstanding the fact that such decrease in single-family
residential units may result in a build-out density whereby more than 30
percent of the total residential units are other than single-family units.
   (d)   Any allowed use may be combined with any other use in a planned unit
development or individual building, at the discretion of the village council.
(Ord. No. 29, §
13.6, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2000-21, § 1, 9-16-2000; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-
28-2021)
Sec. 32-297. Recreational and open space requirements.
   (a)   Each planned unit development shall provide at least 20 percent of the
parcel proposed for development in open space. Of the total required open
space, ten percent shall be in uses other than golf course. Such required open
space may be developed and incorporated into a central amenities package and
shall be contiguous except where otherwise deemed appropriate.
   (b)   Upon approval by the village council as part of its approval of the
master plan, any or all of the required open space reserved under subsection
(a) of this section may be dedicated to the village for recreational or open
space purposes.
   (c)   Any required open space which is not dedicated to the village shall be
maintained by a homeowners' or property owners' association or other nonprofit
organization with appropriate restrictions recorded which restrict in
perpetuity the use of such land and facilities to open space and recreational
uses, as shown on the master plan.
(Ord. No. 29, § 13.7, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-298. Residential density.
   Planned unit developments shall have residential densities no greater than
the maximum density allowed for the predominant zoning classification, by
acreage, based on the following formula:
   (Maximum single-family density x 70%) + (Maximum Multifamily density x 30%)
x 50% = Maximum planned unit development residential density (in units/acre)
(Ord. No. 29, § 13.8, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-299. Density bonuses.
   In approving an application for planned unit development, if the village
council finds that an increase in density will not have an adverse impact on
the public health, safety, and welfare of the village and that the development
meets the purpose and intent of this chapter, the village council, at their
discretion, may grant a density bonus of up to 15 percent of permitted gross
density calculated according to the following:
   (1)   Construction of on-site bike and/or fitness trails or facilities: not
more than five percent;
   (2)   Construction of park, open space or greenway facilities that exceed
minimum village standards: not more than five percent;
   (3)   Creative use of stormwater impoundments (ponds) for recreation, views
over water, incorporation in parks or for waterfront promenades: not more than
five percent;
   (4)   Development following the standards of traditional urban development:
not more than ten percent; and
   (5)   Donation of school or other public facility site: not more than ten
percent.
(Ord. No. 29, § 13.9, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-300. Development standards and improvement requirements.
   (a)   The village may approve as a part of the planned unit development
process, notwithstanding any requirements of the underlying zoning ordinance,
the lot dimensions, setbacks, parking, interior landscaping, and buffers within
the planned unit development.
   (b)   Planned unit developments containing both residential and
nonresidential uses shall be designed, located and oriented on the site so that
the nonresidential uses are directly accessible to residents of the planned
unit development. For the purposes of this section, directly accessible shall
mean pedestrian and vehicular access by way of improved sidewalks or paths and
streets that do not involve leaving the planned unit development or using a
major thoroughfare. Directly accessible does not necessarily mean that
nonresidential uses need to be located in a particular location but that the
siting of such uses considers the accessibility of the residential areas of the
planned unit development to the nonresidential use.
(Ord. No. 29, § 13.10, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-301. Phasing of development.
   (a)   Construction of the nonresidential portions of the planned unit
development, phase or section, shall be designed and phased to ensure that the
impacts of the nonresidential development upon the surrounding community and
properties will not be detrimental to further residential development of the
community and adjacent properties, or the use and enjoyment of adjacent
residential properties. Impact of the nonresidential portion includes but is
not limited to the visual impact and perception of the nonresidential
development. Construction of the commercial development which is part of the
planned unit development shall commence no earlier than such time as building
permits have been issued for 15 percent of the dwellings in the planned unit
development, unless another schedule which fulfills the intent of this section
has been approved by the village council as part of the master plan approval.
   (b)   All open space and recreational amenities shall be dedicated and
completed before certificates of occupancy may be issued for more than 50
percent of the dwellings in the planned unit development or, if the approved
master plan divides the planned development into phases, in that phase of the
planned unit development of which the amenity is a part.
(Ord. No. 29, § 13.11, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-302. Elements of the planned unit development.
   (a)   Applications for planned unit development approval shall contain three
elements for approval:
   (1)   A master plan of the proposed planned unit development;
   (2)   A site specific plan for each development phase within the planned
unit development; and
   (3)   A document package as required under section
32-303.
   (b)   The planned unit development shall require the submission of a master
plan for review by the technical review committee, planning board and final
approval of the village council.
   (c)   Following approval of the master plan, the planned unit development
plan shall require the submission, approval, and recordation of one or more
final site specific plats. The final planned unit development plat shall
contain the language, "approved as a planned unit development plat." Site
specific final plat approval is contingent on review by appropriate village
authorities and approval by the village manager or his designee.
(Ord. No. 29, § 13.12, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-303. Special requirements.
   Before site specific plat approval is issued, appropriate documents, deed
restrictions, or similar covenants guaranteeing adequate maintenance and
continued operation of all assured open space and other private service
facilities, shall be filed with the village manager for approval and then be
properly recorded.
(Ord. No. 29, § 13.13, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-304. Master plan application approval.
   (a)   Preapplication conference.
   (1)   A preapplication conference between the applicant and the appropriate
village staff shall occur prior to any presentation to the planning board. The
request for a conference must be submitted by the applicant. The primary
purpose of this conference is to provide assistance and guidance to the
applicant for the swift and least interruptible review of the proposed planned
unit development. To ensure an equal understanding, this conference will
provide a mutual exchange of basic information that is needed to facilitate and
clarify the requested review process for all planned unit developments.
   (2)   Once the preapplication conference is complete, the applicant will
prepare a master plan of the entire planned unit development. The applicant
will complete the master plan compliance sheet as a requirement of the
application.
   (b)   Submission. Submission and review procedures for master plan approval
shall be in accordance with chapter 26, article II, procedures for plat
approval. notwithstanding the provisions for information required on
preliminary plats. The master plan shall contain all information as set forth
in subsection (c) of this section.
   (c)   Master plan plat requirements. The master plan will contain and label
the following elements:
   (1)   Tax parcel number;
   (2)   Existing zoning;
   (3)   Major thoroughfares;
   (4)   Recreational areas;
   (5)   Golf courses/other recreational amenities;
   (6)   Lakes (natural or manmade);
   (7)   Buffer strips;
   (8)   Single-family residential area;
   (9)   Multifamily residential area;
   (10)   Total acreage of commercial area;
   (11)   Total acreage of the planned unit development;
   (12)   Total acreage of the residential use;
   (13)   Total acreage of the recreational use;
   (14)   Total acreage of the open space;
   (15)   Total number of commercial units;
   (16)   Total number of residential units by type;
   (17)   Total density per acre;
   (18)   North arrow;
   (19)   Infrastructure layout;
   (20)   Total impervious coverage for residential development;
   (21)   Total impervious coverage for non-residential and commercial area;
   (22)   Walking paths/bike trails;
   (23)   Scale, date, and legal description of site;
   (24)   Abutting property owners;
   (25)   Phases of development (if recording in phases);
   (26)   Ten copies of the master plan (for office use only); and
   (27)   The village staff shall have the authority to require other
information as necessary to determine compliance with this chapter, or other
local, state, or federal regulations.
   (d)   Authority to approve. The council shall have the authority to approve
the planned uni development master plan application following a determination
that the plan meets the requirements of this article.
(Ord. No. 29, § 13.14, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-305. Site specific plan approval.
   (a)   If the planned unit development is of the size that it must be
completed in phases, it is the responsibility of the applicant or owner to
present site specific plans of each phase, prior to the development of that
phase, to the village manager or his designee. The applicant or agent will be
presented with a planned unit development compliance sheet to assist with the
completing of the site specific plan in a more accurate and efficient manner.
The site specific plans are in more detail and must contain all information as
required for preliminary plats in chapter 26, article VII, of this code.
   (b)   If the proposed planned unit development is to be completed in one
initial phase, the applicant or owner may submit a master plan that contains
all of the elements of the site specific plan.
   (c)   Site specific approval is a two-step process. The preliminary site
specific plat must have village approval prior to installation of the required
improvements. Following the installation of the required improvements, a final
site specific plat shall be approved by the village manager. A mylar with the
appropriate information will be required for signatures of the village manager
or his designee so that the applicant or owner can record the site specific
plan. Submission of the preliminary site specific plans and final site specific
plans must occur no later than 14 days prior to the regularly scheduled
technical review committee meeting. Filing fees as set forth by the village
council in their approved fee schedule, which shall be modified from time to
time, shall be payable to the village upon submission of such preliminary and
final plans. Necessary revisions of plans resulting from technical review
committee comments must be received 14 days prior to the subsequent technical
review committee meeting to be considered at that meeting. If the number of
submittals are such that additional staff time is necessary to review the
documents, then at the discretion of the village manager or his designee those
submittals not being reviewed will be continued to the agenda for the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the technical review committee, occurring no
more than 45 days from the previous technical review committee.
   (d)   Approval of any site specific plan shall be valid for a period of 24
months from and after the date of approval thereof. Within 24 months of the
date of approval of any site specific plan, the developer shall install all
required improvements or make any provisions for guarantee of the installation
thereof pursuant to section
26-201 of this code and thereafter may submit a final site specific plan for
approval by the manager or his designee. Failure of the developer to install
improvements or provide and post the necessary guarantees in lieu thereof and
to provide to the manager a final plat for approval or to record such approved
final plat within such 24-month period shall void the approval of the site
specific plan. Any subsequent proposed development of such property shall be
approved only upon conformity with the terms and conditions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 29, § 13.15, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2001-17, 8-25-2001; Ord. No. 2021-
0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-306. Amendments to master plan and site specific plans.
   Any and all amendments to the master plan and/or site specific plans for the
planned unit development shall be subject to the following review procedures:
   (1)   Village manager approval is required for the following:
      a.   Changes which result in a decrease in assigned density for a
specific parcel, either residential or nonresidential.
      b.   Change in land use designation from multifamily to single-family or
a change from any other use to open space/passive recreation.
      c.   Minor changes in major infrastructure features (i.e., roads/access,
sewer, water, storm drainage) of the master plan area which are clearly
beneficial to the occupants of the master plan area.
      d.   Minor changes in order to correct typographical errors or other
revisions not affecting compliance with any of the substantive features of the
planned unit development.
   (2)   The village council approval is required for the following:
      a.   Significant changes in major infrastructure features (i.e., roads/
access, sewer, water, storm drainage) of the master plan.
      b.   Change in land use designation to increase density for master plan
or site specific plan.
      c.   Any other significant change to the master plan or site specific
plan as determined by the village manager.
(Ord. No. 29, § 13.16, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-307. Enforcement provisions.   
   (a)   Any person violating any section of this chapter shall be guilty of a
class 3 misdemeanor and punishable by a fine not to exceed $50.00 or
imprisonment not to exceed 20 days. Each day that a violation continues shall
be considered a separate and distinct offense.
   (b)   In addition to and not in lieu of any criminal remedies set forth in
subsection (a) of this section, the village may apply to any court of competent
jurisdiction for a temporary restraining order, preliminary injunction and
permanent, mandatory or prohibitory injunction preventing the unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use of any land or structures in violation hereof, including
order of abatement directing that buildings or other structures located on any
property subject hereto be closed, demolished or removed, if necessary, to come
into compliance herewith.
   (c)   The village's remedies for violations hereof as set forth in this
section shall be cumulative.
(Ord. No. 29, § 13.17, 8-17-1991; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-308. Procedures for establishing a moratorium.
   (a)   The village may adopt temporary moratoria on any village development
approval required by law. The duration of any moratorium shall be reasonable in
light of specific conditions that warrant imposition of the moratorium and may
not exceed the period of time necessary to correct, modify, or resolve such
conditions. Except in cases of imminent and substantial threat to public health
or safety, before adopting an ordinance imposing a development moratorium with
a duration of 60 days or any shorter period, the governing board shall hold a
public hearing and shall publish a notice of the hearing in a newspaper having
general circulation in the area not less than seven days before the date set
for the hearing. A development moratorium with the duration of 61 days or
longer, is subject to the notice and hearing requirements of G.S. 160D-601.
Absent an imminent threat to public health or safety, a development moratorium
adopted pursuant to this section shall not apply to any project for which a
valid building permit issued pursuant to G.S. 160D-1108 is outstanding, to any
project for which a special use permit application has been accepted as
complete, to development set forth in a site-specific vesting plan approved
pursuant to G.S. 160D-108.1, to development for which substantial expenditures
have already been made in good-faith reliance on a prior valid development
approval, or to preliminary or final subdivision plats that have been accepted
for review by the village prior to the call for a public hearing, if
subsequently approved, shall be allowed to proceed to final plat approval
without being subject to the moratorium. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a
complete application for a development approval has been submitted prior to the
effective date of a moratorium, G.S. 160D-108(b) applies when permit processing
resumes.
   (b)   Any ordinance establishing a development moratorium must expressly
include at the time of adoption each of the following:
   (1)   A clear statement of the problems or conditions necessitating the
moratorium and what courses of action, alternatives to a moratorium, were
considered by the village council and why those alternative courses of action
were not deemed adequate.
   (2)   A clear statement of the development approvals subject to the
moratorium and how a moratorium on those approvals will address the problems or
conditions leading to the imposition of the moratorium.
   (3)   An express date of termination of the moratorium and a statement
setting forth why that duration is reasonably necessary to address the problems
or conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium.
   (4)   A clear statement of the actions, and the schedule for those actions,
proposed to be taken by the village during the duration of the moratorium to
address the problems or conditions leading to imposition of the moratorium.
   (c)   No moratorium may be subsequently renewed or extended for any
additional period unless the village shall have taken all reasonable and
feasible steps proposed to be taken by the village in its ordinance
establishing the moratorium to address the problems or conditions leading to
the imposition of the moratorium and unless new facts and conditions warrant an
extension. Any ordinance renewing or extending a development moratorium must
expressly include, at the time of adoption, the findings set forth in (b)(1)
through (b)(4) of this section, including what new facts or conditions warrant
the extension.
   (d)   Any person aggrieved by the imposition of a moratorium on development
approvals required by law may apply to the appropriate division of the General
Court of Justice for an order enjoining the enforcement of the moratorium, and
the court shall have jurisdiction to issue that order. Actions brought pursuant
to this section shall be set down for immediate hearing, and subsequent
proceedings in those actions shall be accorded priority by the trial and
appellate courts. In any such action, the village shall have the burden of
showing compliance with the procedural requirements of this section.
(Ord. No. 2006-1012, 10-26-2006; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Secs. 32-309—32-330. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. SIGNS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 32-331. Title.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Sign Ordinance of the
Village of Bald Head Island, North Carolina," and may be referred to as the
sign ordinance.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. I, § 1, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord. No.
2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-332. Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to establish limitations on signs to ensure
that they are appropriate to the neighborhood, building, or use to which they
are appurtenant, and are adequate, but not excessive, for their intended
purpose as a means of communication; to maintain and enhance the aesthetic
environment of the island; to improve pedestrian and other traffic safety; to
minimize the possible adverse affect of signs on nearby public and private
property; and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of this article.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. I, § 2, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord. No.
2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-333. Authority.
   This article is hereby adopted under the authority and provisions of the
G.S. 160A-174 and 160D-702 et seq.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. I, § 3, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord. No.
2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-334. Jurisdiction.
   This article govern each and every sign erected within the corporate limits
of the village as indicated on the official corporate boundary map of Bald Head
Island, North Carolina.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. I, § 4, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord. No.
2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-335. Usage of words and terms.
   For the purpose of interpreting this article, certain words or terms are
herein defined. Except as defined in this article, all other words used in this
article shall have their everyday dictionary definition.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. II, § 1, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, ; Ord. No. 2021-
0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-336. Definitions.
   For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall be
defined as specified in this section:
   Banner sign means a sign made of fabric or any nonrigid material with no
enclosing framework.
   Bollard means a wooden post constructed and erected for the purposes of
location identification of buildings and building sites. All bollards shall not
exceed four feet in height.
   Bollard cap means a cover or top for a bollard constructed for the purposes
of advertising the sale, rental, or lease of property. All bollard caps must be
located on a bollard constructed and erected pursuant to this section.
   Building-mounted sign means a sign attached to, painted on, inscribed on or
deriving its major support from a building, including a wall sign, a projecting
sign or an awning sign.
   Bulletin board means a board not greater in size than five feet by seven
feet used to announce meetings or programs to be held on the premises of a
church, village property, library, museum, community center, Bald Head Island
Club, or similar noncommercial places of public assembly. A bulletin board
shall not contain any commercial advertising or shall be treated as a sign.
   Changeable copy means copy that is or can be changed manually in the field
or through mechanical means (e.g., reader boards w/changeable letters).
   Construction sign means a sign placed at the construction site identifying
or announcing the project or the name of the architect, engineer, or contractor
involved in the development of the project.
   Copy means any words, letters, numbers, figures, characters, symbols, logos,
or insignia that are used on a sign display surface area.
   Decorative flag means a piece of fabric bearing a distinctive design which
is purely ornamental in purpose.
   Direction sign means a sign directing traffic toward a specific destination
remote to the location of the sign.
   Directory sign means a subsidiary sign listing the names, uses, and/or
location of various residential developments.
   Door sign means a sign attached to the outward facing side of an exterior
door or a sign that is on the interior side of a door, but which is visible
from the exterior of the building because the door or part of the door is made
of glass or another transparent material.
   Double-faced sign means a sign having two sides bearing similar information
on both sides.
   Freestanding sign means a sign, supported by one or more columns, uprights
or braces, in or upon the ground, but not attached to any building. A sign
attached to a flat surface not a part of the building, such as a fence or wall,
shall be considered a freestanding sign.
   Golf course means a course with nine or more holes for playing golf,
including any accessory driving range, clubhouse, office, restaurant,
concession stand, picnic tables, pro shop, maintenance building, restroom
facility, or similar accessory use or structure. This term shall not include
miniature golf courses, nor shall it include driving ranges, which are not
accessory to a golf course.
   Government means any agency, office bureau, or corporation licensed by any
duly authorized authority of the United States, the state, the county, any
regional government, or the village.
   Ground-mounted sign means a freestanding sign which extends from the ground
or which has a support which places the bottom thereof less than two feet from
the ground.
   Holiday decorations means displays erected on a seasonal basis in observance
of religious, national, or state holidays, which are not intended to be
permanent in nature and which contain no advertising material.
   Illegal sign means any sign erected or maintained in violation of this
article or erected, altered, removed, or replaced in violation of this article,
or any amendments hereto.
   Instructional sign, on-premises, means a sign designed to guide golf cart
and/or pedestrian traffic by using such terms as entrance, exit, one-way, or
similar directional instruction, but not including any advertising message. The
name or logo of the business or use to which the sign is giving direction may
not be included on the sign.
   Logo means a business trademark or symbol.
   Lot means a parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some
legal instrument such as a recorded deed or a recorded map and which is
recognized as a separate legal parcel for purposes of transfer of title.
   Multifamily development means two or more multifamily dwellings located on a
single property.
   Multifamily dwelling means a building containing three or more dwelling
units, and where the building is designed to be or is occupied by three or more
families living independently from each other.
   Nonconforming sign means any sign that met all legal requirements when
constructed but does not comply with this article or a subsequent amendment
hereto.
   Not-for-Profit Business Tax Exempt Business means a tax exempt nonprofit
organization under Section 501(c)(3) of the United States Internal Revenue Code
(26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)).
   Off-premises sign means a sign that directs attention to a business
commodity, service, or establishment conducted, sold, or offered at a location
other than the premises on which the sign is erected.
   On-premises sign means a sign that directs attention to a business
commodity, service, or establishment conducted, sold, or offered on the
premises on which the sign is erected.
   Parcel means a tract or plot of land.
   Portable sign means any sign that is not permanently affixed to a building,
structure, or the ground or that is not designed to be permanently affixed to a
building, structure, or the ground.
   Private road and street mean any road or street which is not publicly owned
and/or maintained and is used for access by the occupants of the development
and their guests.
   Public street means a street consisting of a publicly dedicated right-of-way
and a roadway maintained by the village.
   Right-of-way means an area owned or maintained by the village, a public
utility, or a private concern for the placement of such utilities and/or
facilities for the passage of vehicles and pedestrians, including roads,
pedestrian walkways or utilities.
   Sandwich board sign means a two-sided A-frame style sign that is self-
supporting, with no moving parts or lights; displayed outside a for-profit or
not-for-profit business, during business hours, to advertise the business,
hours of operation, an event, a promotion, or for any similar purpose.
   Sign means any words, lettering, parts of letters, figures, numerals,
phrases, sentences, emblems, devises, structures, designs, trade names, or
trademarks by which anything is made known, such as are used to designate an
individual, a firm, an association, a corporation, a profession, a business, or
a commodity or products, which are visible from any public street or adjacent
property which by its nature attracts attention.
   Sign height means the distance measured from the highest point of a sign,
including any molding, trim, border, or frame from ground level at the base of
the sign.
   Temporary sign means a sign that can be used only for a designated period of
time.
   Traffic sign means a sign indicating federal, state, or municipal
regulations for golf cart, vehicle, bicycle, and/or pedestrian movement, or a
sign of similar content installed within a private right-of-way by the owner. A
traffic sign within a private right-of-way, may state "Private Road" but may
not state "Owners and Guests Only", "Keep Out," or other access restrictions .
   Village manager means the chief administrator of the village who is
responsible to the council for administering all municipal affairs placed in
his charge by them.
   Wall sign means a building-mounted sign attached to, painted on, inscribed
or deriving its major support from a wall, and which projects less than 12
inches from the wall.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. II, § 2, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord.
No. 2015-0402, passed 4-17-2015; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
   Cross References: Definitions generally, § 1-2.
Sec. 32-337. Word interpretations. 
   For the purpose of this article, certain words shall be interpreted as
follows:
   The term "lot" includes the word "plot" or "parcel" or "tract."
   The term "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
   The term "structure" shall include the word "building."
   The term "used for" shall include the meaning "designed for."
(Ord. No. 60A, art. III, § 1, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord.
No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-338. Calculation of sign area.
   Sign area shall be calculated as the area within a parallelogram, triangle,
circle, semicircle or other regular geometric figure including all letters,
figures, graphics or other elements of the sign, together with any material or
framing that is an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the
sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed. The sign area
is defined as the area within a single, continuous perimeter enclosing the
extreme limits of characters, lettering, logos, illustrations, or
ornamentations, together with any material or color forming an integral part of
the display or to differentiate the sign from the background to which it is
placed. Structural supports bearing no sign copy shall not be included in the
sign area. If the sign is located on a decorative fence or wall, when such
fence or wall otherwise meets these or other ordinances or regulations and is
clearly incidental to the display itself, the fence or wall shall not be
included in the sign area.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. II, § 3, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord.
No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-339. Violations.
   Any of the following shall be classified as a violation of this article
except as permitted or nonconforming and shall be subject to the enforcement
remedies and penalties provided by this article and by state law:
   (1)   Installing, creating, erecting or maintaining any sign in a way that
is inconsistent with any plan to permit governing such sign or the lot on which
the sign is located;
   (2)   Installing, creating, erecting or maintaining any sign requiring a
permit without such a permit;
   (3)   Failing to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected or
maintained in violation of this chapter or for which the sign permit has
lapsed; or
   (4)   Continuing any such violation. Each such day of a continued violation
shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty portions of
this article.
   Each sign installed, created, erected or maintained in violation of this
article shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty
sections of this article.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. III, § 2, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord.
No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-340. Enforcement and remedies.
   Any violation or attempted violation of this article or of any condition or
requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained, corrected or abated, as
the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate proceedings pursuant to
state law. In the case of a violation of this article, the remedies available
to the village shall include the following:
   (1)   Issuing a stop work order for any and all work on any signs in the
same lot or lots;
   (2)   Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that
requires the removal of the sign or the correction of the nonconformity;
   (3)   Issuing a civil citation to cause the violation to be corrected and
imposing a penalty for failure to do so;
   (4)   Seeking in court the imposition of any additional penalties that can
be imposed by such court under this chapter; and
   (5)   In the case of a sign that poses an immediate danger to the public
health or safety, taking such measures as are available to the village under
the applicable provisions of this article and the building code for such
circumstances.
   The village shall have such other remedies as are and as may from time to
time be provided for or allowed by state law for the violation of this article,
except that a violation of this article shall not result in criminal
proceedings.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. III, § 2.1, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2011-0402, 4-15-2011; Ord.
No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-341. Citation.
   (a)   If through inspection, it is determined that a person has failed to
comply with the provisions of this article, the building inspector shall issue
a notice of violation by hand delivering such notice to the violator or by
sending such notice by certified mail addressed to the violator. Violations
shall be corrected within 15 days of the receipt of such notice except that a
violation for failing or refusing to remove a temporary sign that does not
comply with the provisions of this article or for which the permit has expired
must be corrected immediately upon receipt of such notice and in no event more
than 24 hours after receipt of notice of the violation. If the violation is not
corrected within the specified time period, a citation subject to a $250.00
civil penalty shall be issued.
   (b)   If the violator does not correct the violation set forth in the
citation within 72 hours after first being cited, additional $250.00 civil
penalties shall be issued per day thereafter until the violation is corrected.
In the case of a violation related to a temporary sign the 72 hour waiting
period before additional fines accumulate is reduced, such that if the violator
does not correct the temporary sign violation set forth in the citation within
24 hours after first being cited, additional $250.00 civil penalties shall be
issued per day thereafter until the temporary sign violation is corrected.
   (c)   In the event the building inspector or a public safety officer cannot
identify the violator responsible for a temporary sign violation, they shall
remove the noncompliant temporary sign.
   (d)   These civil penalties are in addition to any other penalties or
actions imposed by a court for violation of the provisions of this article.
   (e)   All such remedies provided in this article shall be cumulative. To the
extent that state law may limit the availability of a particular remedy set
forth herein for a certain violation or a part thereof, such remedy shall
remain available for other violations or other parts of the same violation.
   (f)   For the purpose of calculating any time period imposed or required by
this division, the first day of any activity or action required or authorized
shall be excluded and the last day shall be included.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. III, § 2.2, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2011-0402, 4-15-2011; Ord.
No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-342. Amendments. 
   The village council may from time to time amend the terms of this article,
but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by
or shall have been submitted to the planning board for review and
recommendation. The planning board shall have 60 days within which to make a
recommendation. If the planning board fails to make a recommendation within the
specified time, it shall be deemed to have recommended approval for the
amendment.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. III, § 4, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord.
No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-343. Prohibited signs.
   Signs not expressly authorized by this article shall be considered
prohibited in all zoning districts. Prohibited signs shall include, but are not
limited to the following:
   (1)   Any sign which obstructs the view of pedestrians, bicyclists, and
vehicles at any street intersection or which interferes with the effectiveness
of or obscures any traffic sign shall be prohibited. Any sign located in such a
way as to deny a visual access to an existing sign.
   (2)   Any sign (other than a government sign) placed on any curb, sidewalk,
post, pole, hydrant, bridge, tree, or other surface and located in, over, or
across any public or private street or right-of-way, unless expressly
authorized by this article.
   (3)   Temporary, nonpermanent signs, including over-head streamers, unless
expressly authorized by this article.
   (4)   Any sign that is attached to or mounted on a roof or projects above
the plane of the building facade.
   (5)   Any sign which contains or consists of strings of light bulbs.
   (6)   Moored balloons or other floating signs that are tethered to the
ground, a structure, or another type of sign.
   (7)   Portable or freestanding signs, including any sign painted or
displayed on vehicles if such vehicle is parked in a location for the primary
purpose of displaying the sign which advertise or identify a specific
commercial event. For purposes of this subsection, the only signs that shall be
permitted on electric carts are those that comply with the requirements of
section 28-92.
   (8)   Separate signs attached to a freestanding sign or its supporting
structure advertising services.
   (9)   Neon or internally lit signs.
   (10)   Off-premises commercial signs, or other off-premises signs unless
expressly authorized by this article.
   (11)   Window signs.
   (12)   Revolving signs.
   (13)   Electrically operated, mounted, and illuminated signs.
   (14)   Any moving sign, windblown sign, or device to attract attention,
whether or not any such device carries a written message, all or part of which
is set in motion by wind, mechanical, electrical, or any other means. This
shall include, but not be limited to, propellers, and discs.
   (15)   Any flashing sign or device displaying flashing or intermittent
lights or lights of changing degrees of intensity. Any searchlight or similar
device.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. III, § 5, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord.
No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-344. Nonconforming signs.
   (a)   All nonconforming signs are permitted to exist, provided that the
signs shall not be:
   (1)   Changed, altered, or replaced by another nonconforming sign, except
that copy may be changed on an existing sign.
   (2)   Expanded or modified in any way.
   (3)   Relocated, except in conformance with the requirements of this
article.
   (b)   The status of a nonconforming sign is not affected by changes in
ownership.
   (c)   A nonconforming sign may be altered to become or be replaced with a
conforming sign by right. Once a sign is altered to conform or is replaced with
a conforming sign, the nonconforming rights for that sign are lost and a
nonconforming sign may not be re-established.
   (d)   Nonconforming temporary signs are not permitted and must be removed.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. III, § 6, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord.
No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-345. Roof mounted marina signs.
   Signs visible from the marina mounted upon the roof of a building and
existing as of January 1, 2014 are exempt from the roof mounted signs,
dimensions and other restrictions hereof that would make such sign unlawful or
nonconforming. An exempt roof mounted marina sign may be repaired or replaced
for the same use, provided there is no change in the size or use and provided
the applicable (nonexempt) requirements of this article are met, including,
without limitation, permit and compliance with building code.
(Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord. No. 2021- 0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Secs. 32-346--32-360. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PERMITS
Sec. 32-361. Permit required.
   (a)   No sign, except as otherwise provided in this article, shall be
painted, constructed, erected, remodeled, refaced, relocated, expanded or
otherwise altered until a sign permit has been obtained from the building
inspector in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (b)   Notwithstanding subsection (a) of this section, changing or replacing
the permanent copy on an existing lawful sign shall not require a permit,
provided the copy change does not change the nature of the sign such as to
render the sign in violation of this article.
   (c)   All signs with the exception of bollard caps will have a valid permit
issued by the village.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. IV, § 1, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord.
No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-362. Application for permit. 
   Applications for permits shall contain or have attached to it the following
information:
   (1)   The street number of the structure on which the sign is to be erected,
and the tax parcel number of the property on which the sign is to be located.
   (2)   Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the applicant, owner of the
property on which the sign is to be erected or affixed, the owner of the sign,
and the person or contractor erecting or affixing the sign.
   (3)   A site or plat plan of the property involved, showing accurate
placement of the proposed sign including setbacks, all structures, etc.
   (4)   Two detailed scaled drawings of the plans and specifications of the
sign to be erected or affixed. The building inspector shall inform the
applicant prior to the application of this requirement. Such plans shall
include but shall not be limited to details of dimensions, materials, copy, and
size of the proposed sign. In addition, these drawings shall show size of sign,
logo, trademark, letters, words, numbers and all other information to be
included in the sign to determine conformity to this article and consistency
with regard to other signs and the integrity of the island.
   (5)   Other information as the building inspector may require to determine
full compliance with this and other applicable codes.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. IV, § 2, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord.
No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-363. Issuance of permits.
   Upon the filing of an application for a sign permit, the building inspector
shall examine the plans and specifications, and as deemed necessary, may
inspect the premises upon which the sign is proposed to be erected or affixed.
If the proposed sign is in compliance with all the requirements of these
regulations and other applicable codes, a permit shall be issued. Any permit
issued in accordance with this article shall automatically become null and void
unless the work for which it was issued has visibly been started within 12
months of the date of issue or if the work authorized by it is suspended or
abandoned for one year.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. IV, § 3, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord.
No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-364. Fees.
   To obtain a sign permit, all fees, in accordance with the approved fee
schedule shall be paid.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. IV, § 4, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord.
No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Secs. 32-365--32-380. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE
Sec. 32-381. Design, construction and maintenance.
   All signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with
the following standards:
   (1)   All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the state
building code at all times.
   (2)   Except where specifically exempted by this article, all signs,
including the supports, frames and embellishments thereto, shall not be located
within any public right-of-way, nor shall any sign be attached, affixed or
painted on any utility pole, tree, rock or other natural object.
   (3)   Except for flags and regulated temporary signs conforming in all
respects with the requirements of this division, all signs shall be constructed
of wood or other semipermanent materials and shall be permanently attached to
the ground, a building or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid
wall, frame or structure.
   (4)   All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in
compliance with all building and electrical codes and in conformance with the
code at all times.
   (5)   The village building inspector shall possess the authority to order
the painting, repair, alteration or removal of a sign which constitutes a
hazard to the health, safety or public welfare by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, or obsolescence. Notice to the owner shall be by
personal service or registered mail, return receipt requested. Upon
notification, the owner shall have 30 days to complete repairs. If the owner
fails to complete repairs within appropriate time frames, then the village
shall have all remedies as available in this article.
   (6)   The immediate premises around a sign shall be kept free from debris.
However, no person may damage, destroy, or remove any trees, shrubs or other
vegetation located within the right-of-way of any public or private street or
road for the purpose of increasing or enhancing the visibility of any sign,
unless specifically approved by the village manager.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. V, § 1, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord. No.
2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-382. Reconstruction of damaged signs or sign structures.
   (a)   Any permitted or nonconforming sign or sign structure which has been
damaged may be repaired and used as before, provided all repairs are initiated
within 60 days and completed within 120 days of such damage. However, if the
sign should be declared unsafe by the village building inspector, the owner of
the sign or the owner of the property whereon the sign is located, shall
immediately correct all unsafe conditions in a manner satisfactory to the
village building inspector.
   (b)   For purposes of this section, a nonconforming sign (or its structure)
shall be considered destroyed, and therefore shall not be repaired or replaced,
if it receives damage to the extent of more than 50 percent of its value as
determined by the village building inspector. Signs destroyed by proven
vandalism may be replaced, but may not be changed, altered, or enlarged from
their original state.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. V, § 2, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord. No.
2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-383. Removal of sign upon termination of business.
   A sign, including its supporting structure or brackets, shall be removed by
the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located when the
business which it advertises is no longer on the premises. Such sign, if not
removed within 30 days from the termination of occupancy by such business,
shall be in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. V, § 3, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord. No.
2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-384. Dilapidated signs.
   All signs shall be maintained in good working condition so as to present a
neat and orderly appearance. The building inspector may give written notice to
remove or repair, within 30 days, any sign which shows gross neglect or which
becomes dilapidated. Failure to comply shall be a violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. V, § 4, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord. No.
2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Secs. 32-385--32-400. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. GENERAL SIGN REGULATIONS
Sec. 32-401. Signs permitted in all districts.
   The following signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to
the standards set forth in this section and elsewhere in this article, and
shall require a sign permit unless otherwise indicated:
   (1)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs shall be non illuminated and limited
to the following types:
      a.   Construction signs, which identify the architects, engineers and
contractors involved with the construction. Construction signs shall be a
maximum of seven and one-half square feet in area and a maximum height of six
feet. Such signs shall be removed upon issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
A sign permit shall be required if the sign is not included in the building
permit application.
      b.   Signs advertising only the name, time, place and information
concerning any special event; provided that all such signs shall be removed
within 24 hours after the last day of the event to which they pertain. Signs
for this purpose shall be erected no earlier than seven days prior to the
special event. The maximum sign area shall be 128 square feet per sign. No more
than three such signs shall be erected for each special event. A sign permit is
required.
      c.   Real estate signs, in the form of a bollard cap as defined in this
chapter, advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises or part of the
premises on which the sign is displayed. Real estate signs shall be a maximum
of one square foot in area per side and a maximum bollard height of four feet.
Sign copy shall be allowed only on one side of the sign. Sandwich board signs
are not permitted for these purposes. Such signs shall be removed within seven
days after the property has been sold. These temporary signs shall not require
a permit.
      d.   Seasonal and holiday decorations: Such banners shall not display the
name of a business or shopping center, nor the words "open," "sale," "vacancy,"
or other similar words or phrases related to the business activity on the
premises. Such banners shall be take down or removed within a reasonable time
period following the end of the season or holiday to which they pertain. No
permit is required for these signs.
      e.   Open house signs, in the form of a bollard cap as defined in this
chapter, indicating the availability of an agent in conjunction with the
advertisement of the sale, rental or lease of the premises or part of the
premises on which the sign is displayed. Open house signs shall be a maximum of
one square foot in area per side and a maximum height of four feet. Sign copy
shall be allowed on three sides of the sign. Sandwich board signs are not
permitted for these purposes. Such signs shall be removed immediately after the
open house is complete. These temporary signs shall not require a permit.
      f.   Government signs: No permit is required for these signs. Approval of
signs by Development Services is required.
   (2)   Permanent signs.
      a.   Traffic signs on private property shall contain no commercial
message of any sort. These signs shall be constructed to specifications in
appendix A which is on file and available for inspection in the village
offices. Traffic signs may be located within a public or private street with
approval of the village manager.
      b.   Informational signs of a public utility regarding its lines, pipes
or facilities. No permit is required.
      c.   Names of buildings, dates of erection, monumental citations,
commemorative tablets, insignia of local, state or federal government, and the
like when carved into stone, concrete or similar material or made of bronze,
aluminum or other permanent type construction and made an integral part of the
structure.
      d.   Informational signs of a public or quasi-public nature identifying
or locating a public building, parking area, historic area, major tourist
attraction or similar public or quasi-public activity; and also including signs
identifying parking lots, or other facilities relating to such places or
activities. The village manager shall have the authority to approve such signs
only to the extent that such signs shall be of the minimum size and number to
reasonably convey information provided thereby.
      e.   Directional signs provided that:
         1.   All such signs shall be located off the road right-of-way.
         2.   The maximum area of the sign shall be four square feet.
         3.   Only one directional sign shall be allowed per residential
development (planned unit developments, subdivisions, multi-family developments
only). In the event that residential developments are adjacent to or in close
proximity to each other, and are under single ownership, the developments shall
share signage area in order to decrease the number of signs on the island. The
village manager shall determine whether shared signage is required. Directional
signs shall meet all specifications defined in appendix B which is on file and
available for inspection in the village offices.
         4.   In the event that residential developments utilize such signage,
the square footage utilized shall be subtracted from the total square footage
allowed for the development's project identification sign.
         5.   The maximum height of the sign shall be five feet.
      f.   Golf course signs relating to golf play and conduct shall be
allowed, provided that such sign does not exceed two square feet in area. No
permit is required.
      g.   Historical markets, monuments, or signs erected by public authority.
No permit is required.
      h.   Directional maps. The village manager shall have the authority to
approve such signs only to the extent that such signs shall be of the minimum
size and number to reasonably convey information provided thereby.
      i.   Government signs.
      j.   Road or street name signs. These signs shall be constructed to
specifications in appendix C which is on file and available for inspection in
the village offices.
      k.   Instructional on-premises signs. The village manger shall have the
authority to approve such signs only to the extent that such signs shall be of
the minimum size and number to reasonably convey information provided thereby.
These signs shall be constructed to specifications 1n appendix D which is on
file and available for inspection in the village offices.
      l.   Bulletin board. Bulletin boards are allowed if not visible from a
right-of- way. A bulletin board located within the four walls of a building or
residence may have commercial advertising.
      m.   Vending machines. An ATM, drink, DVD or other vending machine shall
be shielded from view from a right-of-way or adjacent property and, if so
shielded, shall be exempt from the neon and internally lit restrictions of
section 32-343(9).
(Ord. No. 60A, art. VI, § 1, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2001-009, § 1, 5-19-2001;
Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-402. Sign regulations for residential uses.
   Residential uses shall be considered those permitted in this chapter. The
following signs shall not require a permit unless otherwise indicated:
   (1)   Single-family dwelling unit identification. One building-mounted sign
or freestanding sign, not expecting two square feet in area for each dwelling
unit, shall be permitted. Such sign shall indicate only the name of the
occupant, the name of the dwelling unit or property unit or property, and/or
its location. Such freestanding signs shall not exceed two feet in height.
   (2)   Multifamily building identification. One or more building-mounted
signs, not exceeding four square feet per building, shall be permitted for the
purpose of identifying a multifamily building. The language on such signs shall
be for identification purposes only, not including any message of a commercial
nature.
   (3)   Home occupations. Signs for the purpose of identifying home
occupations shall be prohibited.
   (4)   Decorative flags. One wall-mounted decorative flag, not to exceed ten
square feet in area, shall be allowed for a dwelling unit. Such flag shall not
indicate the name or logo of a business or home occupation, nor a written
message pertaining to a business or home occupation.
   (5)   Subdivision or project identification. Freestanding ground-mounted
signs, with a maximum area of 24 square feet, shall be permitted for the
identification of a subdivision, apartment or condominium complex, planned
development, and each multi-family site contained within a planned unit
development, if located at the entrance to the project, on project property. No
more than one sign shall be permitted at each entrance (a maximum of two per
project). If such signs are "double-faced", the sign shall be limited to 15
square feet per face. The maximum height for these type signs shall be five
feet. A permit is required for project identification signs.
   (6)   Additional regulations for signs allowed by this section.
      a.   Unless otherwise indicated, freestanding signs shall have a maximum
height of five feet.
      b.   No sign shall project beyond the property line or be located on or
project over a private or village right-of-way, except that subdivision or
project identification signs may be allowed within such area if approved by the
village manager, upon a determination that the location of such sign does not
interfere with utilization of the right-of-way (functional or visual), and upon
a further finding that the signs must be maintained by a property owner's
association or the property owner. Authorization of the property owner to use
the property must be provided.
      c.   All signs shall be nonilluminated, unless otherwise specified.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. VI, § 2, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2005-011, 7-15-2005; Ord. No.
2014-0603, 7-25- 2014; Ord. No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-403. Sign regulations for commercial and not-for-profit uses.
   The following signs shall require a sign permit unless otherwise indicated:
   (1)   Single business on a single lot.
      a.   Type of signs permitted: building-mounted and door.
      b.   Number of signs permitted: one building-mounted, one door. For
buildings fronting on more than one public street, and having more than one
public entrance, each frontage with a public entrance shall be considered
separately when calculating building-mounted or door sign area. Such buildings
may be allowed a maximum of two building-mounted signs and a maximum of two
door signs.
      c.   Maximum sign area: nine square feet - building mounted; two square
feet - door.
   (2)   Two or more businesses in the same building, or on the same lot or on
adjoining properties under the same ownership, and having shared parking lots
and/or driveways.
      a.   Type of signs permitted: building-mounted and door.
      b.   Number of signs permitted: one building-mounted signs and one door
sign for each business with a separate main exterior public entrance. Where two
or more businesses share a main exterior public entrance, one building-mounted
sign and one door sign shall be permitted to be shared by the businesses
located therein. Where one or more business has a second entrance used as a
public entrance from an adjacent parking lot, public street or driveway, one
additional building-mounted sign and one door sign may be placed at the second
entrance.
      c.   Maximum sign area: nine square feet per sign - building-mounted; two
square feet per sign - door.
   (3)   Commercial subdivision or commercial designed complex project
identification sign. Freestanding ground-mounted signs, with a maximum area of
24 square feet shall be permitted for the identification of a commercial
subdivision or commercial designed complex, if located at the entrance to the
project. No more than one sign shall be permitted at each entrance (a maximum
of two per project). If such signs are double-faced, the sign shall be limited
to 15 square feet per face. The maximum height for these type signs shall be
five feet. A permit is required for project identification signs.
   (4)   Not-for-profit business/tax exempt business.
      a.   Type of signs permitted: building-mounted and bulletin boards.
      b.   Number of signs permitted: one building mounted, one bulletin board.
      c.   Maximum sign area: nine square feet--building mounted; 20 square
feet--bulletin board (may be freestanding).
      d.   Up to four off-premises signs shall be permitted weekly to promote
fund raising events. Signs are to be wood framed with a maximum area of five
square feet. Signs are permitted 48 hours prior to the fundraising event and
must be removed the day of the event.
   (5)   Additional regulations for signs allowed by this section.
      a.   Unless otherwise indicated, freestanding signs shall have a maximum
height of five feet.
      b.   No sign shall project beyond the property line or be located on or
project over a private or village right-of-way, except that signs for not-for-
profit uses may be allowed within such area if approved by the village manager,
upon a determination that the location of such sign does not interfere with
utilization of the right-of-way (functional or visual), and upon a further
finding that the signs must be maintained by the nonprofit entity responsible
for the sign.
   (6)   Additional regulations for sandwich board signs.
      a.   Notwithstanding any other provisions contained within this article,
sandwich board signs shall be allowed only in zoning districts that are zoned
for commercial use pursuant to section
32-121, et seq.
      b.   Number of signs allowed: one sandwich board sign per business.
Except that in cases of commercial buildings that have a single public entrance
used by multiple tenants, one sandwich board sign shall be allowed to be shared
by the businesses located therein.
      c.   Placement of signs: sandwich board signs may be placed on a sidewalk
or other pedestrian walkway directly in front of the associated business
establishment. A minimum of five feet of passage must be maintained between the
public right-of-way of any street and the sign. In all instances, a sandwich
board sign must be placed so as not to interfere with or obstruct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic. Sandwich board signs may not be anchored to the sidewalk, or
attached or chained to poles, newspaper vending boxes, or other structures or
appurtenances. However, in the interest of public safety sandwich board signs
may be temporarily weighted down and must be removed in high winds.
      d.   Size: Sandwich board signs shall not exceed two linear feet in width
and three linear feet in height on either of the two sides of the sign. Maximum
display area for a sandwich board sign is 12 square feet.
      e.   Display hours: Sandwich board signs shall be displayed in front of a
business establishment only during the hours that the business is open and only
while an employee is present on the premises. Sandwich board signs must be
removed at the end of the business day or when no employee is present on the
premises, such as during a lunch break where the business is closed.
      f.   No permit required: Sandwich board signs that comply with this
section shall not require a permit; however, in the interest of public safety,
sandwich board signs that are found not to comply with this section or which
present an immediate danger to the public safety may be removed by the Village.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. VI, § 3, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord.
No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-404. Supplemental sign regulations.
   The following regulations shall apply for all signs, unless specified
otherwise in this article:
   (1)   All permanent or off-premises signs must be made or constructed of
wood or other semipermanent materials.
   (2)   All signs shall be set back a minimum of five feet from the property
line or ten feet from the edge of the road surface, whichever is greater. This
provision shall not apply to traffic signs. Bollard caps, placed on existing
street address bollards, located within the street right-of-ways are exempt
from this requirement.
   (3)   Traffic signs for private streets shall be allowed in rights-of-way,
with appropriate setbacks from roadway surfaces to promote public safety as
determined by the village manager.
   (4)   Signs, other than those specified in this article as permitted, shall
be considered prohibited signs.
   (5)   All signs shall be nonilluminated, unless otherwise specified.
   (6)   Notwithstanding any other provisions contained within this article, in
multifamily developments and nonresidential developments where various uses or
occupants are subject to legally enforceable restrictions imposed by covenant
or lease the planning board may approve project signage guidelines, if the
guidelines are consistent with the intent of this article, and promotes
creative and attractive signage, constructed in accordance with a uniform plan
of control and approval, so that neither aesthetics nor maintenance standards
embodied by this article are compromised.
   (7)   Notwithstanding any other provisions contained within this article,
the following locations shall be required to comply with master signage plans
reviewed and adopted by the planning board to promote creative and attractive
signage, constructed in accordance with a uniform plan of control and approval,
so that neither aesthetics nor maintenance standards embodied by this article
are compromised:
      a.   Merchant's Row;
      b.   The Bald Head Island Club;
      c.   The Shoals Club.
   (8)   Temporary booths set up during special events may display commercial
logos or advertising. Nonpermanent signs erected for special events, pursuant
to section 32-401(1)b, may display commercial logos or advertising on a sign
which also advertises the name, time, place, and information concerning any
such special event.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. VI, § 4, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord.
No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
Sec. 32-405. Hardship cases.
   Whenever the location, topography or configuration of any lot on which any
permitted use is conducted is such as will cause a hardship by the limitations
placed on the signs permitted by this article due to sight distances, existing
vegetation, location of buildings on adjacent lots and/or the topography of the
parcel, the planning board may, after an evidentiary hearing, grant a
modification to these regulations. A modification may be approved if it is
found that:
   (1)   It is designed, constructed and operated to adequately safeguard the
health, safety and welfare of the occupants of the adjoining and surrounding
property;
   (2)   It does not unreasonably impair an adequate supply of light and air to
adjacent property;
   (3)   It does not increase public danger from fire or otherwise unreasonably
restrict public safety; and
   (4)   It does not impair the established property values in surrounding
areas.
(Ord. No. 60A, art. VI, § 5, 11-13-1999; Ord. No. 2014-0603, 7-25-2014; Ord.
No. 2021-0607, § 1, 6-28-2021)
APPENDIX A
PERSONNEL*
*   Editors Note: The Personnel Policy was removed from this appendix during
the codification of Supplement No. 5, January, 2012, by request of the village.
   Cross References: Administration,
ch. 2.
   State Law References: Personnel generally in municipalities, G.S. 160A-162
et seq.; authority to adopt personnel rules, G.S. 160A-164.
APPENDIX B
GRANT CRITERIA AND PROCEDURES FOR LOCAL IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT PROGRAMS
UNDER THE COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT ACT*
*   Editors Note: herein are the latest grant criteria and procedures for local
implementation and enforcement programs under the Coastal Area Management Act
being G.S. 113A-100 et seq. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without
notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
   Cross References:
ch. 2.
Section .0100 - Purpose
15A NCAC 7I .0101 Authority.
15A NCAC 7I .0102 Policy.
Section .0200 - Policy and Standards
15A NCAC 7I .0201 Value of coastal resources.
15A NCAC 7I .0202 Multi-unit programs.
15A NCAC 7I .0203 Eligibility: funding level.
15A NCAC 7I .0204 Local ordinance required.
15A NCAC 7I .0205 Accountability.
15A NCAC 7I .0206 Future funding.
Section .0300 - Application Procedures
15A NCAC 7I .0301 Application form.
15A NCAC 7I .0302 Application process.
15A NCAC 7I .0303 Reserved.
15A NCAC 7I .0304 Reserved.
15A NCAC 7I .0305 Grant administration.
15A NCAC 7I .0306 Grant conditions.
Section .0400 - Generally Applicable Standards
15A NCAC 7I .0401 Program costs.
15A NCAC 7I .0402 Ineligible activities.
15A NCAC 7I .0403 Computations.
15A NCAC 7I .0404 Designated local official.
15A NCAC 7I .0405 Permit projections.
15A NCAC 7I .0406 Application fees.
15A NCAC 7I .0407 Grant consistency.
15A NCAC 7I .0408 Grant administration.
Section .0500 - Local Implementation and Enforcement Plans
15A NCAC 7I .0501 Purpose.
15A NCAC 7I .0502 Definitions.
15A NCAC 7I.0503 Adoption.
15A NCAC 7I .0504 Record of hearings and comments.
15A NCAC 7I .0505 Content of plan.
15A NCAC 71 .0506 Allocation of authority.
15A NCAC 7I .0507 Local permit officer.
15A NCAC 7I .0508 Consideration of application by permit officer.
15A NCAC 7I .0509 Notice of civil action.
15A NCAC 7I .0510 Commission review and acceptance of the local plan.
15A NCAC 7I .0511 Commitment to adopt local management plan as ordinance.
Section .0600 - Amendment of Local Management Plan
15A NCAC 7I .0601 Notice and public hearing requirement.
15A NCAC 7I .0602 Coastal Resources Commission approval.
Section .0700 - Failure to Enforcement and Administer Plan
15A NCAC 7I .0701 Sanction for violations by the local permit-letting agency.
15A NCAC 7I .0702 When an action exceeds the local authority.
SECTION .0100 - PURPOSE
15A NCAC 7I .0101 Authority.
   These rules are promulgated pursuant to G.S. 113A-112 and G.S. 113A-124 by
the Secretary of the Department of Environment, Health, and Natural Resources
in his capacity as executive head of the North Carolina agency designated by
the Governor to administer federal funds granted by the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration under the Federal Coastal Zone Management Act.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977;
              Amended eff. May 1, 1990.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0102 Policy.
   The purpose of these criteria is to establish the means and procedures by
which local governments may request and receive the funds necessary to
implement locally developed Coastal Area Management Act implementation and
enforcement programs. These provisions are designed to ensure that no local
government will have to forego the assumption of permit-letting authority
because of inadequate local finances or to severely burden its local budget in
order to undertake a Coastal Area Management Act local implementation and
enforcement program. These provisions are designed to ensure that localities
will be treated uniformly yet equitably with the goal that two localities in
similar situations will be similarly treated.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977;
              Amended eff. August 1, 1978.
 
SECTION .0200 - POLICY AND STANDARDS
15A NCAC 7I .0201 Value of coastal resources.
   The Department of Natural Resources and Community Development and the
Coastal Resources Commission recognize the increased financial burden imposed
by Coastal Area Management Act implementation efforts, realize that the
protection of coastal lands and waters is beneficial to state and national
interests, and believe that the cost of coastal management should be shared by
all levels of government.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977;
              ARRC objection lodged March 15, 1990.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0202 Multi-unit programs.
   Implementation and enforcement programs sponsored by more than one local
government (multi-unit programs) are encouraged where such consolidations are
likely to operate more efficiently and effectively. Such consolidated programs
allow the employment of a person or persons who can spend a substantial
percentage of time in Coastal Area Management Act permit-letting activities and
thereby afford an opportunity to build expertise, operate more efficiently, and
foster the economic administration of the program.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124
              Eff. December 10, 1977.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0203 Eligibility: funding level.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977;
              Repealed eff. August 1, 1978.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0204 Local ordinance required.
   Each local government applying for an implementation and enforcement grant
shall have adopted local ordinance(s)necessary to give effect to the local
implementation and enforcement plan that has been approved by the Commission
for its jurisdiction.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0205 Accountability.
   In general, local governments that are subgrantees of federal and state
funds administered by the Department of Environment, Health, and Natural
Resources will be subject to accounting techniques and procedures similar to
those applicable to the Department of Environment, Health, and Natural
Resources as grantee of federal funds administered by the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration. More specifically, the requirements of General
Statutes and standards generally applicable to local governments, Federal
Management Circulars 74-4 and 74-7, and National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration administrative grants standards will be observed. These
standards and regulations are the same as those applicable to Coastal Area
Management Act land use planning grants.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977;
              Amended eff. May 1, 1990; May 20, 1980.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0206 Future funding.
   The award of a grant by the Department of Environment, Health, and Natural
Resources is in no way a commitment to award such grants in subsequent years or
to enter into grant amendments in the case of grant award.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977;
              Amended eff. May 1, 1990.
 
SECTION .0300 - APPLICATION PROCEDURES
15A NCAC 7I .0301 Application form.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977;
              Repealed eff. August 1, 1978.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0302 Application process.
   (a)   An application form is not required for local governments having
entered into previous agreements with the Department for reimbursement under
this Rule. Local governments without previous agreements are directed to
contact the Division of Coastal Management at P.O. Box 27687, Raleigh, North
Carolina 27611.
   (b)   The geographic jurisdiction will be the same as identified in the
local Implementation and Enforcement Program. Where two or more local
governments are combined for grant administration, a written statement to this
effect must be submitted to the Division of Coastal Management and signed by
the appropriate local officials.
   (c)   Based on the availability of state and/or federal funds, agreements
will be renewed on an annual basis. Currently, the grant year runs from July 1
through June 30, and local governments can expect to receive amendments to
their contracts after the end of each grant year updating the previous
agreements.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977;
              Amended eff. October 1, 1988; October 1, 1982; May 20, 1980.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0303 Reserved.
15A NCAC 7I .0304 Reserved.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977;
              Amended eff. October 1, 1982; August 1, 1978;
              Repealed eff. August l, 1988.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0305 Grant administration.
   (a)   Reimbursement will be made quarterly upon submittal of composite
records after the last day of the last month of the relevant quarter. Composite
records will include each applicant's name, the date of the application, the
date of public notice, the relevant AEC type, the permit decision, the decision
date and any vouchers for training expenses, special projects or other
documents as required by the contract between the locality and the Department
of Environment, Health, and Natural Resources.
   (b)   Grant Contract. Prior to the disbursement of funds, the locality and
the Department will become parties to a contract.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124;
              Eff. August 1, 1978;
              Amended eff. May 1, 1990; November 1, 1984; October 1, 1982; May
              20, 1980.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0306 Grant conditions.
   (a)   All contracts shall provide notice of any conditions which affect the
quarterly grant payments.
   (b)   At a minimum, the following conditions will apply:
      (1)   Per permit reimbursements will only be made after certification is
received by the secretary (from the local permit officer) that all CAMA
standards have been observed when the permitted activity is completed;
      (2)   Final quarterly payment for a given fiscal year will be withheld
pending receipt by the secretary of an annual permit summary, said summary to
consist of a description of all permits processed in the locality by the
applicant's name, address, date of application, AEC type, permit decision, and
decision date;
      (3)   Quarterly verification from the relevant field office/CAMA field
consultant specified in the contract that the following permit information has
been received for each permit processed in the quarter:
         (A)   One copy of the permit application mailed to the appropriate
field consultant or field office of the Division of Coastal Management within
five working days of acceptance by the local government;
         (B)   One copy of the legal notice associated with the application,
         (C)   One copy of the final decision and any associated permit
conditions;
      (4)   Approval of any special project necessitates compliance with
conditions deemed necessary by the secretary to ensure compliance with the
standards and policies of this subchapter.
   (c)   No quarterly payment will be made until all applicable grant
conditions are met. Local governments not meeting the timetable specified in
subparagraph (b)(3) of this Rule will not be reimbursed for the permits in
question.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113.4-124;
              Eff. May 20, 1980;
              Amended eff. May 1, 1990; June 12, 1981.
 
SECTION .0400 - GENERALLY APPLICABLE STANDARDS
15A NCAC 7I .0401 Program costs.
   (a)   Costs associated with the management of a local Implementation and
Enforcement Program will be recovered on a per permit basis established by the
Secretary unless specified elsewhere in this Rule.
   (b)   The per permit reimbursement rate has been set in consideration of
local costs, such as salaries, office supplies, copying, mailing and telephone
use, and funds made available to the Division of Coastal Management. These
rates are set as follows:
      (1)   All county permit-letting authorities are eligible to receive
seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each processedpermit.
      (2)   All municipal permit-letting authorities are eligible to receive
fifty-five dollars ($55.00) for each processed permit.
      (3)   For multi-unit programs involving a county and a municipality, the
higher county rate applies, however, programs involving two or more
municipalities will use the municipal rate.
      (4)   Mandatory follow-up inspections are required when the permitted
activity is completed, and such inspections will be documented on a form
specified by the Secretary; the follow-up inspection fee received by all local
governments is set at forty dollars ($40.00).
   (c)   Funds for field and office equipment have been made available for the
first four years of the permit program. Due to funding limitation, no further
funds will be allocated for the purpose.
   (d)   Training costs for Local Permit Officers (LPOs) at the Department of
Environment, Health, and Natural Resources annual training session are limited
to a maximum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00)/LPO upon submittal of
proper receipts. No funds will be provided for attendance at CRC meetings.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113.4-112; 113.4-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977;
              Amended eff. May 1, 1990; October 1, 1982; May 20,1980; August 1,
              1978.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0402 Ineligible activities.
   (a)   Costs not associated with CAMA permit letting are not eligible for
reimbursement.
   (b)   The following costs are presumed not to be eligible:
      (1)   The costs of local appeal;
      (2)   Attorneys' fees;
      (3)   Bookkeeping or accountant costs;
      (4)   Fines and penalties.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977;
              Amended eff. August l, 1978.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0403 Computations.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977;
              Repealed eff. August 1, 1978.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0404 Designated local official.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977;
              Amended eff. August 1, 1978;
              Repealed eff. November 1, 1984.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0405 Permit projections.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977;
              Amended eff. August 1, 1978;
              Repealed eff. October 1, 1982.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0406 Application fees.
   The application fees collected by the locality shall be used only to defray
the administrative costs associated with processing a CAMA application.
Deficits resulting from administrative costs exceeding amounts received from
application fees shall be recovered from per permit reimbursements. The current
application fee is now twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-119; 113A-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977;
              Amended eff. October 1, 1982; May 20, 1980; August 1, 1978.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0407 Grant consistency.
   The application shall be consistent with the local implementation and
enforcement plan adopted by the locality and approved by the Coastal Resources
Commission.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0408 Grant administration.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-112; 113A-124;
              Eff. December 10, 1977;
              Amended eff. October 1, 1982; May 20, 1980; August 1, 1978;
              Repealed eff. November 1, 1984.
 
SECTION .0500 - LOCAL IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT PLANS
15A NCAC 7I .0501 Purpose.
   The Coastal Area Management Act authorizes, but does not require, a city or
county in the coastal area to act as a permit-letting agency for minor
development permits in areas of environmental concern. These Rules establish
the criteria for preparation of local implementation and enforcement plans by
local governments. Before a local government can become a permit-letting
agency, a plan consistent with these criteria must be submitted to the Coastal
Resources Commission for approval. These criteria are provided to assist local
government in:
      (1)   Establishing procedures to be followed in developing local
implementation and enforcement programs;
      (2)   Establishing the scope and coverage of said programs;
      (3)   Establishing minimum standards to be prescribed in said programs;
      (4)   Establishing staffing requirements of permit-letting agencies;
      (5)   Establishing permit-letting procedures;
      (6)   Establishing priorities of regional and statewide concern;
      (7)   Establishing that the program is consistent with the land use plan.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-117; 113A-124(c);
              Eff. November 1, 1984;
              Amended eff. December 1, 1991.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0502 Definitions.
   (a)   All definitions set out in G.S. 113A-100 through 128 apply herein.
   (b)   The following definitions apply whenever these words appear in this
section:
      (1)   City. The word "city" means any of the incorporated cities within
the 20 coastal counties.
      (2)   County. The word "county" means any one of the 20 counties in the
coastal area.
      (3)   Land Use Plan. The term "land use plan" refers to the plan prepared
by local government for submission to the Coastal Resources Commission pursuant
to Part 2 of the Coastal Area Management Act.
      (4)   Local Management Program. The term "local management program" means
the local implementation and enforcement program of a coastal city or county
that has expressed an intention (as described in G.S. 113A-117) to administer a
permit program for minor development in areas of environmental concern located
within such county or city.
      (5)   Local Permit Officer. The term "local permit officer" refers to the
locally designated official who will administer and enforce the minor
development permit program in areas of environmental concern and all part of
the land-use plan which the local government may wish to enforce over the
entire planning area.
      (6)   Management Plan (Plan). The term "management plan" refers to the
written description of the management program which must be submitted to the
Coastal Resources Commission.
      (7)   Secretary. The word "Secretary" refers to the Secretary of
Environment, Health, and Natural Resources.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-116; 113A-117; 113A-124(c);
              Eff. November 1, 1984;
              Amended eff. May 1, 1990.
 
15A NCAC 7I.0503 Adoption.
   Each local permit-letting agency submitting a letter of intent before July
1, 1976 must adopt a management plan before July 1, 1977. A local permit-
letting agency submitting a letter of intent later than two years after July 1,
1974, must adopt a management plan within the time stated by the Commission
upon receipt of a letter of intent.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-116; 113A-117(b);
              Eff. November 1, 1984.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0504 Record of hearings and comments.
   Each permit-letting agency must compile and maintain a complete record of
the public hearing on its proposed management plan and comments received
pursuant to G.S. 113A-117. The record of the public hearing, written comment,
and any documentation filed with the local permit-letting agency as to the
proposed management plan must:
      (1)   Consist of a written account from the minutes or transcribed from
an electronic recording, and all written documents;
      (2)   Remain open for 15 days after the hearing;
      (3)   Be available to the Commission upon request.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-117(b); 113A-124(c)(5);
              Eff. November 1, 1984.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0505 Content of plan.
   (a)   The plan for the local implementation and enforcement program shall
include the following elements:
      (1)   The geographic extent of jurisdiction of the local management
program;
      (2)   A description of the criteria to be used in choosing the permit
officer;
      (3)   Methods of permit processing and coordinating procedures;
      (4)   Methods for identifying and taking into account projects and
impacts of regional, state and national concern;
      (5)   A copy of all existing or proposed local ordinances relating to
zoning and land use in areas of environmental concern or any other relevant
subject in order that the Commission may determine:
         (A)   Whether there is sufficient authority to enforce the program
described in the local management plan;
         (B)   Whether any local ordinances are inconsistent with the approved
land use plan. No plan will be approved for any county or city if the
Commission determines either that the local government unit lacks sufficient
authority to enforce the program or that the local government unit has an
ordinance or ordinances inconsistent with its land use plan.
   (b)   The plan may also include the following elements for the remainder of
the zoning jurisdiction of the county or city:
      (1)   A copy of all local ordinances relating to land use or any other
subject relevant to land use;
      (2)   Procedures for assuring consistency of governmental actions with
the approved land use plan for the entire jurisdiction.
   (c)   The remaining rules within this section provide criteria which shall
act as guidelines for cities and counties in drafting the local management plan
describing their local management program.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-117; 113A-124(c);
              Eff. November 1, 1984.
 
15A NCAC 71 .0506 Allocation of authority.
   (a)   A county may establish permit-letting authority for any city or part
thereof that lies within said county if such city does not submit a letter of
intent to the Commission or states to the Commission its intent not to become a
local permit-letting agency.
   (b)   A city management plan shall be limited to its corporate boundaries
and to any extra-territorial zoning area over which it may have established
control at the time it requested authority to act as a permit-letting agency or
over which it later gains control.
   (c)   A county implementation and enforcement plan shall be limited to areas
not covered by any city plans unless the county acts as the permit-letting
agency for a city or cities. A county may begin such duties only after the
county's implementation and enforcement plan has been amended to include such
area.
   (d)   In any city in which neither the city nor the county elects to become
the permit-letting agency, the secretary will have that duty.
   (e)   Only the Department of Environment, Health, and Natural Resources may
issue a permit for a major development.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-117(b); 113A-124(c)(5); Eff. November 1,
              1984;
              Amended eff. May 1, 1990.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0507 Local permit officer.
   (a)   The local plan shall designate an existing official or create a new
position for an official who shall receive, review and take all appropriate
action as to applications for minor development permits. The locality shall
inform the Department of all permit officers who will implement or enforce the
local management plan.
   (b)   The plan shall specify the job requirements as mandated by these
criteria.
   (c)   The permit officer shall attend the department's training course
within one year of his appointment. The officer shall also attend those regular
regional work sessions held by the Department to inform and coordinate the
activities of the local permit officers in each region.
   (d)   In order to continue to process permits in a timely fashion and to
avoid the issuance of passive grants, eligible permit-letting agencies shall
immediately notify the Commission in writing when the local permit officer
resigns or is for any reason unable to perform his or her duties.
   (e)   This notice shall indicate the method or methods by which the locality
will continue to process permits in a thorough and timely fashion. Such methods
can include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The appointment of a temporary local permit officer (LPO) until
such time as a permanent replacement is selected.
      (2)   The appointment of one or more LPO(s).
      (3)   Evidence that an agreement exists between the locality and another
appropriate agency for the assumption of the permit program.
      (4)   A formal request that the secretary assume the permit function for
the locality.
   (f)   From date of receipt and acceptance of application and/or decision on
an application, the local permit officer must within five workings days mail
and/or submit copies of same to the appropriate field consultant or the nearest
field office of the Division of Coastal Management.
   (g)   The permit officer shall, on a quarterly basis, summarize for the
commission the receipt and disposition of all permit applications for the
immediately preceding quarter.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-121(b); 113A-117; 113A-124;
              Eff. November 1, 1984;
              Amended eff. May 1, 1990.
 
   Cross References: and employees, §
2-61 et seq.
15A NCAC 7I .0508 Consideration of application by permit officer.
   (a)   The method of consideration of minor development permit requests by
the permit officer must be uniform in application and must be set out in
writing and available for public inspection. The permit officer shall use only
forms approved by the Commission in its handling of any minor development
permit application.
   (b)   The local management plan shall specify the procedures which will be
followed in the handling and consideration of all applications for a minor
development permit, including appropriate response to receipt of an application
for a major development permit.
   (c)   The permit officer shall maintain a record of all applications,
correspondence, public notices, responses from public notices, and a copy of
his final disposition for all permit applications whether issued or denied.
   (d)   The permit officer, in his handling of all minor development permit
applications, must use a numbering system which will be developed by the
Commission in consultation with local government.
   (e)   It is the policy of the Coastal Resources Commission to allow local
government the greatest flexibility in coordinating minor development permits
with all other local permits and approvals. The Commission requires, however,
that the plan eventually submitted state how this coordination will be
accomplished.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-124(c)(5);
              Eff. November 1, 1984.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0509 Notice of civil action.
   The Secretary of the Department of Environment, Health, and Natural
Resources and the Coastal Resources Commission shall be notified of any civil
action undertaken by or against the local permit officer under the Coastal Area
Management Act.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-117; 113A-126(b);
              Eff. November 1, 1984;
              Amended eff. May 1, 1990.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0510 Commission review and acceptance of the local plan.
   The local management plan adopted by any local permit-letting agency must be
submitted to the Commission for review. The Commission will evaluate the
proposed local management plan as required in G.S. 113A-117(c)and will assess
the plan in terms of the local land use plan, the CAMA Land Use Planning
Guidelines described in 15A NCAC 7B .0100, the Coastal Area Management Act and
these rules.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-117(c); 113A-124;
              Eff. November 1, 1984;
              Amended eff. October 1, 1988.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0511 Commitment to adopt local management plan as ordinance.
   The local governing body shall enter into a commitment to accept the local
management plan as part of the city or county code of ordinances within a
three-month period.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-117(c); 113A-124(c)(5);
              Eff. November 1, 1984.
 
SECTION .0600 - AMENDMENT OF LOCAL MANAGEMENT PLAN
15A NCAC 7I .0601 Notice and public hearing requirement.
   Amendment of the local management plan shall follow the notice and public
hearing requirements set forth in the Coastal Area Management Act and these
Rules pertaining to the adoption of the original program.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-117(b);
              Eff. November 1, 1984;
              Amended eff. December 1, 1991.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0602 Coastal Resources Commission approval.
   An amendment of a local plan shall be submitted to the Coastal Resources
Commission for approval in the same manner in which the original management
plan is submitted.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-124(c)(5);
              Eff. November 1, 1984.
 
SECTION .0700 - FAILURE TO ENFORCE AND ADMINISTER PLAN
15A NCAC 7I .0701 Sanction for violations by the local permit-letting agency.
   (a)   When the local permit-letting agency fails to administer or enforce
the local management plan submitted to the Commission and approved by it, the
Commission shall:
      (1)   Notify the local permit-letting agency in writing that it is in
violation of the provisions of its local management plan and specify the
grounds for such charges of violations;
      (2)   Inform the local permit-letting agency of specific deficiencies in
administration and enforcement;
      (3)   Inform the local permit-letting authority of its opportunity to
request a hearing before the Commission at which time it may make any
presentation or present any arguments relevant to the issue raised in the
Commission letter to the local agency. The Commission may at its sole
discretion hear from any other affected person at the hearing.
   (b)   If the conditions are not remedied or corrected within 90 days after
receipt of commission notification of such violation, the Commission shall
assume the duties of the local permit-letting agency until the local permit-
letting agency indicates to the Commission in writing its willingness and/or
ability to perform in conformance with its approved local management plan. Any
changes in circumstances affecting the agency's willingness and/or ability to
properly administer the local management plan also shall be substantiated in
writing to the Commission.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-117(d); 113A-124;
              Eff. November 1, 1984.
 
15A NCAC 7I .0702 When an action exceeds the local authority.
   When the local permit-letting agency exceeds the scope and extent of its
authority, which is limited to consideration of applications proposing minor
development as defined in the Coastal Area Management Act, that action shall be
null, void and of no effect. The determinations of the Commission shall be
binding on the local permit-letting agency as to questions of such
jurisdiction.
 
History Note: Authority G.S. 113A-118(e); 113A-120(c); 113A-124(c)(5);
              Eff. November 1, 1984.
 
APPENDIX C
VILLAGE OF BALD HEAD ISLAND COMMERCIAL FILMING GUIDELINES, PERMIT APPLICATION
AND FEE SCHEDULE
Note: To view Appendix C in PDF, please click here
I.   Permit required.
   A permit is required for any commercial filming activity taking place within
the Village of Bald Head Island, whether on public or private property.
II.   Pre-production meeting required.
   Prior to submitting a permit application, a pre-production meeting is
required between the village film liaison and the location manager. A list of
all anticipated locations with tentative dates and an insurance certificate are
required prior to the pre-production meeting. All applicants are required to
maintain public liability insurance policies for filming on location within the
village. The following policy amounts are required:
   •   General Liability Insurance   $1,000,000
   •   Automobile Liability   $1,000,000
   •   Worker’s Compensation
      and Employer’s Liability   $1,000,000
   No permit applications will be accepted until the pre-production meeting has
taken place.
   Additionally, the applicant must pay the applicable non-refundable
application fee as set forth in the current fee schedule in place at the time
when the applicant submits a permit application, no portion of which will be
returned under any circumstances. Additionally, upon submitting an application,
the applicant will be required to provide the village a refundable performance
bond to secure performance of all requirements and obligations herein, as set
forth in the current fee schedule in place at the time when the applicant
submits a permit application. The fee schedule may be amended from time to time
by resolution of the village council. The refundable performance bond may be
adjusted by the village manager, taking into account the scope of the project
and the possible or actual impact of the project on the village.
III.    Application.
   Following the pre-production meeting, an application must be submitted on
the village's standard form shall be in effect at the time and presented to the
village film liaison for review no later than ten working days prior to the
proposed project start date.
IV.   Required Notice.
   The applicant shall notify all businesses and property owners which may be
affected by the filming activity no later than seven days prior to the proposed
project start date. The notification shall include the location and duration of
the proposed filming activities, a copy of the permit application, a cover
letter from the applicant including contact information for the applicant, and
specifics regarding lights, noise, and special effects. The businesses and
property owners which must be notified shall be determined by the village film
liaison accounting for the impact of the planned activity. A proposed list of
those persons or businesses requiring notification for review must be forwarded
to the village film liaison with the permit application. The list shall include
the name and address of the businesses and property owners. Following the
issuance of the notification, the applicant must provide the village film
liaison with written confirmation that such notice was given.
   Business and property owners shall have three days from the receipt of the
notice to contact the village film liaison regarding any objections or concerns
with the proposed film project. The applicant shall cooperate and assist the
village film liaison in addressing any meritorious objections or concerns.
   The village may deny or revoke permits where the applicant fails to comply
with the notice requirements contained herein.
V.   Restrictions.
   Bald Head Island generally discourages filming during high tourist
occupancy. The village manager may restrict filming in streets, neighborhoods,
parks, or specific districts. Additionally, the village may impose such other
conditions upon a permit as shall be deemed necessary. Applicants are urged to
confer with the village film liaison before beginning location scouting. In the
event of natural or civil disasters, the village may cancel or suspend all
village issued commercial filming permits. In the event that evacuation of a
street, neighborhood, or district is deemed necessary by the village, all
outstanding permits for the affected area shall be indefinitely suspended. Such
suspensions shall be lifted after the state of emergency proclamation or other
evacuation order has been lifted, and following a safety evaluation conducted
by the village, the applicant, and any applicable utility company.
VI.   Indemnification.
   The applicant shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the village, its
officers, agents, and employees from and against all claims, suits, actions,
damages, liability, costs and expenses (including but not limited to its
attorney's fees and expenses), and expenses for bodily or personal injury, loss
of life or property or damage or other legal claim whatsoever arising from, or
out of, any matter or occurrence concerning filming in the Village of Bald Head
Island.
VII.   Traffic Control.
   Approval must be obtained from the village manager and the director of
public safety prior to any film activity that would disrupt the normal flow of
traffic on any village street. If needed, traffic control must be handled by
the village's public safety officers, who shall be hired by the applicant at
the applicant's sole expense.
   Request for street closure or diverting of traffic should be made seven days
prior to the start of activity to allow for the planning of alternative routes
and proper signage. Such requests must be sent to the village manager and the
director of public safety. All filming activity that involves the holding,
delaying, or re-routing of traffic must be accompanied by at least one public
safety officer.
VIII.   Explosives.
      Explosives, pyrotechnics, fire, or smoke-making machines shall not be
used unless specifically approved by the village manager and the director of
public safety.
IX.   Special Effects Hours.
   Special effects involving sirens, gunshots, speeding cars, or other loud
noises are limited to the hours between 8:00 am to 11:00 pm.
X.   Lighting.
   Lighting for filming both during the day and at night, shall be oriented
away from neighboring property whenever possible. Lighting at night during
turtle nesting season, July through September, shall be shielded so as not to
disturb turtle nesting.
XI.   Use of Public Right-of-Way.
   Residents or business owners may not charge the applicant for the use of the
public right-of-way in front of their homes or businesses, nor prohibit its
use.
XII.   Removal of Vegetation.
   Removal, cutting or trimming of vegetation in the public right-of-way or on
village owned lands shall be prohibited unless specifically approved by the
Village manager and any applicable home owner's association.
XIII.   Filming on Private Property.
   No filming shall take place on private property without the written consent
of the property owner.
XIV.   Garbage Assistance.
   Whenever the project blocks or holds traffic on streets which are scheduled
for garbage pickup, applicant shall move all trash containers to a location
that is accessible to the sanitation vehicles. After the trash containers have
been emptied, they shall be returned to their property owners by the applicant.
XV.   Parking and Equipment.
   All equipment and support vehicles not in immediate use shall be parked so
as not to cause any interference to pedestrians or vehicular traffic, or to
impede safe lines of vision at intersections. Vehicles or equipment used during
the project must not block fire hydrants, driveways, or other access ways. No
internal combustion engine ("ICE") vehicles shall be brought on Island roads
without first obtaining the requisite ICE permits.
XVI.   Areas of Environmental Concern.
   Whenever a film set contains dirt, sod, plants, petroleum products, or other
hazardous materials and is located near an environmentally sensitive area, the
production company shall take such measures as deemed necessary to insure that
such materials do not encroach, seep, or intrude into the environmentally
sensitive area. There shall be no disturbance of primary dunes, beach
vegetation, or beach groins. Driving motor vehicles upon the beach is
prohibited pursuant to Village Ordinance Section 28-33.
XVII.   Daily Clean-Up.
   At the end of each day of shooting, the production company will clean and
restore the site location, including public and private lands, to a clean and
orderly condition. The village may grant an exception for filming activities
that are more than one day in duration.
XVIII.   Removal of Sets.
   All sets, piling, fences, building materials, debris, equipment, and any
other materials brought in or built by the applicant shall be removed within
seven days after conclusion of filming. All public property shall be returned
to its original condition.
XIX.   Expenses.
   The production company shall be responsible to the village and shall
reimburse the village for any expenses, including employee overtime, which are
directly attributable to the project.
XX.   Penalties.
   Failure to comply with the guidelines and conditions set forth herein, or
the requirements of the specific permit may result in fines or suspension,
modification or termination of any or all permits issued pursuant to Village
Ordinance Section 32-255. The applicant shall be responsible to the village for
any costs or expenses incurred as a result of the production company's or other
person's failure to follow the ordinance or commercial filming guidelines.
XXI.   Fees.
   Application fees and fees for the use of village staff, equipment, or
emergency apparatus shall be subject to the current fee schedule in place at
time when the applicant submits a permit application. In addition, the village
may charge the applicant a fee for any street closures, barricades, or for
permitting the use of explosives or fireworks during filming.
XXII.   Duration, suspension, modification, and termination of permits.
   The village shall set effective dates during which a commercial film permit
is valid. A permit shall expire at the end of those effective dates. Prior to
or during the effective dates, the village may suspend, modify, or terminate
any permit in the interest of public safety, environmental protection, or where
filming activities cause a nuisance to village residents or property owners or
impede the operation of government activity.
(Ord. No. 2012-0301, 3-16-12; Res. No. 2012-0401, 4-20-12; Ord. No. 2013-0501,
5-17- 2013)
   VILLAGE OF BALD HEAD ISLAND COMMERCIAL FILMING FEE SCHEDULE
   1.   Non-refundable application fee
         a.   $1,500.00 (Application fee will not be refunded whether project
occurs, application is withdrawn, or for any other reason)
   2.   Refundable performance bond
         a.   $10,000.00
   3.   Fee for use of Village staff
         a.   [$30 per hour per employee - 4 hour minium]
   4.   Fee for use of Village equipment (including Public Safety vehicles)
         a.   [$40 for 4 hours or $100 per day, whichever is less]
   5.   Fee for use of Emergency Apparatus
         a.   [$200 per hour for Village fire truck or EMS vehicles]
         b.   [Fees for use of other emergency apparatus shall be determined on
a case-by-case basis in the Village Manager or his designee's sole discretion]
   6.   Street closure fee
         a.   [$300 per location]
   7.   Barricade fee
         a.   [$100 per location]
   8.   Explosive/fireworks fee
         a.   [$200 per day - Emergency Apparatus and Public Safety Officers
and Staff may be required on site at the Village Manager or Director of Public
Safety’s discretion. The Applicant shall be required to pay the applicable fees
for any such attendance separate from the Explosive/fireworks fee]
(Ord. No. 2012-0301, 3-16-12; Res. No. 2012-0401, 4-20-12; Ord. No. 2013-0501,
5-17-2013)
Commercial Filming Permit Application
Applicant/Production Company:   
Name of Film:    
Contact Person:    
Production Address:    
City:                               State:                      Zip:    
Office Phone No.:                            Mobile Phone:    
Fax No. :
                                                                                 Email
Address:    
Type of Filming (check all that apply):
Feature Film                 TV Movie                    TV Series
                Commercial                 Other             
Location (name and address):    
Film Date:                                  Hours:    
Prep/wrap outside listed time?   Yes          No          (See page 2,
“Additional Information”.)
In case of inclement weather or other emergency, alternate date will be:    
Describe scene:    
            
            
Number in Cast:                Number in Crew:                   Number of
Extras:          
Equipment Parking:    
            
Base Camp:    
Crew Parking:    
Extras Parking:    
Extras Holding:    
Catering (including any vehicle parking):    
Other On-Street Parking:    
            
Street Closure Requested: If yes, where? (Please be as specific as possible.)*:
   
            
*Public Safety Officers are required for all street closures.
Intermittent Traffic Control (ITC) and/or Pedestrian Traffic Control (PTC)
requested? If yes, where?
(Please be specific as possible.)*    
            
*Intermittent Traffic Control (ITC) may only be done in 2-3 minute intervals.
Public Safety Officers:    # needed:          Hours needed:           a.m./p.m.
to           a.m./p.m.
Public Safety Cars:      # needed:          Hours needed:           a.m./p.m.
to           a.m./p.m.
Special Equipment and Placement (generators, condors, etc.):    
            
Special Effects (stunts, animals, gunfire, noise, etc.):    
            
Special Requests (barricades, alteration to Village property, etc.)   
            
Number of Internal Combustion Engine Vehicles needed:    
*ICE Permit required fro each ICE vehicle.
Moving to another location upon completion?      Yes             No          
If yes, list location:    
Additional information (include any prep and wrap activities, times, parking):
   
            
By signing below, the Applicant certifies that all information herein is true
and accurate and, for valuable and sufficient consideration, agrees to
indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Village, its officers, agents, and
employees from and against all claims, suits, actions, damages, liability,
costs and expenses (including but not limited to its attorney’s fees and
expenses) for bodily or personal injury, loss of life or property or damage, or
other legal claim whatsoever arising from, or out of, any matter or occurrence
concerning filming any film project in the Village of Bald Head Island.
            
Signature   Date
            
Name   Title
(Ord. No. 2012-0301, 3-16-2012)
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
ORDINANCES
This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the village used in this Code.
Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the codification and any omitted
materials are not reflected in this table.
Ordinance Number Date Section Section this Code
Ordinance Date Section                           Section this Code
Number
          10-
200026    21-  2                                 28-59
          2000
          8-
29        17-  13.8                              32-298
          1991
          11-                                    30-31--
3         15-  1--6                              30-36
          1985
          1-                                     6-31--
2         27-  art. I, § 1-1--art. I, § 1-9    6-39
          1986
             art. II, § 2-1--art. II, § 2-7  6-61--
                                                 6-67
             art. III, § 3-1, art. III, § 3-26-81,
                                                 6-82
             art. III, § 3-4--art. III, § 3-16-83--
                                                 6-90
             art. IVI, § 4-1                  6-111
          1-
5         27-  1                                 14-121
          1986
             2(a), (b)                         14-123
             2(c)                              14-122
             3--6                              14-124--
                                                 14-127
          6-
6         27-  1, 2                              14-101
          1986
          7-                                     4-31--
15        24-  1--4                              4-34
          1987
          10-                                    8-31--
18        15-  1--13                             8-43
          1988
          12-
20        3-   1--3                              4-3
          1988
          5-                                     14-31--
31        18-  art. 1, § A--art. 1, § D        14-34
          1991
             art. 2                            14-35
             art. 3, § A--art. 3, § H        14-36--
                                                 14-43
             art. 4, § A--art. 4, § E        14-61--
                                                 14-65
             art. 5, § A, art. 5, § B        14-81,
                                                 14-82
             art. 5, § D, art. 5, § E        14-83,
                                                 14-84
          8-                                     32-1--
29        17-  1.1--1.4                          32-4
          1991
             2.1                               32-11
             3.1--3.5                          32-41--
                                                 32-45
                                                 32-61,
             4.1--4.6                          32-63--
                                                 32-66
             5.1--5.5                          32-81--
                                                 32-85
             6.1--6.5                          32-101--
                                                 32-105
             7.1--7.6                          32-5--
                                                 32-10
             8.1--8.8                          32-121--
                                                 32-128
             9.1--9.4                          32-161--
                                                 32-164
             10.1--10.4                        32-191
             11.1--11.3                        32-221
             12.1--12.4                        32-251--
                                                 32-254
             13.1--13.7                        32-291--
                                                 32-297
             13.9--13.17                       32-299--
                                                 32-307
          8-                                     24-31--
30        17-  1--3                              24-33
          1991
             5--7                              24-34--
                                                 24-36
          11-                                    12-53--
31        16-  1--4                              12-56
          1991
             5                                 12-51
             6                                 12-57
             7                                 12-52
          9-
34        19-  1                                 16-51
          1992
             2                                 16-53
          9-                                     10-51--
37        18-  1--3                              10-53
          1993
             6--9                              10-56--
                                                 10-59
             11                                10-61
          6-                                     6-161--
40        18-  1--5                              6-165
          1994
          1-
45        27-  1                                 16-101
          1996
          3-
44        16-  2                                 24-71
          1996
             3--7                              24-73--
                                                 24-77
          6-                                     10-81--
42        15-  1--6                              10-86
          1996
          10-
48        12-  2, 3                              10-162
          1996
             4                                 10-163
          4-
49        19-  1                                 16-102
          1997
          11-
52        15-  art. I                            18-31
          1997
             art. II—IV                      18-32--
                                                 18-34
             art. V                            18-36
             art. VI                           18-35
          2-
21A       20-  1                                 20-1
          1998
          2-
53        20-  1--4                              2-131
          1998
          2-                                     2-151--
54        20-  1--6                              2-156
          1998
          4-
23        17-  2--4                              4-2
          1998
          7-                                     20-31--
17A       13-  I--X                              20-40
          1998
          7-                                     26-1--
8A        17-  art. I, §§ I—V                26-5
          1998
             art. II, §§ I—III             26-6--
                                                 26-8
             art. III, §§ I—IV             26-9--
                                                 26-12
             art. III, §§ VI, VII            26-13,
                                                 26-14
             art. IV, §§ I—III             26-51--
                                                 26-53
             art. V, §§ I, II                26-91,
                                                 26-92
             art. VI, § I                     26-121
                                              26-124
             art. VI, §§ II, III             26-122,
                                                 26-123
             art. VII, §§ I—IV             26-161--
                                                 26-164
             art. VIII, § I                   26-201
             art. VIII, § I(A)                26-202
          11-                                    32-331--
60A       13-  art. I, §§ 1—4                32-334
          1999
             art. II, § 1                     32-336
             art. II, § 2                     32-336
             art. II, § 3                     32-338
             art. III, § 1                    32-337
             art. III, § 2                    32-339
             art. III, § 2.1                  32-340
             art. III, § 2.2                  32-341
             art. III, §§ 4--6               32-342--
                                                 32-344
             art. IV, §§ 1--4                32-361--
                                                 32-364
             art. V, §§ 1--4                 32-381--
                                                 32-384
             art. VI, §§ 1--5                32-401--
                                                 32-405
          3-
Ord. of   18-  32-11                             32-126
          2000
                                              32-191
          4-
Ord. of   15-                                   32-163
          2000
             I                                 26-124
          5-                                     22-1--
Ord. of   20-  1--4                              22-4
          2000
             5--10                             22-9--
                                                 22-14
             11                                22-5
             12                                22-7
             13                                22-6
             14                                22-8
                                                 Ch. 22, Appendices
             app. A, app. B                    A and
                                                 B
          7-
Ord. of   15-  1                                 18-1
          2000
          9-
2000-21   16-                                   32-11
          2000
                                              32-295,
                                                 32-296
          10-
2000-23   21-  1                                 16-151
          2000
             2, 3                              16-153
             4                                 16-154
          10-                                    2-181--
2000-25   21-  1--6                              2-186
          2000
          10-
2000-26   21-  2                                 28-5
          2000
          11-                                    28-1,
2000-28   18-  1--4                              28-92
          2000
          5-
2001-009  19-  1                                 32-401
          2001
          5-
2001-011  19-  1                                 18-36
          2001
          8-
2001-17   25-                                   32-305
          2001
          8-
2001-016  25-                                   26-53
          2001
          8-
2001-018  25-  3                                 6-90
          2001
          9-
2001-019  15-                                   32-44
          2001
          10-
2001-37   26-  1                                 14-37
          2001
          10-
2001-021  26-  1                                 20-40
          2001
          10-
2001-022  26-  1                                 8-43
          2001
          10-
2001-024  26-  1                                 30-36
          2001
          10-
2001-025  26-  1                                 4-33
          2001
          10-
2001-026  26-  1                                 20-1
          2001
          10-
2001-027  26-  1                                 10-86
          2001
          10-
2001-028  26-  1                                 16-102
          2001
          10-
2001-031  26-  1                                 24-36
          2001
          10-
2001-033  26-  1                                 22-6
          2001
          10-
2001-037  26-  2                                 14-43
          2001
          10-
2001-038  26-  1                                 4-3
          2001
          10-
2001-040  26-  1                                 12-53
          2001
             2                                 12-56
             3, 4                              12-51,
                                                 12-52
          10-
2001-042  26-  1--4                              4-1
          2001
          10-                                    10-121--
2001-047  27-  1--7                              10-127
          2001
          11-
2001-49   17-  2, 3                              16-153
          2001
          11-
2001-048  17-  1                                 12-53
          2001
          11-
2001-049  17-  1                                 16-151
          2001
             5                                 16-152
          2-
2002-004  16-  1                                 24-33
          2002
          4-
2002-006  20-  1                                 32-10
          2002
          5-                                     4-31,
2002-008  24-  1                                 4-32
          2002
          8-
2002-016  16-  1                                 2-181
          2002
          3-
2003-005  21-  1--3                              6-21
          2003
          6-
ZO-01-04  18-                                   32-295(4)
          2004
          6-
ZO-02-04  18-                                   32-11
          2004
          6-
ZO-03-04  18-                                   32-10
          2004
          9-
2004-006  17-  1                                 24-33(c)(d)
          2004
          3-
2005-003  15-  1                                 10-127
          2005
          5-
2005-005  20-  1                                 12-53
          2005
             2                                 12-52
          7-
2005-011  15-                                   32-402(6)
          2005
          7-
2005-012  15-                                   32-292
          2005
          7-
2005-13   15-  1                                 10-161
          2005
             2                                 10-163
          10-
2005-014  21-  1--5 Added                        10-31
          2005
          1-
2006-001  20-                                   32-191(4)c.2.v.
          2006
          9-
2006-0902 15-                                   32-44(a)(5)
          2006
          9-
2006-0903 15-  Added                             Adpt. Ord. pg. xi
          2006
          10-
2006-1001 20-                                   32-127(Tbl. 1)
          2006
          10-
2006-1002 26-                                   26-11
          2006
          10-
2006-1003 26-                                   32-83
          2006
          10-
2006-1004 26-                                   32-83
          2006
          10-
2006-1005 26-                                   32-84
          2006
          10-
2006-1006 26-                                   32-85
          2006
          10-
2006-1007 26-                                   32-101
          2006
          10-
2006-1008 26-                                   32-102
          2006
          10-
2006-1009 26-                                   32-106
          2006
          10-
2006-1010 26-                                   32-254
          2006
          10-
2006-1011 26-                                   32-255
          2006
          10-
2006-1012 26-                                   32-308
          2006
          11-
2006-1101 17-                                   32-11
          2006
          11-
2006-1102 17-                                   32-126
          2006
          11-
2006-1103 17-                                   10-121
          2006
             Rpld                              10-126
             Added                             10-126
          12-
2006-1201 15-  Added                             2-61
          2006
          4-                                     10-164--
Ord. of   20-  Added                             10-166
          2007
          4-
2007-0401 20-  Rpld                              20-36
          2007
             Added                             20-36
          6-
2007-0601 15-                                   26-124(k)
          2007
          7-
2007-0702 20-  Added                             24-37
          2007
          10-                                    4-1--
2007-1001 26-  Art. XX(3) Rpld                   4-3,
          2007
                                              4-31--
                                                 4-34
             Art. I(1--3) Added                4-1--
                                                 4-3
             Art. II(1--4) Added               4-51--
                                                 4-54
             Art. III(1--5) Added              4-76--
                                                 4-80
             Art. VIII(1--6) Added             4-121--
                                                 4-126
             Art. X Added                      4-146
             Art. XII(1--5) Added              4-181--
                                                 4-185
             Art. XIII Added                   4-231
             Art. XIV(1) Added                 4-276
             Art. XV(1--3) Added               4-301--
                                                 4-303
             Art. XVI(1) Added                 4-336
             Art. XVII(1, 2) Added             4-365,
                                                 4-366
             Art. XVIII Added                  4-401
             Art. XIX Added                    4-436
             Art. XX(1) Added                  4-466
2007-     10-
1001-2    26-                                   32-127(Tbl. 1)
          2007
          10-
2007-1002 26-  Added                             30-131
          2007
          10-
2007-1003 26-                                   Ch. 4
          2007
                                                 30-1,
                                                 30-41—
                                                 30-54,
                                                 30-81—
                                                 30-87,
          10-                                    30-111—
Ord. of   26-  Added                             30-116,
          2007                                   30-131,
                                                 30-151—
                                                 30-153,
                                                 30-171—
                                                 30-175,
                                                 30-181—
                                                 30-189
          3-
2008-0301 14-                                   6-163(1)
          2008
             Rnb                               6-163(2)—(4)
             as                                6-163(3)—(5)
             Added                             6-163(2)
          7-
2008-0701 18-                                   Adpt. Ord. pg. xii.1
          2008
          9-                                     14-31—
Ord. of   26-  Rpld                              14-43
          2008
                                              14-61—
                                                 14-65
                                              14-81—
                                                 14-84
             Art. I(A—D) Added               14-31—
                                                 14-35
             Art. 2 Added                      14-35
             Art. 3(A—H) Added               14-36—
                                                 14-43
             Art. 4(A—D) Added               14-61—
                                                 14-65
             Art. 5(A—D) Added               14-81—
                                                 14-84
             Art. 6(A, B) Added                14-85
          5-
2009-0501 15-                                   10-83
          2009
          5-
2009-0502 15-                                   32-126
          2009
          5-
2009-0503 15-                                   32-11
          2009
          5-
2009-0504 15-  Added                             4-4
          2009
          6-                                     30-44,
2009-0602 19-                                   30-49,
          2009                                   30-82,
                                                 30-84
          7-
2009-0701 17-                                   32-43
          2009
                                                 4-480,
          9-                                     4-500,
2009-0901 18-  Added                             4-501,
          2009                                   4-502,
                                                 4-520,
                                                 4-521
          4-
Ord. of   16-                                   32-163
          2010
          9-
2010-0901 10-                                   Adpt. Ord. pg. xii.3, 4
          2010
          9-
2010-0902 24-                                   28-5
          2010
          1-
2011-0101 21-                                    
          2011
             Added                             28-110,
                                                 28-111
          4-
2011-0401 15-                                   16-1
          2011
                                                 1-6,
                                                 8-43,
                                                 10-86,
                                                 10-127,
                                                 12-52,
          4-                                     14-43,
2011-0402 15-  Added                             16-102,
          2011                                   22-6,
                                                 24-36,
                                                 30-1,
                                                 30-36,
                                                 32-63,
                                                 32-340,
                                                 32-341
             Rpld.                             32-62
          9-
2011-0901 16-                                   18-1
          2011
          10-
2011-1001 21-                                   30-48
          2011
          12-
2011-1201 16-  Added                             32-129
          2011
          12-
2011-1202 16-                                   18-36
          2011
          3-                                     32-126,
2012-0301 16-                                   32-255,
          2012                                   Appendix C
Res. No.  4-
2012-0401 20-                                   Appendix C
          2012
          6-                                     10-186—
2012-0601 15-  Added                             10-189
          2012
          6-                                     16-131—
2012-0602 15-  Added                             16-136
          2012
          10-
2012-1001 19-                                   32-11
          2012
          2-                                     28-130—
2013-0202 20-  Added                             28-135
          2013
                                                 1-8,
                                                 2-61,
                                                 4-3,
                                                 4-4,
                                                 4-78,
                                                 6-21,
                                                 10-51,
                                                 10-53,
                                                 10-54,
                                                 10-55,
                                                 10-57,
          5-                                     12-53,
2013-0501 17-                                   12-54,
          2013                                   12-55,
                                                 12-56,
                                                 12-57,
                                                 16-1,
                                                 16-102,
                                                 16-151,
                                                 16-152,
                                                 16-153,
                                                 16-154,
                                                 18-35,
                                                 26-8,
                                                 26-53,
                                                 Appendix C
          6-
2013-0601 19-                                   18-36
          2013
          9-
2013-1001 10-                                   26-124
          2013
          4-
2014-0401 25-  Added                             10-32
          2014
          4-
2014-0402 25-                                   16-101
          2014
          5-
2014-0501 23-                                   30-175
          2014
                                                 32-331—
                                                 32-345,
          7-                                     32-361—
2014-0603 25-                                   32-364,
          2014                                   32-381—
                                                 32-384,
                                                 32-401—
                                                 32-405
          4-                                     32-10,
2015-0402 17-                                   32-11,
          2015                                   32-336
             Added                             32-12
          4-
2014-0403 17-                                   32-126
          2015
          6-                                     10-121,
2015-0601 19-                                   10-122,
          2015                                   10-126
             Added                             10-128
          9-                                     16-51,
2015-0901 17-  Added                             16-52
          2015
                                              16-54
          12-
2015-1205 11-                                   10-82
          2015
2016-10-  10-                                    32-11,
01        21-                                   32-126
          2016
          12-                                    22-1—
2016-1202 16-                                   22.16, Ch. 22, Appendices
          2016                                   A and
                                                 B
2016-06-  6-                                     12-51—
16        16-                                   12-57
          2017
2017-0701 7-6-                                  16-2
          2017
          8-                                     16-51,
2017-0801 18-                                   16-52,
          2017                                   16-54
          3-                                     14-31—
Ord. of   20-  Art. 1(A—D)                     14-34
          2018
             Art. 2                            14-35
             Art. 3(A—H)                     14-36—
                                                 14-43
             Art. 4(A—E)                     14-61—
                                                 14-65
             Art. 5(A—E)                     14-81—
                                                 14-85
          6-
2018-0603 27-                                   12-53
          2018
          6-
2018-0604 27-  Rpld.                             10-32
          2018
             Added                             20-2
          10-                                    28-1—28-3, 28-31—28.37, 28-51—28.63, 28-91, 28-92, 28-93—23-95, 28-121—28-129, 28-
Ord. of   15-  Rpld.                             161, 28-162,
          2019
                                                 28-1—
                                                 28-9,
                                                 28-30—
                                                 28-41,
                                                 28-50—
                                                 28-54,
                                                 28-70—
             Added                             28-77,
                                                 28-90—
                                                 28-96,
                                                 28-110—
                                                 28-112,
                                                 28-130—
                                                 28-135,
                                                 14-35
2019-10-  12-                                    16-131—
01        15-  1—4                             16-133,
          2019                                   16-136
          12-
2019-     13-                                   14-35
          2019
          2-
2020-0203 26-                                   30-48
          2020
          6-
2021-0607 28-  1—3   Rpld.                  2-111—2-115
          2021
                                                 14-65,
                                                 22-7,
                                                 32-1—
                                                 32-12,
                                                 32-41—
                                                 32-45,
                                                 32-61—
                                                 32-66,
                                                 32-81—
                                                 32-85,
                                                 32-101—
                                                 32-106,
                                                 32-121—
                                                 32-129,
                Added                       32-161—
                                                 32-164,
                                                 32-191,
                                                 32-221,
                                                 32-251—
                                                 32-255,
                                                 32-291—
                                                 32-308,
                                                 32-331—
                                                 32-345,
                                                 32-361—
                                                 32-364,
                                                 32-381—
                                                 32-384,
                                                 32-401—
                                                 32-405
                                                 20-1,
                                                 20-36,
                                                 20-40,
                                                 22-15,
          8-                                     24-33,
2021-0801 20-  1—8   Added                  24-36,
          2021                                   30-43,
                                                 30-45—
                                                 30-48,
                                                 30-115,
                                                 30-153,
                                                 30-182
          10-
2021-1002 22-  1   Added                      16-155
          2021
          4-
2022-0401 14-  1   Added                      12-31
          2022
          6-                                     32-11,
2022-0603 17-  1, 2                              32-126
          2022
          12-
2022-1202 16-  1                                 18-36
          2022
          11-                                    30-81,
2023-1101 17-  1, 2                              30-84
          2023
                                                 Added   
                                                 9-1—
                                                 9-4,
                                                 9-21—
                                                 9-25,
          11-                                    9-41—
2023-1102 17-  1                                 9-47,
          2023                                   9-60—
                                                 9-66,
                                                 9-80—
                                                 9-83,
                                                 9-101—
                                                 9-105,
                                                 App. A
                                                 9-1—
                                                 9-4,
                                                 9-21—
                                                 9-25,
                                                 9-41—
          7-                                     9-47,
2024-072  19-                                   9-60—
          2024                                   9-66,
                                                 9-80—
                                                 9-83,
                                                 9-101—
                                                 9-105,
                                                 App. A
          10-
2024-1003 11-  1                                 32-11
          2024
             2                                 32-126
          3-
2025-0303 21-  1                                 12-55
          2025
             2   Added                      12-58
          4-
2025-0403 11-  1                                 32-127
          2025
          6-
2025-0604 20-  1,2                               28-9
          2025
          9-
2025-0903 19-  1                                 28-71
          2025
             2                                 28-91
          10-
2025-1002 17-  1                                 26-124
          2025
                                               
 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE
   This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the
text or notes following the text, of references to the General Statutes of
North Carolina.
G.S. Section this Code
G.S.                            Section this Code
1-593                           1-2
ch. 7A                          14-65
12-3                            1-2
14-1 et seq.                    Ch. 16
14-4                            1-6
                               4-1
                               4-2
                               4-54
                               4-80
                               4-126
                               10-127
                               12-52
                               16-52
                               16-81
                               16-136
                               18-1
                               20-1
                               20-40
                               22-15
                               24-36
                               28-6
                               28-133
                               32-341
                               32-255
14-127 et seq.                  Ch. 16, Art. II
14-269                          16-101
14-269 et seq.                  Ch. 16, Art. IV
14-269(a1)                      16-101
14-269(b)                       16-101
14-269(c)                       16-101
14-278 et seq.                  Ch. 16, Art. III
14-288.1 et seq.                Ch. 8
14-288.12                       Ch. 8, Art. II
                               8-31
14-360                          4-80
14-361.1                        4-80
14-362                          4-80
14-362.1                        4-80
14-363                          4-80
14-399                          Ch. 20
14-401                          4-80
14-409.39 et seq.               Ch. 16, Art. III, Div. 2
14-410 et seq.                  16-81
14-415.11                       16-101
18B-1001                        16-2
18B-1004                        16-2
19A-1 et seq.                   Ch. 4
19A-46                          4-3
                               4-80
ch. 20                          Char. §
                                10.1
20-4.01(49)                     Char. §
                                10.1
20-11                           28-91
20-11(b) - (e)                  28-91
20-50                           28-2
20-52                           28-2
20-57                           28-2
20-63                           28-2
20-115                          28-2
20-122.1                        28-2
20-123.2                        28-2
20-125                          28-2
20-125.1                        28-2
20-126                          28-2
20-127(b)                       28-2
20-127(c)                       28-2
20-128                          28-2
20-129                          28-2
20-131                          28-2
20-135.2                        28-2
20-135.2(a)                     28-2
20-135.3                        28-2
20-137.1                        28-2
20-138 et seq.                  Ch. 28, Art. I
20-183.2                        28-74
                                28-74
                                28-52
20-279.1 et seq.                28-54
                                28-71
                                28-72
                                28-74
20-309                          28-2
ch. 44A, art. 1                 28-7
44A-4                           4-80
47-30                           26-92
67                              4-1
67-1 et seq.                    Ch. 4
67-4.1(c)                       4-123
67-4.2                          4-126
75A-10                          Ch. 20
75A-13.3(a), 75A-13.3(b)        18-1
87-115 et seq.                  24-33
105-349, 105-350                Char. §
                                4.6
106-403                         4-80
106-405                         4-80
113-189                         Char. §
                                11.1
                               4-480
113-230(a)                      22-3
113-291.1                       18-1
113-337                         Char. §
                                11.1
                               4-480
113.4-112                       App. B
113.4-124                       App. B
113A-1--113A-7                  Ch. 10
113A-100 et seq.                Ch. 10, Art. IV
                               Ch. 14, Art. III
                               App. B
113A-100--113A-128              App. B
113A-112                        App. B
113A-116, 113A-117              App. B
113A-117(b)--113A-117(d)        App. B
113A-118(e)                     App. B
113A-119                        App. B
113A-120(a)                     14-124
113A-120(c)                     App. B
113A-121                        Ch. 14, Art. III, Div. 2
                               14-124
113A-121(b)                     App. B
113A-124                        App. B
113A-124(c)                     App. B
113A-124(c)(5)                  App. B
113A-126                        14-126
113A-126(b)                     App. B
ch. 115C                        32-11
122C-3(11)B                     32-11
ch. 130A, art. 9                14-35
130A-25                         4-54
130A-184 et seq.                Ch. 4
130A-185                        4-54
130A-189                        4-54
130A-192                        4-1
                               4-54
130A-196                        4-54
130A-290 et seq.                Ch. 20
130A-290(a)(6)                  14-35
130A-290(a)(36)                 14-35
130A-309                        Ch. 20, Art. II
ch. 136                         Char. §
                                10.2
136-66.2                        Char. §
                                10.2
136-143                         32-11
ch. 143, art. 21, pt. 6         14-31
143-128 et seq.                 2-156
143-129(a)                      2-156
143-129(f), 143-129(g)          2-153
143-143.9(6)                    32-11
143-143.15                      14-82
143-215.51 et seq.              Ch. 14
143-215.58                      14-64
153A-121                        4-1
153A-123                        4-1
153A-127                        4-1
153A-131                        4-1
153A-422                        4-1
ch. 159                         Ch. 2, Art. V
159-25                          Char. §
                                4.7
160-385.1                       32-128
ch. 160A                        Ch. 2
ch. 160A, art. 7, pt. 2         Char. §
                                4.1
ch. 160A, art. 8                14-31
ch. 160A, art. 19, pt. 3A       32-128
ch. 160A, art. 19, pts. 3, 5, 8 14-31
160A-1                          Char. §
                                1.2
160A-3                          Char. § Pt. I
160A-63                         Char. §
                                2.7
                               Char., §
                                3.2
160A-66 et seq.                 Ch. 2, Art. II
160A-74, 160A-75                Char. §
                                2.6
160A-77                         1-1
160A-79                         1-1
160A-146                        Ch. 2, Art. IV
160A-162 et seq.                App. A
160A-164                        App. A
160A-174                        Char. §
                                11.1
                               32-333
160A-175                        1-6
                               16-52
                               16-136
                               16-155
                               18-35
                               20-1
                               20-40
                               24-36
                               28-3
                               28-133
                               32-61
160A-175(b)                     32-63
160A-175(d)                     18-35
160A-175(e)                     10-127
                               18-35
160A-184                        16-152
160A-186                        Ch. 4
                               Ch. 4, Art. II
160A-189                        Ch. 16, Art. III, Div. 2
160A-189, 160A-190              16-102
160A-193                        Ch. 10, Art. II
                               Ch. 12, Art. II
160A-265 et seq.                2-131
160A-266(c)                     2-131
160A-291--160A-293              Ch. 12
160A-296 et seq.                Ch. 24
160A-303                        Ch. 10, Art. II, Div. 2
160A-303.1                      Ch. 20
160A-304                        28-112
160A-308                        Char. §
                                11.1
160A-312                        Ch. 30
160A-350 et seq.                Ch. 18
                               18-32
160A-351                        18-34
160A-360                        26-4
160A-371                        Ch. 26
160A-371 et seq.                26-3
160A-373                        Ch. 26, Art. II
160A-374                        26-12
160A-376                        26-7
160A-383                        2-114
160A-385.1                      Char. §
                                9.2
                               32-308
160A-385.1(b)(3)                Char. §
                                9.1
                                Char. §
160A-385.1(d), 160A-385.1(e)    9.2, Char. §
                                9.3
160A-385.1(e)(l)a               Char. §
                                9.3
160A-411 et seq.                Ch. 6, Art. II, Div. 1, Pt. I
                               6-131
160A-415                        Ch. 6
                               6-63
160A-417                        6-82
160A-418, 160A-419              6-88,
                                6-89
160A-421                        6-67
160A-422                        6-87
160A-426                        6-111
160A-434                        6-111
160A-435                        Ch. 6, Art. II, Div. 7
                               6-161
160A-437                        6-163
160A-458.1                      Ch. 14
                               Ch. 22
160A-471                        26-11
160D                            32-101
160D-108(b)                     32-308
160D-108.1                      32-128
                               32-308
160D-201                        32-2
160D-301                        32-103
160D-302                        32-103
160D-601                        32-308
160D-702 et seq.                32-333
160D-913                        32-106
160D-940 et seq.                32-128
160D-1108                       32-308
160D-1110                       32-11
160D-1116                       32-11
160D-1402                       32-105
161-30                          26-10
163A-1616                       Char. §
                                3.1
164-7                           1-9
166A-1 et seq.                  Ch. 8
166A-8                          8-31
                                
 
