BILTMORE FOREST, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-11 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord. 2025-05, passed 10-14-2025
State legislation current through 2024, Pamphlet #3
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
   TOWN CHARTER
Editor’s Note - House Bill No. 252, Senate Bill No. 120, being an Act to
Incorporate the Town of Biltmore Forest, adopted by the General Assembly of
North Carolina and ratified on the 14th day of February, 1923, is set out
herein in full, except for Section 10 which repealed all laws or parts of laws
in conflict, and Section 11 which placed this Act in force from and after its
ratification. Only the catchphrases are not a part of the original act.
These have been added for easy reference. This original act was signed by W. B.
Cooper, President of the Senate, and John G. Dawson, Speaker of the House of
Representatives.
Section 1. [Incorporation; powers.]
   That the town of Biltmore Forest, in Buncombe County, be and the same is
hereby incorporated under the name and style of “Town of Biltmore Forest”, and
shall have and exercise all the powers, and be subject to all the provisions
contained in subchapter one, and Articles fifteen, sixteen, seventeen and
nineteen of Chapter fifty-six of the Consolidated Statutes of North Carolina,
and other general laws which are now or may hereafter be enacted for the
organization and government of cities and towns in North Carolina. (H. B. 252,
S. B. 120, 2-14-23)
Section 2. [Corporate limits.]
   That the corporate limits of said Town shall be as follows: All of that area
included within the lines, beginning at a point on the north bank of the
Swannanoa River, where the west line of Biltmore Village intersects the same,
and running down and with the north bank of said River to the center of the
road leading through the Victoria Gate, or Entrance to the Biltmore Estate;
thence running with the center of said road southeastwardly to the Approach
Road of the Biltmore Estate; thence with the center line of the Approach Road
to its intersection with the Overlook Road; thence with the center line of the
Overlook Road to its intersection with the center line of the Busbee Road, near
the Busbee Gate, or Entrance, of the Biltmore Estate; thence with the center
line of the Busbee Road, eastwardly to the west line of the tract of land
conveyed by the Trustees of the Estate of George W. Vanderbilt to the Biltmore
Estate Company, by deed registered in the Office of the Register of Deeds for
Buncombe County, in Book No. 244, at page fifty-six; thence with the west line
of said Tract to Station No. 29 of the survey of said tract; thence eastwardly
to the south-west corner of the J. M. Brown tract; thence with the west and
North lines of said Brown Tract to a point in the western margin of the
Asheville-Hendersonville Highway, northwardly to the northeast corner of the
aforesaid Biltmore Estate Company Tract; thence with the north line of said
Tract, South 87 deg. 48' East, 265 feet to a stake in the east line of the
Biltmore Estate; thence with the east line of the Biltmore Estate, northwardly
to the north-west corner of the Biltmore High School property; thence with the
north line of the Biltmore High School property eastwardly to the center of the
Ravine north of the Biltmore High School; thence down and with the center of
said Ravine to its intersection with the south line of the corporate limits of
Biltmore Village; thence with the South and West lines of the corporate limits
of Biltmore Village, to the beginning. (H.B. 252, S. B. 120, 2-14-23)
Section. 3. [Mayor and Commissioners.]
   The following named persons shall fill the offices of Mayor and
Commissioners, from their qualifications until an election to be held on the
first Monday in May, nineteen hundred and twenty-three, and until their
successors are elected and qualified, to-wit: Junius G. Adams, Mayor, and
Charles E. Waddell, Edward M. Jones and Lloyd M. Jarrett, Commissioners. (H. B.
252, S. B. 120, 2-14-23)
Section 4. [Tenure in office.]
   The officers of said town shall hold office until their successors are
elected and qualified. (H. B. 252, S. B. 120,2-14-23)
Section 5. [Appointment of Clerk, Treasurer and policemen.]
   The Clerk, Treasurer and regular policemen shall be appointed by the
Commissioners, and all special policemen shall be appointed by the Mayor. (H.
B. 252, S. B. 120, 2-14-23)
Section 6. [Power to issue bonds and levy taxes.]
   The Commissioners shall have the power to issue bonds of the town, and to
levy and collect taxes, within the limits provided by law, on all real and
personal property within the corporate limits of said town. (H. B. 252, S. B.
120, 2-14-23)
Section 7. [Elections.]
   That an election shall be held in said town on the first Monday in November,
every four years, for the purpose of electing a Mayor and three Commissioners,
which said election shall be held under the laws of North Carolina regulating
elections in cities and towns. (H. B. 252, S. B. 120, 2-14-23)
Section 8. [Officers to qualify.]
   That the officers provided for in this Act shall qualify within ten days
from its ratification before a Justice of the Peace, or Clerk of the Superior
Court and all officers thereafter elected or appointed by the Board shall
qualify before the Mayor of said town, a Justice of the Peace, or Clerk of the
Superior Court. (H. B. 252, S. B. 120, 2-14-23)
Section 9. [Liability for existing taxes.]
   The incorporation of said town shall in no way release or relieve the
persons and property therein from liability for the payment of any ordinary or
special School Tax levied for the public schools of the district in which said
property is situated. (H. B. 252, S. B. 120, 2-14-23)
CODE OF ETHICS
   The purpose of this code of Ethics is to establish guidelines for ethical
standards of conduct for the Town of Biltmore Forest Board of Commissioners and
to help determine what conduct is appropriate in particular cases. It should
not be considered a substitute for the law or for the Board member’s best
judgment.
   The Town of Biltmore Forest Board of Commissioners is comprised of the Mayor
and three Commissioners and all references in this Code of Ethics to
‘Commissioners’ is deemed to include the Mayor and the three Commissioners.
Commissioners Shall Obey the Law
All members of the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Biltmore Forest should
obey all laws applicable to their official actions as members of the Board.
Board members should be guided by the spirit as well as the letter of the law
in whatever they do.
Commissioners Shall Uphold the Integrity and Independence of the Office
All members of the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Biltmore Forest should
demonstrate the highest standard of personal integrity, truthfulness, honesty
and fortitude in all public activities in order to inspire public confidence
and trust in government. They should participate in establishing, maintaining,
and enforcing, and should observe high standards of conduct so that the
integrity and independence of the office may be preserved.
Commissioners Shall Avoid Impropriety and the Appearance of Impropriety in All
His or Her Activities
It is essential that government attract those citizens best qualified and
willing to serve. Commissioners have legitimate interests - economic,
professional and vocational - of a private nature. A Commissioner should not be
denied, and should not deny to other Commissioners or citizens, the opportunity
to acquire, retain and pursue private interests- economic or otherwise, except
when it conflicts with their responsibility to the public and cannot be
avoided. Each member of the Board of Commissioners should exercise his/her best
judgment to determine when this is the case. Members should respect and comply
with the law and conduct themselves, at all times in a manner that promotes
public confidence in the integrity of the office of Commissioner and of
government. Members should not allow family, social, or other relationships to
unduly influence his/her conduct or judgment and should not lend the prestige
of the office of Commissioner to advance the private interests of others; nor
should he/she convey or permit others to convey the impression that he/she is
in a special position to influence them. If a Commissioner believes that his/
her actions, while legal and ethical, may be misunderstood, the member should
seek the advice of the Attorney and should consider publically disclosing the
facts of the situation and the steps taken to resolve it.
Commissioners Shall Faithfully and Diligently Perform the Duties of the Office
Commissioners should perform the duties of the office as prescribed by law and
should give precedence to these duties over other activities. In the
performance of these duties, the following standards shall apply:
Legislative Responsibilities.
Commissioners should actively pursue policy goals they believe to be in the
best interests of their constituents within the parameters of orderly decision-
making, rules of the Board of Commissioners and open government. Commissioners
should respect the legitimacy of the goals and interests of other Commissioners
and shall respect the rights of others to pursue goals and policies different
from their own.
Adjudicative Responsibilities.
Commissioners should be faithful to the general and local laws pertaining to
the office and strive for professional competence in them. They should be un-
swayed by partisan interests, public clamor, or fear of criticism.
Commissioners should demand and contribute to the maintenance of order and
decorum in proceedings before the Board of Commissioners. Commissioners should
be honest, patient, dignified and courteous to those with whom they deal in
their official capacity, and should require similar conduct of staff.
Commissioners should accord to every person who is legally interested in a
proceeding before the Commission, full right to be heard according to law.
Commissioners should dispose promptly of the business of the Town of Biltmore
Forest.
Administrative Responsibilities.
Commissioners should clearly distinguish legislative, adjudicatory and
administrative responsibilities and should refrain from inappropriate
interference in the impartial administration of affairs by employees.
Commissioners should diligently discharge those administrative responsibilities
that are appropriate, should maintain professional competence in the
administration of these duties and should facilitate the diligent discharge of
the administrative responsibilities of fellow Commissioners and other
officials. Commissioners should conserve the resources of the Town and employ
equipment, property, funds and personnel only in legally permissible pursuits
and in a manner that exemplifies excellent stewardship.
Commissioners Shall Conduct the Affairs of the Board in an Open and Public
Manner
Commissioners must be aware of the letter and intent of the State’s Open
Meetings Law, being G.S. Ch. 143, Art. 33C, and conduct the affairs of the
Board of Commissioners consistent with the letter and spirit of that law and
consistent with the need to inspire and maintain public confidence in the
integrity and fairness of government and the office of Commissioner. Consistent
with this goal of preserving public trust, Commissioners shall be aware of the
need for discretion in deliberations when the lack of discretion would pose a
threat to the resources of the Town, to the reputation of current or potential
employees, to orderly and responsible decision making, to the integrity of
other governmental processes or to other legitimate interests of the Town.
Commissioners should be informed concerning campaign finance, conflict of
interest and other appropriate state and federal laws and should scrupulously
comply with the provisions of such laws. Each member should refrain from
financial and business dealings that tend to reflect adversely on the Board or
on government or to interfere with the proper performance. Each member should
manage his/her personal financial interests to minimize the number of cases in
which he/she must ask to be excused from voting on matters coming before the
Board. Each member should not disclose any information acquired in his/her
official capacity as a Commissioner in financial dealings or for any other
purpose not related to official duties.
Commissioners Shall Refrain from Political Activity Inappropriate to His/Her
Office
Commissioners have a civic responsibility to support good government by every
available means, to continue to inform and educate the citizenry about the
affairs and processes of government and to make themselves available to
citizens of the so that they may ascertain and respond to the needs of the
community. In doing so, each member may join or affiliate with civic
organizations whether partisan or nonpartisan, may and should attend political
meetings, may and should advocate and support the principles or policies of
civic or political organizations consistent with the Constitution and laws of
the United States and North Carolina. Each member should maintain the dignity
appropriate to the office, and should encourage members of his/her family to
adhere to the same standards of political conduct that apply to the
Commissioners. Each member should refrain from making pledges or promises of
conduct in office that he/she cannot or will not perform or which would be
illegal if performed.
This Code of Ethics shall be effective upon its adoption. Adopted this the 10th
day of August, 2010.
FORM OF GOVERNMENT
   Section 1.   In accordance with the provisions of G.S.§§ 160A-101 and 160A-
102, the Charter of the Town of Biltmore Forest, as set forth in Chapter 32 of
the 1923 Session Laws of North Carolina, as amended, is hereby further amended
to provide that the Town shall operate under the council-manager form of
government in accordance with G.S. § 160A, Art. 7, pt. 2 and any charter
provisions not in conflict therewith.
   Section 2.   The Town Clerk shall cause a notice to be duly published,
stating that an ordinance amending the Charter to adopt the council-manager
form of government has been adopted. Subject to any referendum petitioned for
and conducted pursuant to G.S. § 160A-103, this amendment shall be in full
force and effect from and after July 24, 2017.
Adopted this 20th day of June, 2017.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time; computing time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend code; effect of new ordinances
   
10.18   Section histories; section headings; statutory references
   
10.19   Altering code
   
10.20   Liability of corporate officers, agents, and employees for violation of
code
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the Town of Biltmore Forest shall
be designated as the Code of Biltmore Forest, North Carolina and may be so
cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The Board of Commissioners of the Town of
Biltmore Forest, North Carolina.
      BOND. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be
sufficient.
      CHARTER. The Charter of the Town of Biltmore Forest, North Carolina.
      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.
      COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and the last day; and if the last day is
Saturday, Sunday, or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
      COUNTY. The County of Buncombe, North Carolina.
      G.S. or GENERAL STATUTES. The latest edition of the GENERAL STATUTES of
North Carolina, as amended.
      GENDER. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine
and neuter.
      GOVERNOR. The Governor of North Carolina.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of
persons or officers.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      NON-TECHNICAL and TECHNICAL WORDS. Words and phrases shall be construed
according to the common and approved usage of the language, but TECHNICAL WORDS
and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate
meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning.
      NUMBER. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural
includes the singular number.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named in this code,
they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use
in this town.
      OWNER. Applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or a part of the property.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers, or agents thereof.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property except real property.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
      REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of North Carolina.
      STREET. Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, dedicated alley, lane, viaduct, bridge, and the approaches thereto
within the town and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between
abutting property lines.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of the building or land, whether alone
or with others.
      TENSE. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
      TOWN. The Town of Biltmore Forest, in the County of Buncombe, North
Carolina.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
      ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. One designated by the Council.
(2013 Code, § 1-2)
Statutory reference:
   Computation of time, see G.S. § 1-593
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this town shall be by the following
rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of an act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this town exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, that spelling shall be corrected and the word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this town for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTING TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME or
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.
   (B)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following:
      (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective
date of this code;
      (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money for the town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or
any evidence of the town's indebtedness;
      (3)   Any contract or obligation assumed by the town;
      (4)   Any ordinance fixing the salary of any town officer or employee;
      (5)   Any right or franchise granted by the town;
      (6)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, widening, paving, and the like, any street or public way
in the town;
      (7)   Any appropriation ordinance;
      (8)   Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or
limited term;
      (9)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes
therefor;
      (10)   Any zoning ordinance or zoning map amendment;
      (11)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat;
      (12)   Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the town;
      (13)   The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the town not in
conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this code;
      (14)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein;
      (15)   Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the
town; and/or
      (16)   Any personnel ordinance.
   (C)   Nor shall any ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance or part
thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by
this chapter; and all ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full
force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.
Statutory reference:
   Statutes not repealed by General Statutes, see G.S. § 164-7
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance, or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES.
   (A)   (1)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend,
repeal, or in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system hereof and printed for inclusion herein.
      (2)   When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section, or
division, or any portion thereof, the repealed portions may be excluded from
this code by omission from reprinted pages.
      (3)   The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in
the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence that the subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the town.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of the code shall be made by
amending provisions by specific reference to the section number of this code in
language substantially similar to the following: “Section                of the
Code of Ordinances, Town of Biltmore Forest, North Carolina, is hereby amended
as follows....”. The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (C)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added,
language substantially similar to the following shall be used: “The Code of
Ordinances, Town of Biltmore Forest, North Carolina, is hereby amended by
adding a section, to be numbered               , which section shall read as
follows:....”. The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (D)   All sections, subchapters, chapters, or provisions desired to be
repealed must be specifically repealed by section, subchapters, or chapter
number, as the case may be.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; SECTION HEADINGS; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and, if any, are listed following the text of
the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960; Ord. 15, passed 1-1-
1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (G.S. §
160A-11) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
         § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
            This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection
or copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
         Statutory reference:
            Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 132-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the prior code of ordinances
of the town, the prior code section number shall be indicated in the history by
“(2013 Code, §       )”. The history notes following sections and the
references scattered throughout the code are not part of the code, but are
merely for the benefit for the user of the code.
§ 10.19 ALTERING CODE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or
deletions, any part or portion of this code of ordinances or to insert or
delete pages, or any portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in
any manner whatsoever except pursuant to ordinance or resolution or other
official act of the Board of Commissioners which shall cause the law of the
town to be misrepresented thereby.
(2013 Code, § 1-5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.20 LIABILITY OF CORPORATE OFFICERS, AGENTS, AND EMPLOYEES FOR VIOLATION OF
CODE.
   In the event of a violation of any provision of this code of ordinances or
other ordinance of the town by a corporation, the officer, agent, or employee
thereof who performs the act, constituting the violation or procures, aids, or
abets the performance of such act shall be subject to the same penalties as if
he or she himself or herself had committed such violation.
(2013 Code, § 1-6)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of any
section or division of this code of ordinances for which no other penalty is
provided, or failing or neglecting or refusing to comply with same, shall, upon
conviction, be penalized in accordance with G.S. § 160A-175.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-175
   Violation of local ordinances a misdemeanor, see G.S. § 14-4(a)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   LEGISLATIVE BODY
      
31.   TOWN ORGANIZATION
      
32.   TOWN POLICIES
      
33.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
34.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
CHAPTER 30: LEGISLATIVE BODY
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Elections
   
30.02   Elections by Board
Meetings
   
30.15   Meetings of the Mayor and Board of Commissioners
   
30.16   Quorum
   
30.17   Order of business
   
30.18   Limitation of discussion
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 ELECTIONS.
   (A)   Schedule for elections. Municipal elections shall be held as provided
by the state’s general statutes, specifically, G.S. § 163-279.
(2013 Code, § 7-1)
   (B)   County Board of Elections. The County Board of Elections shall conduct
the elections of the town of pursuant to the authority of G.S. § 163-284.
(2013 Code, § 7-2)
   (C)   Procedures. All procedures for municipal elections in the town shall
be as provided in G.S. Ch. 163, Art. 23.
(2013 Code, § 7-3)
§ 30.02 ELECTIONS BY BOARD.
   All elections by the Board shall be by ballot if requested by any member
present. A majority of the votes of all members present shall be necessary to
an election or appointment; provided, that a quorum of at least a majority of
the Board shall be necessary to transact any business, including elections and
appointments.
(2013 Code, § 2-9)
Cross-reference:
   Quorum, see §
30.16
MEETINGS
§ 30.15 MEETINGS OF THE MAYOR AND BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
   The Board of Commissioners shall meet each month on the second Tuesday. All
meetings of the Board shall be held, conducted, and governed by, under, and
according to the rules of procedure prescribed herein and in the Robert’s Rules
of Order.
(2013 Code, § 2-5)
Statutory reference:
   Regular and special meetings, procedure, see G.S. § 160A-71
§ 30.16 QUORUM.
   At the hour appointed for the meeting of the Mayor and Board, the Mayor
shall take the chair and direct a call of the members by the Town Clerk, who
shall note the absentees. If a quorum, consisting of the Mayor and two members
of the Board, or three Commissioners, be not present, the Mayor shall send for
the absentees, and upon the appearance of a quorum, shall call the body to
order and proceed with the order of business. If a quorum shall fail to attend,
the meeting shall stand adjourned to a time agreed on by a majority of the
members present.
(2013 Code, § 2-6)
§ 30.17 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   At all regular meetings of the Mayor and Board of Commissioners, the
order of business shall be as follows:
      (1)   Roll call by the Clerk;
      (2)   Reading of minutes;
      (3)   Correction and adoption of the minutes;
      (4)   Complaints, grievances, and suggestions from the public;
      (5)   Reports of committees;
      (6)   Reports of officers;
      (7)   Communications;
      (8)   Unfinished business;
      (9)   New business;
      (10)   Petitions, motions, resolutions, and ordinances; and
      (11)   Approving bills for payment.
   (B)   If the Board of Commissioners shall so desire and direct, any matter
may be designated as special business of a future meeting, when the same shall
have precedence over all other business at such meeting; and no proposition,
motion, or resolution shall be entertained by the Mayor until it has been
seconded, and every proposition, motion, or resolution shall, when required by
the Mayor or a Commissioner, be reduced to writing.
(2013 Code, § 2-7)
§ 30.18 LIMITATION OF DISCUSSION.
   No subject shall be discussed by any person who is not a member of the Board
of Commissioners for more than five minutes, nor shall such subject matter be
discussed more than once, except by express permission of the Board.
(2013 Code, § 2-8)
CHAPTER 31: TOWN ORGANIZATION
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Committees
   
31.02   Vice-Mayor
   
31.03   Town Clerk
   
31.04   Compensation of Mayor and Board
Town Officials, Board, Departments, And The Like
   
31.15   Police Department
Cross-reference:
   Legislative Body, see
Ch. 30
   Town Policies, see
Ch. 32
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 COMMITTEES.
   The Mayor shall appoint all committees, except where the Board of
Commissioners shall otherwise order.
(2013 Code, § 2-1)
§ 31.02 VICE-MAYOR.
   At the first meeting after each election, the Board shall elect from its
number a Vice-Mayor, who shall, in the absence or disability of the Mayor,
perform the duties of the Mayor.
(2013 Code, § 2-2)
Statutory reference:
   Mayor Pro Tempore, see G.S. § 160A-70
§ 31.03 TOWN CLERK.
   (A)   Generally. At said first meeting after each election, the Board shall
also elect a Town Clerk, which said Town Clerk need not be a member of the
Board.
(2013 Code, § 2-3)
   (B)   Duties and Compensation of Town Clerk. The Town Clerk shall record all
proceedings of the Board, shall have charge of the archives of the town, and
shall be responsible for all documents, records, books, resolutions, and other
papers kept therein, and shall, in addition, perform all such duties as may be
desired by the Board. The Town Clerk shall receive such compensation as may be
set from time to time by the Board.
(2013 Code, § 2-4)
Cross-reference:
   Appointment of Clerk, see
Charter, § 5
§ 31.04 COMPENSATION OF MAYOR AND BOARD.
   The Mayor and each member of the Board of Commissioners shall receive
compensation as may be set from time to time and fixed by ordinance duly
passed.
(2013 Code, § 2-10)
TOWN OFFICIALS, BOARD, DEPARTMENTS, AND THE LIKE
§ 31.15 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Generally. The Police Department shall consist of a Chief and as many
police officers as the Board of Commissioners shall from time to time determine
necessary.
(2013 Code, § 14-1)
   (B)   Character of police officers. No person shall be appointed as a police
officer unless he or she be of good moral character and habits.
(2013 Code, § 14-2)
   (C)   Special police officers. The Mayor shall have the power and authority
from time to time to appoint such special police officers as he or she may
think necessary for special purposes.
(2013 Code, § 14-3)
   (D)   Unlawful police calls. It shall be unlawful for any person to send in
a call for a police officer without good reason.
(2013 Code, § 14-4)
   (E)   Hampering an officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct,
oppose, menace, or seek to intimidate any police officer engaged in the
performance of his or her duty.
(2013 Code, § 14-5)
   (F)   Auxiliary police division.
      (1)   The Police Department of the town may establish an auxiliary police
division. The auxiliary police division shall be a volunteer organization,
whose members shall serve without compensation, composed of as many members as
may from time to time be determined by the Chief of Police and approved by the
Town Manager.
      (2)   Auxiliary police, while undergoing official training and while
performing duties on behalf of the town pursuant to orders or instructions of
the Chief of Police of the town, shall be entitled to benefits under North
Carolina Workers Compensation Act and to any fringe benefits for which such
volunteer personnel qualify.
(Ord. 2022-01, passed 2-14-2023) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to appoint and employ, see G.S. § 160A-281
   Auxiliary police division, see G.S. § 160A-282(a) and (b)
CHAPTER 32: TOWN POLICIES
Section
   
32.01   Compensation of officers and employees
   
32.02   Holidays
   
32.03   Vacation leave
   
32.04   Sick leave
   
32.05   Civil leave
Cross-reference:
   Legislative Body, see
Ch. 30
   Town Organization, see
Ch. 31
§ 32.01 COMPENSATION OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   All officers and employees of the town shall receive such compensation as
may be set from time to time by the Board of Commissioners.
(2013 Code, § 2-21)
Statutory reference:
   Compensation of personnel, see G.S. § 160A-162
§ 32.02 HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   All town employees will receive full pay for holidays as determined
annually by the Town Board of Commissioners and those holidays which are
included in the town’s personnel policy.
   (B)   Employees required to work on an observed holiday shall receive
compensatory time off. Holidays observed by the town shall not be counted as
vacation leave.
(2013 Code, § 2-22)
Editor’s note:
   Personnel Manual adopted June 27, 1988, except for the Public Safety
Department
§ 32.03 VACATION LEAVE.
   (A)   Generally. Each employee with one year’s continuous service in the
employ of the town shall receive ten working days of vacation each year.
(2013 Code, § 2-23)
   (B)   When vacation leave may be taken. Vacation leave may be taken as
earned by an employee with the approval of his or her immediate supervisor;
however, vacation leave is permissive and may be denied when conditions are
such that the ordinary work of the town could not be performed adequately if
vacation leave were granted.
(2013 Code, § 2-24)
§ 32.04 SICK LEAVE.
   (A)   Sick leave with pay is not a right, which an employee may demand, but
is a privilege granted by the town.
   (B)   (1)   Leave from work with pay, up to two weeks, may be charged as
sick leave if the absence is due to sickness, bodily injury, quarantine,
required physical or dental examinations or treatment, illness in the
employee’s immediate family which requires the care of the employee, or the
funeral of a member of the employee’s family.
      (2)   All such absences, except any resulting from intemperance or misuse
of sick leave, shall be charged against the sick leave credit of the employee.
   (C)   Any extension of sick leave beyond the normal two weeks must be
reviewed and approved or disapproved at the discretion of the Mayor and
immediate supervisor.
   (D)   (1)   The employee may be required to submit a physician’s certificate
as to the nature of the illness and as to the employee’s physical capacity to
resume his or her duties.
      (2)   Such requirement shall be at the discretion of the Mayor or
immediate supervisor.
(2013 Code, § 2-25)
§ 32.05 CIVIL LEAVE.
   Any employee of the town called for jury duty, or as a court witness for the
federal or state governments, or a subdivision thereof, shall be entitled to
leave with pay for such duty, in addition to being allowed to keep fees
received for such duty.
(2013 Code, § 2-26)
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Procedures for disposing of personal property valued at less than $500
Taxation
   
33.15   Tax rate
   
33.16   Tax levy to conform to state law
Statutory reference:
   Authority to impose taxes, see G.S. § 160A-206
   Remedies for collecting taxes, see G.S. § 160A-270
   Special assessments, see G.S. §§ 160A-216 through 160A-236
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 PROCEDURES FOR DISPOSING OF PERSONAL PROPERTY VALUED AT LESS THAN $500.
   (A)   The Town Clerk is hereby authorized, pursuant to G.S. § 160A-266(c),
to dispose of any surplus personal property owned by the town, whenever he or
she determines, in his or her discretion, that:
      (1)   The item or group of items has a fair market value of less than
$500;
      (2)   The property is no longer necessary for the conduct of public
business; and
      (3)   Sound property management principles and financial considerations
indicate that the interests of the town would best be served by disposing of
the property.
   (B)   The Town Clerk may dispose of any such surplus personal property by
any means which he or she judges reasonably calculated to yield the highest
attainable sale price in money or other consideration, including, but not
limited to, the methods of sale provided in G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 12. Such sale
may be public or private, and with or without notice and minimum waiting
period.
   (C)   The surplus property shall be sold to the party who tenders the
highest offer, or exchanged for any property or services useful to the town if
greater value may be obtained in that manner, and the Town Clerk is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver any applicable title documents. If no offers
are received within a reasonable time, the Town Clerk may retain the property,
obtain any reasonably available salvage value, or cause it to be disposed of as
waste material. No surplus property may be donated to any individual or
organization, except by resolution of the Town Board.
   (D)   The Town Clerk shall report monthly in writing to the Town Board on
any property disposed of under these provisions. The written report shall
generally describe the property sold or exchanged, to whom it was sold, or with
whom exchanged, and the amount of money or other consideration received for
each sale or exchange since the last such report was submitted.
   (E)   This section is effective upon adoption.
(2013 Code, § 2-11) (Ord. passed 11-15-1988)
TAXATION
§ 33.15 TAX RATE.
   The tax rate of the town shall be set from time to time by the Board as
provided by law and shall remain posted on the bulletin board of the Town Hall.
(2013 Code, § 16-1)
§ 33.16 TAX LEVY TO CONFORM TO STATE LAW.
   No property within the limits of the town shall be free from taxes, except
such property exempted by the State Constitution.
(2013 Code, § 16-2)
Statutory reference:
   Machinery Act, see G.S. § 105-271
   Property taxes, generally, see G.S. § 160A-209
CHAPTER 34: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
   
34.01   State of emergency defined
   
34.02   Declaration of state of emergency
   
34.03   Proclamation
   
34.04   Curfew authorized
   
34.05   Termination
   
34.06   Restrictions
   
34.07   Extension, alteration, or repeal
   
34.08   Violation of restrictions
 
   
34.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to enact ordinances dealing with states of emergency, see
G.S. § 166A-19.31
   Continuity of local government in emergency, see G.S. §§ 162B-1 et seq.
   One political subdivision to assist officers of another, see G.S. § 160A-288
§ 34.01 STATE OF EMERGENCY DEFINED.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   STATE OF EMERGENCY. Exists whenever, during times of great public crisis,
disaster, rioting, catastrophe, or similar public emergency, for any reason,
municipal public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or
afford adequate protection for lives or property.
(2013 Code, § 6-1)
§ 34.02 DECLARATION OF STATE OF EMERGENCY.
   In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency endangering the
lives, safety, health, and welfare of the people within the town, or
threatening damage to or destruction of property, the Mayor is hereby
authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all
persons the existence of such a state of emergency, and in order more
effectively to protect the lives and property of people within the town, to
place into effect any or all of the restrictions hereinafter authorized.
(2013 Code, § 6-2)
§ 34.03 PROCLAMATION.
   In accordance with §
34.02, the following proclamation shall be issued.
 
PROCLAMATION
 
“WHEREAS, the Governing Body of the town has duly adopted an ordinance providing
that when there exists within the town a state of emergency, extraordinary
measures are authorized to cope with any widespread illegal activity endangering
the lives, safety, and property of persons within the town; and
 
WHEREAS, by ordinance duly adopted by the Governing Body of the town, the Mayor is
authorized to proclaim the existence of such a state of emergency to all citizens
and to impose certain restrictions for the protection of the lives and property;
 
NOW, THEREFORE, I,__________ Mayor of the town, do hereby proclaim that:
 
I. A state of emergency exists within the town.
 
II. Except as provided in Section IV below, and until the state of emergency as
hereby proclaimed is ended, it shall be unlawful for any person:
 
(a)   To possess off his own premises, or to buy, sell, give away, or otherwise
transfer or dispose of any explosives, firearms, ammunition, or dangerous weapons
of any kind;
 
(b)    To buy or sell beer, wine, or intoxicating beverages of any kind;
 
(c)   To organize or participate in any demonstrations, parades, marches, or
vigils on any public ways or public property within the town.
 
III. Until the state of emergency as hereby proclaimed is ended, all persons shall
remain in their homes, offices or places of business, between _____ p.m. on each
day and ____ a.m. on the next day, and during such hours it shall be unlawful for
any person to:
 
(a)   To be or travel upon any public street, alley or roadway or upon any public
property, unless in search of medical assistance, food, or other commodity or
service necessary to sustain the well being of himself or herself or his family or
some member thereof;
 
(b)   Participate in or carry on any business activity;
 
(c)   Keep open any place of business, place of entertainment, or any other place
of public assembly.
 
IV. (a)   The following persons are exempt from the restrictions imposed by
Section III (c) above:
 
   (1)   (List, such as law enforcement officers, and the like)
 
   (2)   And the like
 
(b) The following businesses are exempt from the restrictions imposed by Section
III(c) above:
 
   (1)   (List, such as public utilities, news media, and the like)
 
   (2)   And the like
 
V. This proclamation shall become effective at ____ this _____ day of___________,
2___, and shall remain in force until dissolved by the Mayor or governing body of
the town”.
 
(2013 Code, § 6-3)
§ 34.04 CURFEW AUTHORIZED.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit by the proclamation
set out in §
34.03 the application of all or any part of such restrictions to any area
specifically designated or described within the corporate limits and to
specific hours of the day or night and to exempt from all or any part of such
restrictions law enforcement officers, firefighters, and other public
employees, doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals, and other medical
facilities, on-duty military personnel, whether state or federal; on duty
employees of public utilities, radio broadcasting, and television broadcasting
corporations operated for profit; and such other classes of persons as may be
essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary to
serve the safety, health, and welfare needs of the people.
(2013 Code, § 6-4)
§ 34.05 TERMINATION.
   The Mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency or all or any
part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when
directed to do so by the governing body.
(2013 Code, § 6-5)
§ 34.06 RESTRICTIONS.
   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the Mayor may
impose by proclamation any or all of the following restrictions:
   (A)   Prohibit or regulate the possession of explosives, firearms,
ammunition, or dangerous weapons of any kind, and prohibit the purchase, sale,
transfer, or other disposition thereof;
   (B)   Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine, or
intoxicating beverages of any kind, and their possession or consumption off
one’s own premises;
   (C)   Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil, or
participation therein taking place on any of the public ways or upon any public
property;
   (D)   Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, or any
other explosive or inflammable fluids or substances;
   (E)   Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street, alley, or roadway,
or upon any other public property, except by those in search of medical
assistance, or other commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-being
of themselves or their families; or
   (F)   Prohibit or regulate the participation in, or carrying on of any
business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of
business, places of entertainment, and any other places of public assembly.
   (G)   Pursuant to G.S. § 14-4, any person found guilty of violating the
above restrictions during a declared state of emergency shall be guilty of a
Class 3 misdemeanor and fined $500.
(2013 Code, § 6-6) (Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic Beverages, see
Ch. 110
   Town Offenses, see
Ch. 130
§ 34.07 EXTENSION, ALTERATION, OR REPEAL.
   Any proclamation may be extended, altered, or repealed, in part or in whole,
during the continued or threatened existence of a state of emergency by the
issuance of a subsequent proclamation.
(2013 Code, § 6-7)
§ 34.08 VIOLATION OF RESTRICTIONS.
   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, it shall be
unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any restriction imposed by
any proclamation authorized by this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 6-8) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   The violation of any provision of this chapter, or any provision of any
restriction imposed by any proclamation authorized by this chapter, unless
otherwise stated within the specific ordinance, shall be punishable as provided
by §
10.99.
(2013 Code, § 6-8) (Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   UTILITIES
      
51.   SOLID WASTE
      
52.   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
CHAPTER 50: UTILITIES
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Tampering with city property
   
50.02   Contamination of water supply
   
50.03   Water tap-on fees
   
50.04   Water rates
   
50.05   Applications and returned checks
   
50.06   Service fees
   
50.07   Discontinuing service
   
50.08   Restoration of services
   
50.09   Testing of meters
   
50.10   Metering tampering and/or unauthorized taps
   
50.11   Service interruption
   
50.12   Office and service hours
   
50.13   Title to water meters and connections
   
50.14   Reservation of rights to remove, test, and the like
   
50.15   Connections for sprinkler systems
   
50.16   Metering for sprinkler system
Cross-Connections, Backflow, and Back-Siphonage Control
   
50.30   Intent, purpose, and control
   
50.31   Responsibilities
   
50.32   Definitions
   
50.33   Regulations
Identity Theft Program
   
50.45   Purpose
   
50.46   Definitions
   
50.47   Identification of relevant red flags
   
50.48   Detection, prevention, and mitigation
   
50.49   Identify theft prevention
   
50.50   Additional legal requirements
   
50.51   Administration
 
   
50.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Building Regulations, see
Ch. 150
Statutory reference:
   Water and sewer authority, G.S. §§ 162A-1 through 162A-58
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 TAMPERING WITH CITY PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the town to
tamper with alter or injure any valve on street mains or curb cocks, or any
cut-offs or fixtures or attachments used in connection with the waterworks
system of the town. All cut-offs and cut-ons are to be performed by town
employees.
   (B)   Pursuant to G.S. § 14-4, any person found guilty of violating §
50.01 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and fined $500.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
§ 50.02 CONTAMINATION OF WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   No person shall contaminate or pollute in any way the water supply of
the town, nor shall he or she throw any dirt or other foreign substance of any
kind into any reservoir containing water for the supply of said town or in any
other fountain or source of the town’s water supply.
   (B)   Pursuant to G.S. § 14-4, any person found guilty of violating §
50.02 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and fined $500.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-22-2022)
§ 50.03 WATER TAP-ON FEES.
   (A)   Each person hooking onto the town’s water supply shall pay an initial
tap-on fee. Water tap fees shall be set from time to time by the Board of
Commissioners and such fees shall be posted in the office of the Town Clerk.
   (B)   In addition to the initial tap on fee, each person shall pay a bi-
monthly meter charge as follows: as set by the Board of Commissioners from time
to time and such charge shall be posted in the office of the Town Clerk.
   (C)   This charge shall be included on the bi-monthly bill for water.
(2013 Code, § 18-3)
§ 50.04 WATER RATES.
   (A)   Generally. Water rates shall be set from time to time by the Board of
Commissioners and such rates shall be posted in the office of the Town Clerk.
(2013 Code, § 18-4)
   (B)   Minimum bi-monthly charge or base rate. The minimum bi-monthly charge
for water service is determined by the size of the meter and is outlined in the
rate schedule. Customers shall be charged, as set by the Board of Commissioners
from time to time, per month for each and every water meter on their property
regardless of whether the service has been used.
(2013 Code, § 18-41)
   (C)   Seasonal customers.
      (1)   Seasonal and irrigation meter customers can make arrangements to
have the water meter disconnected, by completing a “request to disconnect water
service”.
      (2)   To reconnect the water meter, customers should complete a “request
to reconnect water service”.
(2013 Code, § 18-42)
§ 50.05 APPLICATIONS AND RETURNED CHECKS.
   (A)   Scope. The intent of this policy is to provide uniform procedures,
rates, and charges for providing water and sewer service to the town’s
customers that will treat all citizens in a fair and indiscriminate manner.
(2013 Code, § 18-50)
   (B)   Original application.
      (1)   Any person requesting services shall be required to complete an
application for services as approved at that time. The requestor will be
required to supply Social Security number or driver’s license number, and sign
the application in the presence of a Town Finance office employee or a notary
public.
      (2)   Applications must be received by 12:00 p.m. to be turned on the
next business day. Only the primary tenant(s) or residents) can apply for
membership with the town. Other persons living in the household are not
eligible. As previously stated, the utility requires proof that the applicant
is the primary tenant. If service has been disconnected for nonpayment or meter
tampering, the town may require the new applicant to sign an affidavit
attesting to the fact that the previous primary tenant is no longer living in
the residence.
(2013 Code, § 18-51)
   (C)   Returned checks.
      (1)   When a customer’s check is returned from the bank for any reason,
the customer is notified, by mail that the check was not honored and that the
service will be disconnected unless arrangements are made with Town Hall to pay
the bill within 72 hours from mailing of notification.
      (2)   The town reserves the right to require a customer to pay a utility
bill in cash only when three or more bad checks have been received during a 12-
month period.
      (3)   After the town has received more than one bad check, the town will
charge, an amount as set by the Board of Commissioners, for each bad check.
(2013 Code, § 18-52)
§ 50.06 SERVICE FEES.
   (A)   Service fees shall be charges to customers for the purpose of
recovering costs associated with supplying service.
   (B)   Service fees shall be charged as follows.
Description Fees
Description            Fees
Capital improvement
charge (monthly         
charge)                $440
   3-inch meter     $770
   4-inch meter     $990
   6-inch meter
Complete a request for $20
utility service
Cut-on service(s) at a
fixed time or date,    $20
read and set up
account
Development fee new
meter                  $9,000
   3-inch meter     $24,000
   4-inch meter     $60,000
   6-inch meter
Drop-in meters - used
when service lines,
meter, and box are     Labor and Materials    Service Charge Development Fee
already installed and  $1,628                    $25         $9,000
not for newly          $2,687                    $25         $24,000
requested services     $5,205                    $25         $60,000
   3-inch meter
   4-inch meter
   6-inch meter
Installation of a      $1,770
second, 1-inch          
irrigation meter
Meter tamping charge   $100 and/or legal action
Restore service
following involuntary
termination of         First occasion: $100
delinquent account     Second and all subsequent occasions: $200
after full payment
received
Transfer from a
previous customer to a $20
new customer and leave
on
Transfer from tenant
to owner, read meter   $20
(s) and leave service
on
Two free meter re-
reads are allowed per
year, thereafter       $20 each reading
                       
Letter to advise of     
disconnection for       
nonpayment: first      $20
occasion                
                       
Letter to advise of     
disconnection for      $30
nonpayment: second
occasion
Unauthorized tap       $100 and/or legal action
*An additional $75 on weekends, holidays, or nights in an emergency as
determined by the Town Manager

Third and subsequent occasion of nonpayment by due date will result in
automatic disconnect

Water service fees shall be billed on the same billing as solid waste fees, and
water and sewer fees. Any payment made on said bill shall first be applied to
the payment of solid waste collection fees, water service fees, sewer fees, and
finally to water fees
 
(2013 Code, § 18-53)
§ 50.07 DISCONTINUING SERVICE.
   (A)   Requested discontinuance of service. When a customer desires to
discontinue service, 24-hours’ advance notice must be given to the town. The
customer will be responsible for all service usage within the 24 hours
following the time of notice to the town.
(2013 Code, § 18-54)
   (B)   Involuntary discontinuance of service. The town may discontinue
service for one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure of the customer to pay billings for utility services when
due as required by the current cut-off policy; or
      (2)   Upon evidence of meter tampering meter by pass or any attempt to
defraud the town of utility services.
(2013 Code, § 18-55)
   (C)   Customer’s rights prior to discontinuance of service.
      (1)   It is the policy of the town to discontinue water service to
customers for reason of nonpayment only after the customer has a reasonable
opportunity to be heard when the accuracy of the bill is questioned. Reasonable
opportunity is defined as 30 days from the issuance of the bill.
      (2)   (a)   If a customer disputes the accuracy of his or her bill, he or
she has the right to a hearing at which he or she may be represented in person,
or by another person of his or her choosing, and may present, orally or in
writing his or her complaint and contentions.
         (b)   A hearing shall be required within 30 days of the date the bill
is issued and must be heard by the Finance Officer at the Town Hall, 355
Vanderbilt Road, Biltmore Forest, North Carolina or telephone at (828) 274-
0824.
         (c)   A hearing may be scheduled between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,
Monday through Friday.
(2013 Code, § 18-57)
§ 50.08 RESTORATION OF SERVICES.
   When it becomes necessary for the town to discontinue services for any of
the reasons listed in §
50.07(B), service will be restored only after:
   (A)   Payment of all billings owed to the town, including penalties and
service fees; and
   (B)   Payment of any reconnection fees and any material and labor costs
incurred by the town.
(2013 Code, § 18.56)
§ 50.09 TESTING OF METERS.
   (A)   (1)   If the customer suspects a malfunction, he or she has the right
to request the municipality to test his or her meter for accuracy.
      (2)   Such requests for accuracy tests may be made at intervals of no
less than six months at a fee not to exceed the town’s actual cost.
   (B)   (1)   The results of all such tests will be made available to the
customer.
      (2)   Should the owner’s meter prove to be faulty (registering at 4%
above correct 100%), the above charge shall be refunded and adjustment made to
the customer.
      (3)   The adjustment shall be determined by the previous six months’ use
and not be adjusted for more than a total of six months.
(2013 Code, § 18.58)
§ 50.10 METERING TAMPERING AND/OR UNAUTHORIZED TAPS.
   Tampering with water meters is prohibited by G.S. § 14-159.1 as follows.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to alter, tamper
with, or bypass a meter which has been installed for the purpose of measuring
water or knowingly to use water bypassing a meter provided by water supplier
for the purpose of measuring and registering the quantity of water consumed.
   (B)   Any meter or service entrance facility found to have been altered,
tampered with, or bypassed in a manner that would cause such meter to
inaccurately measure and register the water to be diverted from the recording
apparatus of the meter, shall be the prima facie evidence of intent to violate
and of the violation of this section by the person in whose name such meter is
installed or the person or persons so using or receiving the benefits of such
unmetered, unregistered, or diverted water and shall be assessed a meter
tampering and/or unauthorized tap charge, in an amount as set by the Board of
Commissioners from time to time, and/or legal action.
   (C)   Nothing in this act shall be construed to apply to licensed
contractors while performing usual and ordinary services in accordance with
recognized customs and standards.
   (D)   The person or persons making unauthorized taps or meter tampering or
the person knowingly benefiting from such water or sewer service will be billed
for unauthorized usage at current rates. The usage shall be estimated by the
town and the minimum charge shall be $25.
   (E)   Connection fees and unauthorized tap charges must also be paid.
Service to the house, building, or other customer-owned facilities will not be
restored until such payment has been received by the town.
   (F)   Pursuant to G.S. § 14-4, any person found guilty of violating §
50.10 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and fined $500.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
§ 50.11 SERVICE INTERRUPTION.
   (A)   The town does not guarantee continuous and uninterrupted water service
and shall not be liable for loss or damage caused by any failure to supply
water or by any interruption unless due to the negligence of the town.
   (B)   The customer shall notify the town promptly of any defect in service
or of any trouble or irregularity in the water supply or quality. In no event
shall the town be responsible for any damage resulting during the customer’s
delay in notifying the town of such trouble or irregularity.
   (C)   Whenever service is interrupted for work on the water lines or on
related equipment such work shall be done, as far as practicable, at a time
that will cause the least inconvenience to the customer. The customer or
customers to be effected by such interruptions shall, if practical, be notified
in advance.
(2013 Code, § 18.60)
§ 50.12 OFFICE AND SERVICE HOURS.
   The Town Hall Office is open for business between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday. Routine and regular service work is performed
during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:30 p.m., except that no routine or regular
service work shall be performed on Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays. Service
personnel can be readied by calling the town’s regular number as listed in the
local telephone directory during regular office hours and by calling the Police
Department during non-office hours.
(2013 Code, § 18.61)
§ 50.13 TITLE TO WATER METERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   The title and ownership of the water meters and connections are retained by
the town.
(2013 Code, § 18.62)
§ 50.14 RESERVATION OF RIGHTS TO REMOVE, TEST, AND THE LIKE.
   The town reserves the right to remove, test, seal, and interfere with any
meter for causes deemed justifiable by the Director of Public Works.
(2013 Code, § 18.63)
§ 50.15 CONNECTIONS FOR SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.
   (A)   All irrigation systems shall have a separate tap from the water main
and a separate meter. No irrigation system shall be connected in any manner to
the house service. An RPZ device must be placed within 15 feet of the
irrigation meter and before any branch lines. All RPZ devices shall be
installed above ground with a minimum of 12 inches of unimpeded clearance from
the bottom of the discharge port. All connections shall be made in accordance
with specifications furnished by the Public Works Director.
   (B)   Any persons with irrigation connections who do not comply with the
aforesaid requirements shall immediately bring the system into compliance.
   (C)   No water passing through connections made for irrigation purpose shall
be used for any purposes other than to operate sprinkler system.
   (D)   In the event any person fails to comply with any of the provisions of
this section, the town shall terminate water service to the irrigation
connection until such time as the person is in compliance with this chapter.
   (E)   Any persons with an irrigation connection that does not comply with
the aforesaid requirements in divisions (A) through (D) above, shall be given
notice to conform thereto. A period of 14 days shall be allowed for the owner
of the irrigation system to bring said system into compliance. After a period
of 30 days of noncompliance, the water supply to the irrigation system shall be
terminated until said system is brought into compliance.
(2013 Code, § 18.64)
§ 50.16 METERING FOR SPRINKLER SYSTEM.
   The metering for an irrigation system shall be installed and maintained by
the town. The meter for an irrigation system shall be adjacent to the present
meter for the customer or adjacent to the town right-of-way. The cost of the
tap for the meter shall be in an amount as set by the Board of Commissioners
from time to time. Larger taps can be achieved but at a significantly higher
cost.
(2013 Code, § 18.66)
CROSS-CONNECTIONS, BACKFLOW, AND BACK-SIPHONAGE CONTROL
§ 50.30 INTENT, PURPOSE, AND CONTROL.
   (A)   Intent.
      (1)   It is the intent of this subchapter to recognize that there are
varying degrees of hazard to potable water within the water main and water
supply systems.
      (2)   It is also the intent to apply the principle that the degree of
protection should be commensurate with the degree of hazard.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is:
      (1)   To protect public potable water supply of the town against actual
or potential cross-connections, backflow, and back-siphonage by isolating with
the premises or private property contamination or pollution that has occurred
or may occur because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross-connection on
the premises or private property;
      (2)   To eliminate cross-connections, backflow, and back-siphonage or any
other source of water or process water used for any purpose whatsoever this may
jeopardize the safety of the public potable water supply of the town; and
      (3)   (a)   To establish a cross-connection, backflow, and back-siphonage
control program.
         (b)   Cross-connection, backflow, and back-siphonage control require
cooperation between the town and the consumer. The responsibilities and duties
of each shall be as set forth in the subchapter and other applicable
regulations.
(2013 Code, § 18.65)
§ 50.31 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   (1)   The town is primarily responsible for the prevention of
contamination and pollution of the public water system. Such responsibility
begins at the point of origin of the public water supply and includes all of
the public water distribution system, and ends at the service connection to the
consumer’s water system.
      (2)   In addition, the town shall exercise reasonable vigilance to ensure
that the consumer has taken the proper steps to protect the public potable
water system.
      (3)   When it is determined that a backflow prevention device is required
for the protection of the public system of the town, the town shall require the
consumer, at the consumer’s expense, to install an approved backflow prevention
device at each service connection.
   (B)   (1)   The consumer has the prime responsibility of preventing
contaminants and pollutants from entering his or her potable water system or
the public water system at his or her service connection. The consumer, at his
or her own expense, shall install, operate, and maintain an approved backflow
prevention device and the service connection as directed by the town.
      (2)   Any testing, maintenance, and repairs of backflow prevention
devices shall be made by a licensed plumber at the consumer’s expense.
Installations are to be made by a licensed plumber.
   (C)   Enforcement of this subchapter shall be administered by the Director
of Public Works in cooperation with the County Health Department -
Environmental Health Division.
(2013 Code, § 18.65)
§ 50.32 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR GAP SEPARATION. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water
to a tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and the flow leveling of the
receptacle. An approved AIR GAP SEPARATION shall be at least double the
diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the
vessel.
   APPROVED. The term approved as herein used in reference to a water supply
system or backflow prevention device (or method) shall mean one that has been
approved by the Public Works Director.
   BACK-PRESSURE BACKFLOW. Backflow caused by a pump elevated tank boiler or
other means that could create pressure within the system greater than the
supply pressure.
   BACK-SIPHONAGE BACKFLOW. A reversal of the normal direction of flow in the
pipeline due to a negative pressure (vacuum) being created in the supply line
with the backflow source subject to atmospheric pressure.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE-TYPE - A. Any effective device, method, or
construction used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of
device used shall be based on the degree of hazard either existing or
potential.
   CHECK VALVE-APPROVED. A check valve that is drip-tight in the normal
direction of flow when the inlet pressure is one P.S.I, and the outlet pressure
is zero. The check valve shall permit no leakage in a direction reverse to the
normal flow. The closure element (e.g. clapper) shall be internally weighted or
otherwise internally loaded to promote rapid and positive closure.
   CONSUMER. Any person, firm, or corporation using or receiving water from the
Town of Biltmore Forest water system.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by sewage or
industrial fluids or waste to a degree, which creates an actual hazard to the
public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any actual or potential connection of structural
arrangement between a public or a consumer’s potable water system and any other
source or system through which it is possible to introduce into any part of the
potable system any used water, industrial fluid, gas, or substance other than
the intended potable water with which the system is supplied. Bypass
arrangements jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or change-over
devices, and other temporary/permanent devices through which or because of
which backflow can or may occur are considered to be CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   DOUBLE CHECK ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of two single independently
acting approved check valves, including tightly closing shut-off valves located
at each end of the assembly and suitable connections for testing the water-
tightness of each check valve.
   HAZARD - DEGREE OF. Plumbing type cross-connection in a consumer’s potable
water system that has not been properly protected by a vacuum breaker, air-gap
separation, or other device. Unprotected, plumbing type cross-connections are
considered to be a health hazard. They include, but are not limited to, cross-
connections to toilets, sinks, lavatories, wash trays, domestic washing
machines, and lawn sprinkling systems. Plumbing type cross-connections can be
located in many type of structures, including homes, apartment houses, hotels,
and commercial and industrial establishment.
   HAZARD POLLUTION. An actual or potential threat to the physical properties
of the water system or the potability of the public or the consumer’s potable
water system but which would not constitute a health or system hazard as
defined. The maximum degree of intensity of pollution to which the potable
water system could be degraded under this definition would cause a nuisance or
be aesthetically objectionable or could cause minor damage to the system or its
appurtenances.
   HAZARD-SYSTEM. An actual or potential threat of severe danger to the
physical properties of the public or the consumer’s potable water system or of
a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the
quality of the potable water in the system.
   INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS. Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health system, pollutional, or plumbing hazard if
introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but not be limited
to: polluted or contaminated used water; all types of process water and “used
waters” originating from the public potable water system which may deteriorate
in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; planting acids and alkalis;
circulated cooling waters collected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling
waters that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic
substances; contaminated natural water such as from wells, springs, streams,
rivers, irrigation canals or systems, and the like; oils, gases, glycerin,
paraffices, caustic and acid solutions; and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other processes or for firefighting purposes.
   INDUSTRIAL PIPING SYSTEM-CONSUMER’S. Any system used by the consumer for
transmission of or to confine or store any fluid, solid, or gaseous substance
other than an approved water supply. Such a system would include all pipes,
conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment, and apparatus used to
produce, convey, or store substances which are or may be polluted or
contaminated.
   POLLUTION. An impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does
not create an actual hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and
unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device containing
within its structure a minimum of two independently acting, approved check
valves, together with an automatically operating pressure differential relief
valve located between the two check valves. The first check valve reduces the
supply pressure at predetermined amount so that during normal flow and at
cessation of normal flow the pressure between the checks. It shall be less than
the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential
relief valve, by its discharging to atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the
pressure between the checks less than the supply pressure. The unit shall
include tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the device and
each device shall be fitted with properly located test cocks between the source
and the service connection such as valves, pumps, pipes, conduits, tanks,
receptacles, fixtures, equipment, and appurtenances used to, produce, convey,
treat, or store a potable water for public consumption or use.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The terminal end of a service connection from the public
potable water system (i.e., where the town loses jurisdiction and sanitary
control over the water at its point of delivery to the consumer’s water. If a
meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the SERVICE
CONNECTION shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There should be no
unprotected takeoffs from the service tine ahead of any meter or backflow
prevention device located at the point of delivery to the consumer’s water
system.
   WATER-POTABLE. Water from any source which has been investigated by the
health agency having jurisdiction and which has been approved for human
consumption.
   WATER SUPPLY-AUXILIARY. Any water supply on or available to the premises
other than the Town of Biltmore Forest’s approved public potable water supply.
These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor’s public potable
water supply or any natural source such as a well, spring, river, stream, and
the like, or used water, or industrial fluids. They may be polluted or
contaminated or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water
source over which the Town does not have sanitary control.
   WATER SYSTEM-CONSUMERS. Includes any water system located on the consumer’s
premises whether supplied by a public potable water system or an auxiliary
water supply. The system or systems may be either a potable water system or an
industrial piping system.
   WATER SYSTEM-CONSUMER’S POTABLE. The portion of the privately-owned potable
water system tying between the service connection and the point of use. This
system will include all pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures,
equipment, and appurtenances used to produce, convey, store, or use potable
water.
   WATER SYSTEM-PUBLIC POTABLE. Any publicly- or privately-owned water system
operated as a public utility under a valid health permit to supply water for
domestic purposes. This system will include all sources, facilities, and
appurtenances.
   WATER USED. Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public potable
water system to a consumer’s water system after it has passed through the
service connection and is no longer under the control of the water purveyor.
(2013 Code, § 18.65)
§ 50.33 REGULATIONS.
   (A)   No water service connections to any premises shall be installed or
maintained unless the potable water and water supply are protected against
actual or potential contamination or pollution in the manner required.
   (B)   In the event of contamination or pollution of a potable water system,
the consumer shall notify immediately the town, in order that appropriate
measures may be taken to overcome the contamination or pollution.
   (C)   The Director or his or her authorized representative shall have the
right to enter any building, structure, or premises to perform any duty imposed
upon by this subchapter where cross-connection, backflow, and back-siphonage is
deemed possible.
   (D)   Nothing herein shall relieve the consumer of the responsibility for
conducting or causing to be conducted, periodic surveys of water use practices
on his or her premises to determine whether there are actual or potential
cross-connection in the consumer’s water system through which contaminants or
pollutants could flow back into the public water system.
   (E)   On request, the consumer shall furnish to the Director any pertinent
information regarding the water supply system on such property where cross-
connection, backflow, and back-siphonage is deemed possible.
   (F)   Water service may be discontinued after reasonable notice to the
consumer if a violation of this subchapter exists on the premises. Such other
precautionary measures may be taken as are deemed necessary to eliminate any
danger to the potable water system. Water service shall not be restored until
the danger has been eliminated in compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter. Installation of all cross-connections, backflow, and back-siphonage
control devices will be made by a licensed plumber approved by the Director of
Public Works. All installations shall be made under the supervision of the
town’s Cross-Connection Control Inspector.
   (G)   Installations of all reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
devices on existing or proposed water meters shall be installed adjacent to the
property line or within 15 feet of the meter.
   (H)   All cross-connections, backflow, and back-siphonage all control
equipment shall meet the testing requirements of the Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control and Hydraulic Research, the American Water Works
Association, and the State Building Code, Volume II Plumbing, and the EPA.
   (I)   (1)   All cross-connections, backflow, and back-siphonage control
devices, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a
safe condition and in good working order. The consumer shall be responsible for
the maintenance of all backflow prevention devices downstream from the service
connection on the private water system.
      (2)   (a)   All backflow prevention devices located at the service
connections shall be tested at least once a year, or more often in those
instances where inspections indicate a need by the Department of Public Works.
Test results shall be made available to the consumer.
         (b)   The consumer shall be notified by the Public Works Department
prior to the requirement that all rubber goods shall be replaced every five
years or more often if needed. Removal, rebuilding, and installation shall be
made by a licensed plumber approved by the Director of Public Works.
      (3)   All maintenance and repairs of the backflow device shall be made at
the expense of the consumer.
   (J)   Any RPZ devices that have been installed inside a building shall be
required to be inspected at least annually by an independent inspector
certified by the state to conduct such inspections. The test results shall be
mailed to the Public Works Director within 14 days of inspection.
   (K)   All RPZ devices must remain free of obstructions (i.e., brush,
shrubbery, fences, and the like) for testing or inspection purposes.
   (L)   The town assumes no responsibility for the RPZ device during an annual
inspection.
   (M)   All fire protection water lines must have an RPZ device.
   (N)   All commercial buildings that use a boiler system must have an RPZ
device and that device must be inspected annually by an independent inspector
certified by the state to conduct such inspections. The test results shall be
mailed to the Public Works Director within 14 days of inspection.
   (O)   All permanent installations designed to introduce water into a
swimming pool from a potable water supply shall be done only through an air gap
of at least two times the diameter of the introducing pipe. In those instances
where a permanent water introduction system is not installed and water from a
potable water supply is introduced into a swimming pool by means of a hose, the
hose bib to which the hose is connected shall be equipped with an RPZ backflow
preventer.
   (P)   No irrigation lines shall be placed within the town rights-of-way.
   (Q)   Pursuant to G.S. § 14-4, any person found guilty of violating §
50.33 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and fined $500.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
IDENTIFY THEFT PROGRAM
§ 50.45 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is for the creation and implementation of an
identity theft prevention program for the town to identify, detect, mitigate,
and update red flags that signal the possibility of identity theft in
connection with the opening of a covered utility account or any existing
covered utility account.
(2013 Code, § 18.67)
§ 50.46 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COVERED ACCOUNT. An account that the Town of Biltmore Forest offers or
maintains, primarily for personal, family, or household purposes, that involves
or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions and any other
account that the Town of Biltmore Forest offers or maintains for which there is
a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or the safety and soundness of the
Town of Biltmore Forest from identity theft, including financial, operational,
compliance, reputation, or litigation risks.
   IDENTITY THEFT. A fraud committed or attempted using the identifying
information of another person without authority.
   RED FLAG. A pattern, practice, or specific activity that indicates the
possible existence of identity theft. Section
50.47 provides a specific description of which red flags are applicable to this
policy.
(2013 Code, § 18-67.1)
§ 50.47 IDENTIFICATION OF RELEVANT RED FLAGS.
   (A)   After careful examination of our accounts, including the methods by
which we open access and past experience with identity theft, the following
events/occurrences reasonably indicate the potential for identity theft and
should be considered “red flags” for purposes of this policy.
   (B)   Alerts, notifications, or other warnings received from consumer
reporting agencies or service providers, such as fraud detections services.
   (C)   The presentation of suspicious documents, such as:
      (1)   Document provided for identification that appears to have been
altered or forged;
      (2)   The photograph or physical description on the identification is not
consistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer presenting the
identification;
      (3)   Other information on the identification is not consistent with
information provided by the person opening a new covered account or customer
presenting the identification;
      (4)   Other information on the identification is not consistent with
readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution
or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or
      (5)   An application appears to have been altered or forged, or gives the
appearance of having been destroyed and reassembled.
   (D)   The presentation of suspicious personal identifying information, such
as a suspicious address changes:
      (1)   Personal identifying information provided is inconsistent when
compared against external information sources used by the town;
      (2)   Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not
consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the
customer. For example, there is a lack of correlation between the Social
Security number range and date of birth; or
      (3)   Personal identifying information provided is associated with known
fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the
town, for example, the address on an application is the same as the address
provided on a fraudulent application.
   (E)   The phone number on an application is the same as the number provided
on a fraudulent application:
      (1)   Personal identifying information provided is of a type commonly
associated with fraudulent activity as indicated by internal or third-party
sources used by the financial institution or creditor;
      (2)   For example:
         (a)   The address on an application is fictitious, a mail drop, or a
prison; or the phone number is invalid, or is associated with a pager or
answering service;
         (b)   The Social Security number provided is the same as that
submitted by other persons opening an account or other customers;
         (c)   The address or telephone number provided is the same as or
similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually
large number of other persons opening accounts or other customers;
         (d)   The person opening the covered account or the customer fails to
provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in
response to notification that the application is incomplete; or
         (e)   Personal identifying information provided is not consistent with
personal identifying information that is on file with the town.
      (3)   If the town uses challenge questions, the person opening the
covered account or the customer cannot provide authenticating information
beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer
report:
         (a)   The unusual use of, or other suspicious activity related to, a
covered account;
         (b)   Notice from customers, victims of identity theft, law
enforcement authorities, or other persons regarding possible identity theft in
connection with covered accounts held by the town; or
         (c)   The town is notified by a customer, a victim of identity theft,
a law enforcement authority, or any other person that it has opened a
fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft.
(2013 Code, § 18-67.2)
§ 50.48 DETECTION, PREVENTION, AND MITIGATION.
   (A)   Detection.
      (1)   In an effort to ensure proper detection of any red flags, all
customers (consumers) must provide at least the following information/
documentation before any new covered account will be opened:
         (a)   Full name;
         (b)   Date of birth (individual);
         (c)   Address, (a residential or business street address for an
individual; for an individual who does not have a residential or business
street address, an Army Post Office (APO) or Fleet Post Office (FPO) box
number, or the residential or business street address of next of kin or of
another contact individual; or for a person other than an individual (such as a
corporation, partnership, or trust), a principal place of business, local
office, or other physical location; and
         (d)   Identification number, which shall be:
            1.   For a U.S. person, a taxpayer identification number; or
            2.   For a non-U.S. person, one or more of the following: a
taxpayer identification number; passport number and country of issuance; alien
identification card number; or number and country of issuance of any other
government-issued document evidencing nationality or residence and bearing a
photograph or similar safeguard.
      (2)   For any account holder of a covered account for which the above
information is not already on file at the town, the customer will be contacted
within a reasonable period of time after discovering the missing information to
obtain the necessary information; and
      (3)   (a)   To assist with detection of red flags, the town will
implement the appropriate computer programs tailored to the town business needs
to help authenticate customers, monitor transactions, and change of address
requests.
         (b)   The following programs are being used and the town continued use
thereof is incorporated and made part of this policy: CSI Technology Outfitters
900 East Main Street, Suite T Easley, South Carolina 29640.
   (B)   Preventing and mitigating identity theft.
      (1)   (a)   In the event a red flag is detected, the town committed to
preventing the occurrence of identity theft and taking the appropriate steps to
mitigate any harm caused thereby.
         (b)   In order to respond appropriately to the detection of a red
flag, the town shall consider any aggravating circumstance(s) that may heighten
the risk of identity theft.
      (2)   After assessing the degree of risk posed, the town will respond to
the red flag in an appropriate manner, which may include:
         (a)   Monitoring a covered account for evidence of identity theft;
         (b)   Contacting the customer;
         (c)   Changing any passwords, security codes, or other security
devices that permit access to a covered account;
         (d)   Reopening a covered account with a new account number;
         (e)   Not opening a new covered account;
         (f)   Closing an existing covered account;
         (g)   Notifying law enforcement; or
         (h)   Determining that no response is warranted under the particular
circumstances.
      (3)   In an effort to mitigate the damage caused by identity theft, the
following programs/software are being used, and the town’s continued use
thereof is incorporated and made part of this policy: CSI Technology
Outfitters.
      (4)   (a)   For the protection of our customers, all service providers
hired by the town to perform any activity in connection with any covered
account must also take appropriate steps to prevent identity theft.
         (b)   To this end, the town will only contract with service providers
that have implemented and follow a similar identity theft prevention policy.
(2013 Code, § 18-67.3)
§ 50.49 IDENTIFY THEFT PREVENTION.
   (A)   The town is committed to maintaining an identity theft prevention
policy that is current with the ever-changing crime of identity theft. To that
end, the town will reassess this policy on a periodic (annual) basis to reflect
changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the town from
identity theft.
   (B)   The determination to make changes to this policy will be within the
discretion of the responsible parties, identified in §
50.51, but after careful consideration of the following:
      (1)   The town’s past experience(s) with identity theft;
      (2)   Changes in methods of identity theft;
      (3)   Changes in methods to detect, prevent, and mitigate identity theft;
      (4)   Changes in the types of accounts that the town offers or maintains;
and
      (5)   Changes in the business arrangements of the town, including service
provider arrangements.
(2013 Code, § 18-67.4)
§ 50.50 ADDITIONAL LEGAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The town shall develop policies and procedures designed to
enable the organization to form a reasonable belief that a credit report
relates to the consumer for whom it was requested.
      (2)   In an effort to ensure that the town maintains accurate address
information for its consumers and to ensure the town provides accurate address
information of its consumers to reporting agencies if requested, at least one
of the following steps must be taken prior to providing the consumer’s address
to the consumer reporting agency:
         (a)   Verify the address on file with the consumer;
         (b)   Confirm the address being sent to the consumer reporting agency
matches the address the town has on file for that particular consumer;
         (c)   Compare the address with information received from any third-
party source; or
         (d)   Verify by other means that are reasonably available at the time.
   (B)   If an accurate address is confirmed, the town shall furnish the
consumer’s address to the nationwide consumer reporting agency from which it
received the notice of address discrepancy if:
      (1)   The town establishes a continuing relationship with the customer;
and
      (2)   The town regularly and in the ordinary course of business,
furnishes information to the consumer reporting agency.
(2013 Code, § 18-67.5)
§ 50.51 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Town Manager will be responsible for overseeing the implementation,
management, and updating of this new policy and shall have the following
responsibilities:
   (A)   Assign specific responsibility for the program’s implementation,
including appropriate training for staff;
   (B)   At least annually, the assigned person/staff must report to the Board
of Commissioners and provide an update on the policy’s effectiveness, any
service provider arrangements, and significant incidents involving identity
theft and the town’s response, and recommendations for ways to improve the
program;
   (C)   Review reports prepared by staff to ensure that the town remains
compliant with its legal responsibility to maintain an identity theft
prevention program; and
   (D)   Approve material changes to this program as necessary to address
changing identity theft risks.
(2013 Code, § 18-67.6)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
(2013 Code, § 18.59) (Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
CHAPTER 51: SOLID WASTES
Section
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Littering
   
51.03   Construction debris
   
51.04   Materials resulting from clearing land
   
51.05   Garbage collection
   
51.06   Garbage receptacles
   
51.07   Tree limbs, brush, leaves, and the like
   
51.08   Placement of limbs, brush, leaves, and the like
   
51.09   Grass clippings
   
51.10   Fees
   
51.11   Refuse not collected by the town
   
51.12   Accumulation of garbage, refuse, rubbish, and waste prohibited
   
51.13   Recycling and recyclable material
   
51.14   Notice of noncompliance
 
   
51.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to regulate removal of garbage and trash, see G.S. § 160A-
312
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING MATERIAL SCRAPS. Scrap building material from the construction,
reconstruction, remodeling, or repair of a building, walkway, driveway, signs,
and or other structures, including, but not limited to, excavated earth, tree
stumps, rocks, gravel, bricks, plaster, concrete, lumber, or any other similar
material used in construction or containers or wrappings therefor.
   BULKY WASTE. Large items of solid waste such as furniture, white goods,
large auto parts, stumps, and other oversize wastes whose large size precludes
or complicates its handling by normal solid waste collection, processing, or
disposal methods.
   COLLECTION. The act of removing solid waste or recyclable material to a
transfer station, processing facility, or disposal facility. For the purposes
of this chapter, any collection receptacles or containers located on town
property are considered to be in the stream of COLLECTION.
   GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable matter resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, in cans, glassware, or other
containers, rags, waste paper, includes all putrescible wastes, but excludes
sewage and human waste.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. A solid waste or combination of solid wastes, including
liquid or gaseous wastes, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or
physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may:
      (1)   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or
      (2)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of,
or otherwise managed.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Any solid waste that is generated in the diagnosis,
treatment, or immunization of human beings or animals, in research pertaining
thereto, or the production of biologicals.
   MIXED PAPER. Envelopes, catalogs, bulk mail, magazines, computer paper, copy
paper, file folders, phone books, gray cartons, adding machine tapes, letters,
scratch pads, soft-covered books, and other material as defined by the Director
of Public Works.
   PATHOLOGICAL WASTE. Human tissues, organs, and body parts, and the carcasses
and body parts of any animals that were known to have been exposed to pathogens
that are potentially dangerous to humans during research, were used in the
production of biologists or in vivo testing of pharmaceuticals, or that humans
died with a known or suspected disease transmissible to humans.
   PUTRESCIBLE. Solid waste capable of being decomposed by microorganisms with
sufficient rapidity as to cause nuisances from odors and gases; such as kitchen
wastes, offal, and animal carcasses.
   RECYCLE, RECYCLABLES, or RECYCLABLE MATERIAL. Those materials or that
process by which solid waste, or materials which would otherwise become solid
waste, are collected, separated, or processed or returned to use in the form of
raw materials or products.
   REFUSE. Solid waste that is non-putrescible waste collected from residences.
   SHARPS. Needles, syringes, and scalpel blades
   SOLID WASTE. Garbage refuse, including SOLID WASTE materials resulting from
residential and business activities, but does not include solids or dissolved
materials in domestic sewage or other significant pollutants in water
resources, such as silt, dissolved materials in irrigation return flows, or
other common water pollutants.
   WHITE GOODS. Inoperative and discarded refrigerators, ranges, water heaters,
freezers, and other similar domestic and commercial large appliances.
   YARD TRASH. Solid waste consisting solely of vegetative matter resulting
from landscaping maintenance. Includes grass clippings, leaves, sod, tree
limbs, and weeds.
(2013 Code, § 9-1)
§ 51.02 LITTERING.
   (A)   This chapter provides that it shall be unlawful for any person to
throw or deposit upon any street or street right-of-way (except as set forth in
§
51.07), or upon any private property, any rocks, bricks, lumber, sawdust,
bottles, jars, broken glass, or any plastic or paper bags, cups, or paper of
any kind, or any trash, leaves, dirt, rubbish, or any thing that may be
unsightly or offensive or that may, in any way, be dangerous to traffic.
   (B)   Pursuant to G.S. § 14-4, any person found guilty of violating §
51.02 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and fined $250.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
§ 51.03 CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS.
   All refuse, lumber, and debris remaining as a result of the repair of a
building or the erection and completion of a new building shall be removed by
the property owner within ten days from the date of completion of said work.
(2013 Code, § 9-3)
§ 51.04 MATERIALS RESULTING FROM CLEARING LAND.
   No materials such as trees, shrubbery, or underbrush resulting from land
being cleared shall be placed for collection by the town, but such materials
shall be disposed of by the contractor or builder. In the event the contractor
or builder fails to remove such material, the removal thereof shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the property.
(2013 Code, § 9-4) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05 GARBAGE COLLECTION.
   (A)   Garbage shall be collected in the back yard of the resident.
Collection of garbage shall be made by the town on a regular basis. A schedule
of such times and routes of collection shall be posted in the Town Hall and may
be changed from time to time as may be necessary in the discretion of the
Director of Public Works and Town Manager.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit at any
location within the corporate limits of the town for collection by the town any
solid waste of any type that was generated outside the corporate limits of the
town.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant of any residence,
dwelling unit, business, or commercial premises to allow any person to place or
deposit for collection by the town any solid waste of any type which was
generated outside the corporate limits of the town.
(2013 Code, § 9-5) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 GARBAGE RECEPTACLES.
   (A)   Garbage receptacles shall be cans made substantially of metal,
plastic, or plastic bags. Cans shall have tight-fitting covers and strong
handles and the covers shall be kept on at all times, except when cans are
being filled or emptied.
   (B)   Plastic bags shall be properly secured at the bag opening with a twist
tie or other means to eliminate any spillage of contents.
   (C)   Containers shall not exceed 32 gallons or exceed 50 pounds in weight.
Each household may have up to five garbage receptacles.
   (D)   Garbage cans shall not be located behind closed fences, inside closed
buildings, or in any other inaccessible place. Garbage from dumpsters shall not
be collected by the town.
(2013 Code, § 9-6) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.07 TREE LIMBS, BRUSH, LEAVES, AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   (1)   All trees or portions thereof to be picked up shall be cut up
and reduced in lengths so that no portion shall be more than six feet in
length. Limbs shall be no greater than six inches in diameter (distance through
the limb).
      (2)   All limbs shall be cut from the main body of any limb or trunk. All
such materials shall be neatly piled with the length of such items
substantially parallel to the street. One dump truck load of limbs and brush
shall be allowed each resident per two months without additional charges.
Should the volume exceed one dump truck load, a fee will be charged for each
two cubic yards or any portion thereof.
      (3)   A fee, in an amount as set by the Board of Commissioners from time
to time, per two cubic yards will be charged when limbs and brush have exceeded
one dump truck load in a two-month period.
   (B)    Loose leaves shall be collected at roadside by town forces from
November 1 through January 15. Leaves shall be free of sticks, rocks, and other
debris, and not placed in plastic bags.
   (C)   Tree limbs and brush shall not be placed at roadside more than five
days prior to the collection date.
   (D)   Limbs and brush shall not be placed at roadside from November 1
through January 15.
   (E)   Removal of limbs, brush, and debris of all types resulting from work
of commercial tree services shall be the responsibility of the property owner,
and not the town.
(2013 Code, § 9-7)
§ 51.08 PLACEMENT OF LIMBS, BRUSH, LEAVES, AND THE LIKE.
   Limbs, brush, and leaves shall be placed by occupant upon that portion of
residents’ property immediately adjacent to the street right-of-way normally
used by vehicles, but at least three feet off of the pavement.
(2013 Code, § 9-8)
§ 51.09 GRASS CLIPPINGS.
   The town strongly discourages the deposit of grass clippings within the
street rights-of-way adjacent to residences; however, should an occupant of a
residence place grass clippings within the street rights- of-way, the town may
remove said grass clippings and, if so removed, shall bill the owner of said
residence a flat fee in an amount as set by the Board of Commissioners from
time to time.
(2013 Code, § 9-9)
§ 51.10 FEES.
   (A)   The following fees shall be charged and collected by the town:
      (1)   Collection of limbs and brush in excess of one dump truck per two
months, $50 fee per two cubic yards;
      (2)   One hundred dollar fee per dump truck load;
      (3)   Twenty-five dollar fee for limbs and brush placed at roadside seven
days prior to scheduled pickup;
      (4)   One hundred fifty dollar flat fee for disposal of grass clippings;
      (5)   Twenty-five dollar for placement of limbs, brush, and leaves in a
location other than the street right-of-way immediately adjacent to the front
of the residents’ property; and
      (6)   One hundred dollar fee for collection of construction debris or
other items not collected by the town in addition to $10 fee per each two cubic
yards or any portion thereof collected.
   (B)   Solid waste collection fees shall be billed on the same billing as
water and sewer fees. Any payment made on said bill shall first be applied to
the payment of solid waste collection fees, water service fees, sewer fees, and
finally to water fees.
   (C)   Where such an accumulation exists for any reason, the town may
summarily remove, abate, or remedy such accumulation and the expense of the
action shall be a lien upon the land or premises and shall be collected as
unpaid taxes.
(2013 Code, § 9-10)
§ 51.11 REFUSE NOT COLLECTED BY THE TOWN.
   The following is a list of refuse not collection by the town (*denotes
refuse not accepted by the County Landfill. Asbestos not accepted unless prior
arrangement with County Landfill personnel):
   (A)   Asbestos*;
   (B)   Ashes;
   (C)   Batteries;
   (D)   Bedding;
   (E)   Building materials;
   (F)   Flammable materials;
   (G)   Gas tanks*;
   (H)   Hazardous waste*;
   (I)   Liquids*;
   (J)   Materials resulting from clearing land;
   (K)   Medical waste;
   (L)   Paint;
   (M)   Pathological waste;
   (N)   Rocks;
   (O)   Sharps;
   (P)   Tires; and
   (Q)   White goods.
(2013 Code, § 9-11)
§ 51.12 ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE, REFUSE, RUBBISH, AND WASTE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No property owner or tenant shall allow the accumulation of garbage,
refuse, rubbish, or waste upon land or premises owned or occupied by them so
that such accumulation is dangerous or prejudicial to the public health.
   (B)   Where such an accumulation exists for any reason, the town may
summarily remove, abate, or remedy such accumulation and the expense of the
action shall be a lien upon the land or premises and shall be collected as
unpaid taxes.
(2013 Code, § 9-12) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.13 RECYCLING AND RECYCLABLE MATERIAL.
   (A)   Recycling encouraged. Each person who owns, leases, or manages a
residence, residential unit, or place of business, industry, commerce, or other
place providing goods or services, or institution, church, camp, or school is
strongly encouraged to remove recyclable materials from solid waste generated
and make them available for recycling.
   (B)   Containers. The town provides each residence with a 95-gallon
container. These containers are to be used for recycling materials only, and
will be picked up once every two weeks by town staff. The containers remain the
property of the town and remain with the residence if ownership is transferred.
Anyone found to remove the container from the residence in violation of this
section shall be charged the prevailing cost of a replacement container.
   (C)   Recyclable materials. Recyclable material shall consist of the
following items and shall be prepared for recycling, prior to deposit in the
town’s recycling containers, as directed:
      (1)   Jars and bottles. All brown, clear, and green container (bottles
and jars) glass));
      (2)   Cans. Aluminum beverage and bimetal (tin or steel) food cans;
      (3)   Plastic containers. Plastic containers No. 1 PETE (soda containers)
and No. 2 HDPE (milk and shampoo containers) and No. 3, 5, and 7 (mixed
plastic);
      (4)   Corrugated containers and cardboard. Must be flattened;
      (5)   Newspapers. May be bundled with string or left loose. Inserts may
remain; and
      (7)   Mixed paper. See definition in §
51.01.
   (D)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit at the
town’s recycling containers any recyclable material unless all such material
can fit entirely within the appropriate container.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit in the
town’s recycling containers any recyclable material of any type that was
generated outside the corporate limits of the town.
      (3)   No person, other than persons authorized by the town, may remove
recyclable material from a recycling container.
(2013 Code, § 9-13) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.14 NOTICE OF NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The town utilizes red tags to inform residents of receptacles that are not
in compliance. A letter of warning shall be given on the first occasion of
placement of tree limbs and brush more than five days prior to the date of
collection.
(2013 Code, § 9-15)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
(2013 Code, § 9-15) (Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
CHAPTER 52: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Section
   
52.01   Purpose
   
52.02   Scope
   
52.03   Applicability and exemptions
   
52.04   Definitions
   
52.05   Review and decision-making entities
   
52.06   Review and appeals procedure
   
52.07   Permit application and plans
   
52.08   Maintenance manual
   
52.09   As-built plans and specifications
   
52.10   Stormwater management objectives
   
52.11   Stormwater management design standards
   
52.12   Stormwater design manual
   
52.13   Construction and maintenance
   
52.14   Performance security and maintenance
   
52.15   Completion
   
52.16   Assurance that improvements will be maintained
   
52.17   Maintenance
 
   
52.99   Penalty
§ 52.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The stormwater management regulations of this chapter shall protect,
maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, environment, and general
welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the
adverse effects of stormwater runoff associated with new development.
   (B)   Proper management of stormwater runoff will protect property; control
stream channel erosion; prevent increased flooding associated with new
development; protect floodplains, wetlands, water resources, riparian, and
aquatic ecosystems; and otherwise provide for environmentally sound use of the
county’s natural resources.
(2013 Code, § 20-1)
§ 52.02 SCOPE.
   Except as otherwise expressly stated, the stormwater management regulations
of this chapter apply to all development within the incorporated area of the
town.
(2013 Code, § 20-2)
§ 52.03 APPLICABILITY AND EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The stormwater management regulations of this chapter do not apply to
any of the following development activities:
      (1)   Activities, including the breeding and grazing of livestock,
undertaken on agricultural land for the production of plants and animals useful
to humans, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Forages and sod crops, grains and feed crops, tobacco, cotton,
and peanuts;
         (b)   Dairy animals and apiary products;
         (c)   Poultry and poultry products;
         (d)   Livestock, including beef cattle, sheep, swine, horses, ponies,
mules, and goats;
         (e)   Bees and daily products; or
         (f)   Fur-producing animals.
      (2)   Activities undertaken on forest land for the production or
harvesting of timber and timber products and conducted in accordance with best
management practices as set out in Forest Practice Guidelines Related to Water
Quality;
      (3)   Activities for which a permit is required under the mining act,
G.S. §§ 74-46 et seq.;
      (4)   Commercial development on lots less than one half acre;
      (5)   Residential development that disturbs less than one acre,
including, total build out of the site, if it is not part of a larger plan of
development that is greater than one acre; or
      (6)   Any development in which the owner has accrued a vested right. A
vested right is recognized if either a preliminary plan has been approved by
the County Planning Board that meets the required specifications and standards
of county ordinances, or a land-disturbing permit has been issued pursuant to
county soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance in effect on or before
the effective date of this chapter, and that such plan or permit remains un
expired.
   (B)   A party in interest to a particular plan found to have no vested right
to construct or develop on or before the effective date of this chapter may
appeal to the County Board of Adjustment for a hearing de novo. Such hearing
shall be expedited and shall be limited to the issue of whether the landowner
has a vested right to construct or develop his or her site under plans
submitted prior to the effective date of this chapter.
   (C)   Redevelopment or expansions to uses included in the above categories
are not subject to the stormwater requirements unless it would result in an
expansion of impervious surface on commercial lots in size equal to or greater
than one-half acre, would result in commercial redevelopment where more than
50% of the square footage of a structure is replaced on a lot in size equal to
or greater than one-half acre, or would result in a total developed acreage of
one acre for residential development.
(2013 Code, § 20-3)
§ 52.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. An owner or developer of a site who executes the stormwater
permit application pursuant to this chapter.
   CONNECTION. Any ditch, pipe, or other device for the diversion or
transmission of storm drainage, which will in any way affect the operation or
maintenance of the drainage ways.
   CONVEYANCE. Any feature of the landscape or earth, human-made or natural
that carries water in a concentrated flow.
   DETAIN. To store and slowly release stormwater runoff following
precipitation by means of a surface depression or tank and an outlet structure.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any land-disturbing activity which adds to or changes the
amount of impervious or partially pervious cover on a land area or which
otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation into the soil, other than
a rebuilding activity that does not qualify as redevelopment.
   DRAINAGE STRUCTURES. Shall include swales, channels, and storm sewers, curb
inlets, yard inlets, culverts, and other structures designed or used to convey
stormwater.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any surface that, in whole or in part, restricts, or
prevents the natural absorption of water into the ground. Such surfaces may
include, but are not limited to, gravel, concrete, asphalt, or other paving
material, and all areas covered by the footprint of buildings or structures.
   LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any use of, or operations on, the land by any
person in residential, industrial, educational, institutional, or commercial
development, including road construction and maintenance, that results in a
change in the natural cover or topography.
   ONE-YEAR, 24-HOUR STORM. The surface runoff resulting from a 24-hour
rainfall of intensity expected to be equaled or exceeded, on average, once in
12 months and with duration of 24-hours.
   RETAIN. To capture and hold stormwater runoff following precipitation by
means of surface depression allowing the water to infiltrate into the soil,
thus reducing the hydrologic and pollution impacts downstream.
   STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of
water from rainfall events.
   STREAM. A watercourse that collects surface runoff.
   VELOCITY. The average velocity of flow through the cross section of the main
channel at the peak flow of the storm of interest.
(2013 Code, § 20-4)
§ 52.05 REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING ENTITIES.
   (A)   The County Planning and Development will administer this chapter. The
Director of Planning and Development will designate a Stormwater Administrator.
   (B)   In addition to the powers and duties that may be conferred, the
Stormwater Administrator shall have the following powers and duties under this
chapter:
      (1)   To review and approve or disapprove applications for approval of
plans pursuant to this chapter;
      (2)   To make determinations and render interpretations of this chapter;
      (3)   To establish application requirements and schedules for submittal
and review of applications and appeals, to review and approve applications;
      (4)   To enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with its
enforcement provisions;
      (5)   To make records, maps, and official materials as relate to the
adoption, amendment, enforcement, or administration of this chapter;
      (6)   To provide expertise and technical assistance to the county;
      (7)   To designate appropriate other person(s) who shall carry out the
powers and duties of the Stormwater Administrator; and
      (8)   To take any action necessary to administer the provisions of this
chapter.
(2013 Code, § 20-5)
§ 52.06 REVIEW AND APPEALS PROCEDURE.
   (A)   A stormwater permit is required for all development and redevelopment
which equals or exceeds one acre of residential development, or on commercial
lots that are one-half acre in size or more, unless exempt pursuant to this
chapter.
   (B)   The County Board of Commissioners shall establish permit review fees
as well as policies, and may amend and update the fees and policies when
needed.
   (C)   For all activities which are subject to this chapter, no person shall
initiate, proceed, or undertake any land-disturbing or development activity for
which a permit is required without first being issued a written stormwater
control permit. All other required applications must be received and permits
must be obtained prior to the start of the work. These may include, but are not
limited to, soil erosion and sedimentation control, flood damage prevention,
subdivision, building permits and inspections, State Department of
Transportation, State Division of Water Quality, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
and State DENR-Dam Safety.
   (D)   Plan review fees shall be double the amount when land-disturbing
activity begins before a stormwater permit is obtained from the county. Prior
to presenting a stormwater plan to the County Planning and Development, a
consultation meeting with the Stormwater Administrator or his or her designee
is required to assess necessary stormwater management measures, constraints,
opportunities, and potential approach.
   (E)   Two copies of the stormwater plan submittal shall be submitted to
Planning and Development for review.
   (F)   The Department shall review the plan for completeness and for
compliance with the requirements of this chapter. An incomplete or
nonconforming stormwater plan will be returned to the applicant prior to review
with an explanation of issues requiring resolution before plan review can be
initiated.
   (G)   Within 30 days of receipt of application for stormwater plan approval,
Planning and Development shall take action on the plan.
      (1)   Planning and Development shall forward a copy of the plan to the
County Soil and Water Conservation District who, within 20 days of receipt of
the plan, will review the plan and submit its comments and recommendations to
the Stormwater Administrator at the County Planning and Development Department.
      (2)   Failure of the Soil and Water Conservation District to submit its
comments and recommendations within 20 days shall not delay final action on the
plan. Planning and Development is solely responsible for plan(s) review and
will incorporate review comments and recommendations from the Soil and Water
Conservation District into its examination of the plan application.
   (H)   (1)   Approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the proposed
stormwater plan shall be in writing, in the case of denial, the reasons for
denial shall be clearly stated. The applicant may appeal the decision of the
Stormwater Administrator at the County Planning and Development Department to a
Plan Review Committee within 15 days after receipt of written notice of
disapproval or approval with modifications. Only the applicant can appeal the
decision of the Stormwater Administrator.
      (2)   A condition of plan approval will be the right to physical
inspection of the drainage structures and stormwater management measures during
and after construction.
   (I)   Hearings held pursuant to this section shall be conducted by a Plan
Review Committee consisting of the Director of Planning and Development, the
Director of the Soil and Water Conservation District, and the Director of
General Services within 30 days after the date of the appeal or request for
hearing.
   (J)   The Plan Review Committee shall decide appeals within 15 days after
the date of the hearing on any stormwater plan. If the Review Committee upholds
the disapproval or modification of a proposed plan following the hearing, the
person submitting the plan shall then be entitled to appeal the local Plan
Review Committee’s decision to the Board of Adjustment within 15 days.
   (K)   The Board of Adjustment will conduct a hearing in the nature of a
quasi-judicial proceeding with all findings of fact supported by material
evidence.
   (L)   Decisions appealing the final decision by the Board of Adjustment may
be filed in County Superior Court, to be reviewed by proceedings in the nature
of certiorari, within 30 days of the final decision of the Board of Adjustment.
   (M)   The Stormwater Administrator shall take action on revisions to a
stormwater plan which has been previously denied, within 15 days of receipt of
the revised plan application for approval.
   (N)   If a revised application is not re-submitted within 60 calendar days
from the date the applicant was notified, the application shall be considered
withdrawn, and a new submittal for the same or substantially the same project
shall be required along with the appropriate fee and pursuant to the current
standards.
   (O)   Application for an amendment to a stormwater plan in written and
graphic form may be made at any time. Until such time that any amendment is
approved by the Stormwater Administrator, it shall be unlawful to deviate from
the approved plan.
   (P)   An approved plan shall become null and void if the applicant has
failed to make progress on the site within six months after the date of
approval. The Stormwater Administrator may grant a single, six-month extension
of this time limit, for good cause shown, upon receiving a written request from
the applicant before the expiration of the approved plan.
(2013 Code, § 20-6)
§ 52.07 PERMIT APPLICATION AND PLANS.
   (A)   (1)   The stormwater permit application and plan shall refer to the
drawings and technical documentation for planned site improvements necessary to
fulfill the drainage and stormwater management requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   This shall include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   Location and topographic maps with the total drainage area
delineated, including both on-site and off-site areas and sufficient
information to define all ridges, existing streams, location of the 100-year
floodplain and floodway, drainage ways, wetland areas, existing springs, and
elevation of any proposed discharge point, and any additional information
required to evaluate the existing and proposed drainage system, which may
include a soil analysis;
         (b)   Architectural and engineering drawings showing plan, profile and
details of piping, drainage structures, swales, and channels tying into a
network of pre-existing human-made or natural channels;
         (c)   Written project specifications governing work performance and
materials;
         (d)   Computations and assumptions sufficient to support the design of
piping, drainage structures, retention/detention ponds, and permanent erosion
control measures; and
         (e)   Whatever other narrative statements necessary to adequately
describe the proposed site improvements and the measures planned to comply with
the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   The stormwater permit application and plan shall be prepared by and
shall bear the seal and signature of a professional engineer or landscape
architect licensed in the state, competent to perform all aspects of design.
   (C)   The stormwater permit application and plan shall be prepared to meet
the basic objectives and design standards for drainage and stormwater
management as described in this chapter.
   (D)   The stormwater permit application and plan shall show the existing
site topography and proposed site drainage improvements in sufficient detail to
facilitate plan review and construction. The plan drawings shall be presented
at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 50 feet.
(2013 Code, § 20-8)
§ 52.08 MAINTENANCE MANUAL.
   (A)   The stormwater permit application and plan shall be accompanied by an
operations and maintenance manual. The manual shall contain a narrative
describing each installed measure and device and its design specifications. The
manual shall indicate for each installed measure and device what operation and
maintenance actions are needed and what specific quantitative criteria will be
used to determine when these actions will be taken. The manual must indicate
the steps that will be taken to restore a measure or device to the design
specifications if a failure occurs.
   (B)   After the permit and plan is approved and installation is complete, if
changes have been made to any installed measure or device, the manual shall be
revised to reflect these changes, and such changes shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Stormwater Administrator.
(2013 Code, § 20-9)
§ 52.09 AS-BUILT PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   The designer of the stormwater control plans shall provide as-built
plans of all stormwater control and management plans showing the field
location, size, depth, and planted vegetation of all measures and devices as
installed. If the previously submitted plans remain unchanged, an as-built
certification to the existing plans will be required. No certificate of
compliance or occupancy shall be issued without said as-built plans.
   (B)   The designer shall certify, under seal, that the as-built stormwater
measures and devices and their installation are in compliance with the county’s
stormwater ordinance.
   (C)   The designer shall submit a final electronic file of the stormwater
plan that is readable by GIS systems.
(2013 Code, § 20-10)
§ 52.10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   In order to reduce drainage-related damage and hazards, adequate
natural drainage systems or stormwater management installations are required to
collect and transmit stormwater flows into either existing drainage facilities
or a natural drainage system.
   (B)   All storm drainage facilities shall be designed, constructed, and
maintained so that adjacent properties are not unreasonably burdened with
surface waters as a result of such improvements, specifically:
      (1)   Off-site areas which drain to or across a site proposed for
development must be accommodated in the stormwater plans for the development.
The stormwater management system must be capable of conveying the existing off-
site flows through or around the development such that the volume and rate of
flow from the adjacent property is not altered. If brush flows are earned in
the site system any detention system shall be sized to accommodate this flow.
The flow must be released to the original drainage area; and
      (2)   Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to limit the discharge
from the site to the rate that existed prior to development of the site. For
projects that are redeveloping a developed site, the discharge will be limited
to that which occurs before any new development. The type and location of the
discharge will be as occurred before the current development unless the
discharge is to a human-made conveyance system.
   (C)   All site improvements shall be provided with a drainage system that is
adequate to prevent the undue retention of surface water on the development
site.
   (D)   These goals for discharge can be accomplished by designing,
constructing, and maintaining all stormwater management installations to the
extent practicable:
      (1)   Avoid increases in surface runoff volume and velocity by including
measures which promote the infiltration of stormwater;
      (2)   Maximize the time of concentration of stormwater runoff; and
      (3)   Promote the filtration and precipitation of pollutants from
stormwater runoff in order to protect the water quality of the receiving
watercourse.
   (E)   Whenever practicable, the drainage system of a development site shall
coordinate with and connect to the drainage systems or drainage ways on
surrounding properties or streets. Permission must be received from other
applicable entities for connection.
   (F)   To the extent practicable, all site improvements shall conform to the
natural contours of the land, and without disturbance, utilize the preexisting
natural and pre-existing human-made drainage ways.
   (G)   To the extent practicable, lot boundaries within subdivisions shall be
made to coincide with natural and preexisting human-made drainage ways to avoid
creation of lots that can only be built upon by altering such drainage ways.
   (H)   Stormwater shall not be diverted from one natural drainage basin into
another.
   (I)   Stormwater shall not be channeled or directed into sanitarily sewers.
   (J)   Stormwater controls shall not be located within the designated
floodway.
   (K)   No built upon area shall be located within 30 feet landward from any
perennial and intermittent surface waters. A surface water shall be deemed
present if the feature is approximately shown on either the most recent version
of the soil survey map prepared by the Natural Resources Conservation Service
of the U.S. Department of Agriculture or the most recent version of the
quadrangle topographic maps prepared by the USGS.
   (L)   Streams shall not be relocated unless it is demonstrated that the
relocation of the stream will have a positive impact on water quality while
reducing velocity. All other applicable permits must be received.
(2013 Code, § 20-11)
§ 52.11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Standards generally. Design standards are established for the purpose
of promoting sound development practices which respect, preserve and enhance
the county’s watercourses and are not intended to prohibit the use of
innovative and alternative techniques which can be demonstrated to have the
potential for successfully achieving the objectives stated in §
52.01.
   (B)   Design storm.
      (1)   The measures shall control and treat the difference in stormwater
runoff volume leaving the project site between the pre- and post-development
conditions for, at a minimum, the one-year, 24-hour storm. Runoff volume
drawdown time shall be a minimum of 48 hours, but not more than 120 hours.
      (2)   All structural stormwater treatment systems used to meet the
requirements of this chapter shall be designed to have a minimum of 85% average
annual removal for total suspended solids (TSS).
      (3)   The hillside development standards of Ch. 70 of the county’s code
of ordinances (§ 20-70-68) apply. This chapter limits the density of disturbed
area and impervious surfaces on steep slopes.
      (4)   The design of drainage facilities in flood hazard areas shall be
consistent with the requirements of the county’s flood damage prevention
ordinance. No stormwater controls shall be allowed within the floodway. No
built upon area shall be within 30 feet landward of any perennial and
intermittent surface water.
      (5)   The computation of stormwater runoff shall follow established
engineering practice. Acceptable methods of computation include the rational
method, the peak discharge method as described in U.S.D.A. Technical Release
Number 55 (TR-55), and U.S. Geological Survey regression equations, where
applicable. If an alternate method is proposed, the method should be described
and justification for using this method should be provided. The same method
must be used for both the pre- and post-development conditions.
      (6)   Runoff coefficients shall be based on full development of the
project and of the watershed to the extent of the current zoning or land use
patterns, and shall include the complete development of the site through build-
out, including roof tops and other impervious areas that may be proposed.
      (7)   (a)   Stormwater detention shall be provided to ensure that the
rate of discharge does not exceed the pre-development rate of discharge.
         (b)   In order to demonstrate this, pre- and post-development
hydrographs will be submitted that demonstrate no increase in flow leaving the
site during the one-year 24-hour storm. Inflow-outflow calculations shall also
be submitted for any stormwater detention ponds.
      (8)   Stormwater controls that drain in whole or part to designated trout
waters shall be designed
and shall implement the best stormwater practices that do not result in a
sustained increase in the receiving water temperature, while still meeting the
other requirements of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 20-12)
§ 52.12 STORMWATER DESIGN MANUAL.
   The County Planning and Development Department may furnish additional
guidance and standards for the proper implementation of the regulations of this
chapter and may provide such information in the form of a Stormwater Design
Manual. Stormwater management practices that are designed, constructed, or
maintained in accord with the Stormwater Design Manual must be presumed to
comply with these regulations; however, the Stormwater Administrator shall have
the right to consult other engineers and duly qualified professionals, and to
impose any conditions or require any modifications deemed necessary to meet the
purpose, intent and requirements of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 20-13)
§ 52.13 CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Stormwater management facilities shall be constructed in accordance
with approved plans and maintained in proper working condition. The applicant/
property owner is responsible for ensuring that the construction of drainage
structures and stormwater management measures are completed in accordance with
the approved plan and specifications. Inspections which may be performed by the
county during construction will not relieve the developer of the responsibility
to install stormwater management and drainage facilities in accordance with the
approved plan.
   (B)   In response to a complaint, or as a compliance check with the
requirements of the ordinance, the Stormwater Administrator or the designee
shall perform a physical inspection of the construction of drainage structures
and stormwater management measures, or monitor long-term maintenance
procedures.
   (C)   The property owner will be notified in writing of any substandard and/
or non-conforming work identified by the Stormwater Administrator. The
notification shall state the specific work that is out of compliance, the
specific reasons for noncompliance, and the corrective measures necessary to
bring the work into compliance.
   (D)   Failure of the property owner or developer to correct substandard and/
or nonconforming work identified by the Stormwater Administrator shall be
sufficient reason to refuse or revoke building permits, and/or deny occupancy
permits for buildings serviced by said work. Appeals on determination of
nonconforming or substandard work and/or the adequacy of the corrective
measures executed shall be made in accordance with §
52.06. Pending the ruling on the appeal, the determination of the Stormwater
Administrator remains in effect.
   (E)   Revisions which affect the intent of the design or the capacity of the
system shall require prior written approval by the Stormwater Administrator.
(2013 Code, § 20-14)
§ 52.14 PERFORMANCE SECURITY AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The county will require the submittal of a surety performance bond
made by a surety bonding company licensed and authorized to do business in the
state, a bond of the owner/developer with an assignment to the county of a
certificate of deposit as security for the bond, a bond of the owner/developer
by an official bank check drawn in favor of the county and deposited with the
county, or cash or an irrevocable letter of credit deposited with the county
prior to issue of a permit in order to ensure that the stormwater system is
installed by the developer and functions as required by the approved stormwater
plan.
   (B)   The amount of an installation performance security shall be the total
estimated construction cost of the system and devices approved under the
permit, plus 25%.
   (C)   The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for
failure, after proper notice, to complete work within the time specified, or to
initiate or maintain any actions which may be required of the applicant in
accordance with this chapter.
   (D)   Upon default of the applicant to construct, maintain, repair, and if
necessary reconstruct any stormwater device in accordance with the applicable
permit, the Stormwater Administrator shall obtain and use all or any portion of
the security to make necessary improvements based on an engineering estimate.
Such expenditure of funds shall only be made after requesting the applicant to
comply with the permit. In the event of a default triggering the use of
installation of performance security, the county shall not return any of the
unused deposited cash funds or other security, which shall be retained for
maintenance.
   (E)   If the county takes action upon such failure by the applicant, the
county may collect the difference should the amount of the reasonable cost of
such action exceed the amount of the security held. This difference will be
collected from the applicant.
   (F)   Within 60 days of the final approval, the installation performance
security shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated.
(2013 Code, § 20-15)
§ 52.15 COMPLETION.
   The developer is responsible for completing all stormwater improvements in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable ordinance
and laws.
(2013 Code, § 20-16)
§ 52.16 ASSURANCE THAT IMPROVEMENTS WILL BE MAINTAINED.
   (A)   The county may not approve a record plat, or in the case of single-lot
development not requiring a record plat may not issue a building permit, until
those stormwater improvements required of the developer have been completed or
a performance guarantee has been provided.
   (B)   Upon completion of required improvements, the design professional must
submit as-built plans, or certify the existing plans as-built if no changes
have occurred, of the installed stormwater improvements to the Stormwater
Administrator. These plans must indicate that stormwater improvements were
constructed in accordance with the county ordinance and approvals.
(2013 Code, § 20-17)
§ 52.17 MAINTENANCE.
   All stormwater improvements must be maintained so they will continue to
serve their intended functions.
   (A)   The developer must maintain stormwater improvements until accepted by
a property owners association or lot owner. The developer must disclose which
party will be responsible for continued maintenance on the record plat and on
the stormwater management plan. The developer will be responsible for the
installation, operations, and maintenance of the stormwater controls until
ownership is conveyed. The responsibility and agreement for operations and
maintenance for the stormwater system is transferred with title, as each
property is conveyed.
   (B)   Before improvements are accepted for maintenance by the property
owner’s association or lot owner, the developer or the developer’s engineer or
landscape architect must certify to the property owners association or lot
owner and to the county that improvements are complete and functioning as
designed.
   (C)   The developer must record, and reference on the record plat, an
operations and maintenance plan that instructs the property owners association
or lot owner about the annual operations and maintenance tasks for at least a
20-year period.
   (D)   (1)   The person responsible for maintenance of any stormwater
structure or feature installed pursuant to this chapter shall submit to the
Stormwater Administrator an inspection report annually from a qualified
registered state professional engineer, surveyor, or landscape architect
performing services only in their area of competence.
      (2)   The report shall contain the following:
         (a)   The name and address of the laud owner;
         (b)   The recorded book and page number of the lot of each stormwater
control;
         (c)   A statement that an inspection was made of all stormwater
controls and features;
         (d)   The date the inspection was made;
         (e)   A statement that all inspected controls and features are
performing properly and are in compliance with the terms and conditions of the
approved maintenance agreement required by this chapter; and
         (f)   The signature and seal of the engineer, surveyor, or landscape
architect.
      (3)   All inspection reports shall be on forms supplied by the Stormwater
Administrator. An original inspection report shall be provided to the
Stormwater Administrator beginning one year from the date of as-built
certification and each year thereafter on or before the date of the as-built
certification.
      (4)   It will be the responsibility of the property owners association or
lot owner to update the plan annually.
   (E)   The developer must record and reference on the record plat a
maintenance agreement, or restrictive covenant that sets forth the property
owner’s association’s or lot owner’s continuing responsibilities for
maintenance, including specifying how cost will be apportioned among lot owners
served.
   (F)   The maintenance agreement must provide that the association and its
individual members are jointly and severably liable for maintenance.
   (G)   The developer must record easements for access, maintenance, and
inspections by any property owners association and by county government.
   (H)   All maintenance documents required by this chapter must be submitted
to the Stormwater Administrator before record plat approval, and such documents
must be referenced on the record plat, or, in the case of single-lot
developments not requiring record plats, documentation must be submitted to the
Stormwater Administrator before building permit issuance.
(2013 Code, § 20-18)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   Civil penalties may be imposed as follows.
   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, or
rules or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this chapter, or who initiates or
continues a development for which a stormwater plan is required, except in
accordance with the terms, conditions, and provisions of an approved plan, is
subject to a civil penalty. The maximum civil penalty for a violation of this
chapter is $27,500 per day. Each day of a continuing violation shall constitute
a separate violation. Additional fees may be charged for remedies and
enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   No penalty shall be assessed until the applicant has been notified of
the violation by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, or
other means reasonably calculated to give actual notice. The notice shall
describe the violation with reasonable particularity, specify a reasonable time
period within which the violation can be corrected, and warn that failure to
correct the violation within the time period will result in the assessment of a
civil penalty or other enforcement action.
   (C)   If the violation has not been connected within the designated time
period, a civil penalty may be assessed from the date the violation is
detected.
   (D)   Refusal to accept the notice or failure to notify the Stormwater
Administrator of a change of address shall not relieve the violator’s
obligation to pay such a penalty.
   (E)   The Stormwater Administrator or other authorized agent may refuse to
issue a certificate of occupancy for any building or other improvements
constructed or being constructed on the site and served by the stormwater
practices in question until the applicant has taken the remedial measures set
forth in the notice of violation and cured the violations described therein.
(2013 Code, § 20-7)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   REGULATIONS
      
73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Leaving ignition keys in unattended vehicles
   
70.02   Driving unsafe vehicles
   
70.03   Improperly equipped vehicles
   
70.04   Weight limitation permit required
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.15   Obedience to official traffic-control devices
   
70.16   Obedience to no-turn signs and turning markers
   
70.17   Obedience to no-parking zone and safety markers
   
70.18   Traffic-control signal legend
   
70.19   Flashing signals
 
   
70.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Streets and Sidewalks, see
Ch. 91
   Traffic Regulations, see
Ch. 71
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 LEAVING IGNITION KEYS IN UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended in any public place or parking lot without first stopping the
engine, locking the ignition, removing the ignition key from the vehicle,
effectively setting the brakes and, when standing on any grade, turning the
front wheels to the curb or side of the highway.
(2013 Code § 11-1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.02 DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive on the streets of the town any
vehicle or combination of vehicles which is in such unsafe condition as to
endanger any person or property.
(2013 Code § 11-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 IMPROPERLY EQUIPPED VEHICLES.
   No automobile or motor vehicle shall be operated on the streets of the town,
unless the same shall be equipped with all necessary equipment to make the
vehicle safe. This shall include an adequate muffler, properly installed to
prevent unnecessary noise.
(2013 Code § 11-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 WEIGHT LIMITATION PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon the streets of the town when
the gross weight of such vehicle exceeds 40,000 pounds, or which is of the
tractor-trailer type, unless a permit is issued. If it is necessary for such a
vehicle to enter the town for the purpose of loading or unloading, then the
operator of such vehicle shall apply to the Chief of Police or other designated
officer who, upon showing the necessity of such entry, shall issue a permit
therefor.
(2013 Code § 11-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.15 OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The driver of every motor vehicle, and any other vehicle shall obey
the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto
placed in accordance with the traffic regulations in this traffic code, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the
driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this chapter.
   (B)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required shall
be enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged
violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section
does not state that signs are required, such section shall be effective without
signs being placed to give notice thereof.
(2013 Code, § 17-62) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.16 OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.
   Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected, or installed indicating that
no right or left or U-turn is permitted, it shall be unlawful for the driver of
a vehicle to disobey the directions of any such sign, and when authorized
markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection
indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles traversing or turning thereat,
it shall be unlawful for any driver of a vehicle to disobey the directions of
such indications.
(2013 Code, § 17-63) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.17 OBEDIENCE TO NO-PARKING ZONE AND SAFETY MARKERS.
   Whenever authorized signs or markings are placed, erected, or installed
indicating no parking zones or safety zones, it shall be unlawful for the
driver of any vehicle to disobey the regulations in connection therewith.
(2013 Code, § 17-64) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.18 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the
words “Go”, “Caution”, or “Stop”, or exhibiting different colored lights
successively one at a time, the following colors only shall be used, and said
terms and lights shall indicate as follows.
   (A)   Green alone or “Go”.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But
vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to
pedestrians lawfully within the intersection at the time such signal is
exhibited.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk.
   (B)   Yellow alone or “Caution” when shown following the green or “Go”
signal.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at the intersection, but if such stop cannot be made in
safety, a vehicle may be driven cautiously through the intersection.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing such signal are thereby advised that there is
insufficient time to cross a roadway and any pedestrian then starting to cross
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles.
   (C)   Red alone or “Stop”.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at such other point as may be indicated
by a clearly visible line, and shall remain standing until green or “Go” is
shown alone.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Red with green arrow.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, but shall not
interfere with other traffic.
      (2)   No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway unless he
or she can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular traffic.
(2013 Code, § 17-65) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.19 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used they shall require
obedience by vehicular traffic as follows.
   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated by rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, and the
right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop
at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal only with caution.
(2013 Code, § 17-67) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   If any person shall violate an ordinance regulating the operation or parking
of vehicles, he or she shall be responsible for an infraction and shall be
required to pay a penalty of not more than $50.
(G.S. § 14-4(b))
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Definitions
   
71.02   Required obedience to traffic regulations
   
71.03   Obedience to police
   
71.04   Public employees to obey traffic regulations
   
71.05   Authority of police in special cases
   
71.06   Exemptions to authorized emergency vehicles
   
71.07   Zone of quiet
   
71.08   Play streets
   
71.09   School zone
   
71.10   Push carts, bicycles, or animals
   
71.11   Riding on handlebars prohibited
   
71.12   Riding on sidewalks or without hands on handlebars prohibited
   
71.13   Clinging to moving vehicles
   
71.14   Unlawful riding
   
71.15   Boarding or alighting from vehicles in motion
   
71.16   Persons riding must stay inside
   
71.17   Entering, jumping on, or riding vehicles without permission
   
71.18   Limitation of number in driver’s seat
   
71.19   Moving of vehicles into restricted areas
   
71.20   Bicyclists to ride in single file
Operation of Vehicles
   
71.35   Vehicles prohibited on sidewalks
   
71.36   Emerging from private drives
   
71.37   Limitations on turning around
   
71.38   Driving through funeral processions
   
71.39   Limitations on backing
   
71.40   Speed regulations
   
71.41   Left turns
Cross-reference:
   Police Department, see §
31.15
   Streets and Sidewalks, see
Ch. 91
Statutory reference:
   Authority of cities relative to traffic, see G. S. § 20-169 and 160A-300
   Operation of vehicles and rules of the road, see G.S. Ch. 20
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department, police
vehicles, and such ambulances designated or authorized by the Chief of Police.
   BLOCK. A portion of any street located between two intersections next
adjacent to each other.
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   The portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at, intersections;
or
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian
crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curb
lines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two or more highways
which join one another at an angle whether or not one such highway crosses the
other.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle, which is self-propelled, and every vehicle,
which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but
not operated upon rails.
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall
mean standard time or daylight savings time as may be in current use.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS. Any device, whether manually, electrically, or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
   PARK. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading, or
unloading.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every road or driveway not open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. Any area not comprising a business district and which
is mainly occupied by dwellings or by dwellings and buildings in use for
business.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of a roadway.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed, or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   STOP OR STOPPING WHEN PROHIBITED. Any stopping of a vehicle, except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the
direction of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
   STOP WHEN REQUIRED. The complete cessation of movement.
   STANDING. Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between property lines of every way or
place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, street cars, and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any street for the
purpose of travel.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracts; provided, that for the
purpose of this chapter, a bicycle or a ridden animal shall be deemed a
vehicle.
(2013 Code, § 17-1)
Cross-reference:
   General definitions and rules of construction, see §
10.99
§ 71.02 REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or to fail to
perform any act required in this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 17-2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer.
(2013 Code, § 17-3) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Police Department, see §
31.15
§ 71.04 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the U.S. government, this state, county, or
town, and it shall be unlawful for any said driver to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by
state statute.
(2013 Code, § 17-4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.05 AUTHORITY OF POLICE IN SPECIAL CASES.
   In the event of a fire or other emergency or when necessary to expedite
traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
(2013 Code, § 17-5) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Fire and Fire Protection, see §§
92.20 though
92.22
   Town Emergencies, see
Ch. 34
§ 71.06 EXEMPTIONS TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   The provisions of this chapter regulating the operation, parking
and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles as
defined in §
71.01, except as follows:
      (2)   A driver when operating such vehicle in an emergency, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer may:
         (a)   Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter;
         (b)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
         (c)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he or she does
not endanger life or property; or
         (d)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning
in specified directions so long as he or she does not endanger life or
property.
   (B)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any
such vehicle from the consequences of his or her reckless disregard for the
safety of others.
(2013 Code, § 17-6)
§ 71.07 ZONE OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected, or installed indicating a
zone of quiet, it shall be unlawful for any person operating a motor vehicle
within any such zone to sound the horn or other warning device of said vehicle,
except in an emergency.
(2013 Code, § 17-7) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.08 PLAY STREETS.
   Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected, or installed indicating any
street or part thereof as a play street, it shall be unlawful to drive a
vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof, except drivers of vehicles
having residences within such closed area, and then said drivers shall exercise
the greatest care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof.
(2013 Code, § 17-8) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.09 SCHOOL ZONE.
   Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected, or installed indicating any
street or parts thereof as school zones, all drivers of motor vehicles and
operators of other vehicles using said streets or parts thereof shall exercise
the greatest care in driving upon said streets or parts thereof for the
protection of children.
(2013 Code, § 17-9) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.10 PUSH CARTS, BICYCLES, OR ANIMALS.
   Every person propelling a push cart or riding a bicycle or any animal upon a
roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to
the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except
those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no
application.
(2013 Code, § 17-10) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Application to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles, see
G. S. § 20-171
§ 71.11 RIDING ON HANDLEBARS PROHIBITED.
   The operator of a motorcycle or bicycle when upon a street shall not carry
any person upon the handle bar, frame, or tank of any such vehicle, nor shall
any person so ride upon any such vehicle.
(2013 Code, § 17-11) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.12 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS OR WITHOUT HANDS ON HANDLEBARS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Riding on sidewalks or without hands on handlebars prohibited.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle or motorcycle on any street
without having his or her hands upon the handlebars, or to ride a bicycle upon
any sidewalk or walkway.
(2013 Code, § 17-12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.13 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, sled, rollerskates, skateboards,
go-carts, or any toy vehicle shall attach himself or herself or his or her
vehicle to any moving vehicle upon any roadway.
(2013 Code, § 17-13) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.14 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on any public conveyance or
vehicle or any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of
passengers. This provision shall not apply to employees engaged in the
necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding within truck bodies in
spaces intended for merchandise.
(2013 Code, § 17-14) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.15 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES IN MOTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to board or alight from any public
conveyance or other vehicle while such conveyance or vehicle is in motion.
(2013 Code, § 17-15) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.16 PERSONS RIDING MUST STAY INSIDE.
   No person, when riding, shall allow any part of his or her body to protrude
or extend beyond the limits of the vehicle in which he or she is riding, except
to give such signals as by law are required, and it shall be unlawful for any
person to hang onto any vehicle whatsoever.
(2013 Code, § 17-16) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Clinging to motor vehicles, see §
71.13
§ 71.17 ENTERING, JUMPING ON, OR RIDING VEHICLES WITHOUT PERMISSION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to jump on or ride any automobile or
other vehicle without the consent of the owner or driver.
(2013 Code, § 17-17) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.18 LIMITATION OF NUMBER IN DRIVER’S SEAT.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver or the person in charge of any motor
vehicle to permit more than three persons, including the driver, to ride in the
front or driver’s seat of a motor vehicle.
(2013 Code, § 17-18) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.19 MOVING OF VEHICLES INTO RESTRICTED AREAS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to move a vehicle not owned by him or
her into any prohibited area or away from a curb, such distance as is unlawful.
(2013 Code, § 17-19) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.20 BICYCLISTS TO RIDE IN SINGLE FILE.
   (A)   All persons operating a bicycle upon a road in the town shall ride in
single file only, and as near to the cyclists right side of the road as is
reasonably safe under the existing conditions, and exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle, or being passed by a moving vehicle, or one
proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a highway or bikeway shall be
subject to the provisions of G.S. Ch. 20, Art. 3, Motor Vehicle Act of 1937,
except those provisions of such sections of the General Statutes which by their
nature can have no application.
   (C)   All persons operating a bicycle upon a road in the town shall ride in
single file only, and as near to the cyclists right side of the road as is
reasonably safe under the existing conditions, and exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle, or being passed by a moving vehicle, or one
proceeding in the same direction.
(2013 Code, § 17-20) Penalty, see §
70.99
OPERATION OF VEHICLES
§ 71.35 VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to drive upon or within
any sidewalk area, except as a permanent or temporary driveway.
(2013 Code § 17-30) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.36 EMERGING FROM PRIVATE DRIVES.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from a private driveway shall stop such
vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk areas
extending across such drive, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
(2013 Code § 17-31) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.37 LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.
   No driver shall turn any vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction
in any street or street intersection, unless the same is clearly marked for
such U-turns.
(2013 Code § 17-32) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Turning movements generally, see G.S. § 20-153
§ 71.38 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   No vehicle shall be driven through a funeral procession, except Fire
Department vehicles, police patrols, and ambulances, when the same are
responding to calls.
(2013 Code § 17-33) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate processions, see G.S. § 20-157.1
§ 71.39 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same into any intersection or
over a crosswalk and shall not in any event or at any place back a vehicle
unless such movement can be made in safety, and he or she shall have given
ample warning to those who may be behind him or her by hand and horn or other
signal.
(2013 Code § 17-34) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.40 SPEED REGULATIONS.
   No person shall drive a vehicle on a street or highway in the town at a
speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then
existing.
(2013 Code § 17-35) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.41 LEFT TURNS.
   In making left turns at street intersections, all traffic shall travel to
the left of the center of said intersections as may be indicated by buttons,
markers, or other directing signs.
(2013 Code § 17-36) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited
   
72.02   Vehicles not to obstruct passage
   
72.03   Stop when traffic obstructed
   
72.04   Vehicles not to stop in streets; exceptions
   
72.05   Parking near fire hydrants or emergency apparatus
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to designate stop intersections, see G.S. § 20-158
   Authority to regulate and limit vehicular parking, see G.S. § 160A-301
§ 72.01 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand, or park a vehicle,
except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance
with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device in any of the
following places:
   (A)   On the sidewalk;
   (B)   On a crosswalk;
   (C)   Within an intersection;
   (D)   Within 30 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic-control
signal located at the side of a street or roadway;
   (E)   No vehicle shall park on either side of any street approaching a
railroad underpass;
   (F)   No vehicle shall park on either side of any street approaching a grade
crossing within 50 feet of the closest rail; provided, that where existing
permanent structures are located along the street and closer than 50 feet,
parking may be permitted in front of such structures, unless otherwise
prohibited, if the said parking does not interfere with the view in either
direction of an approaching locomotive or train;
   (G)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
stopping or standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (H)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure or within any underpass
structure;
   (I)   Within 15 feet in either direction of the entrance to a hotel,
theater, hospital, sanitarium, or any public building; or
   (J)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing or parked at the
edge or curb of a street.
(2013 Code, § 17-47) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.02 VEHICLES NOT TO OBSTRUCT PASSAGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to stand on any street so as to
interrupt or interfere with the passage of public conveyances or other
vehicles.
(2013 Code, § 17-48) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.03 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
a sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the passage
of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control sign to
proceed.
(2013 Code, § 17-49) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.04 VEHICLES NOT TO STOP IN STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, a vehicle in any street, except
for the purpose of parking as prescribed in this chapter in designated areas,
unless such stop is made necessary by the approach of fire apparatus, by the
approach of a funeral, or other procession which is given the right-of-way, by
the giving of traffic signals, the passing of some other vehicle or a
pedestrian, or by some emergency; and in any case covered by these exceptions,
said vehicle shall not stop so as to obstruct any crossing or street
intersection if the same can be avoided.
(2013 Code, § 17-50) Penalty, see §
70.99
Cross-reference:
   Driving through funeral processions, see G.S. § 71-38
§ 72.05 PARKING NEAR FIRE HYDRANTS OR EMERGENCY APPARATUS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand, stop, or park a motor vehicle,
vehicle, push cart, or other means of conveyance in any area where such
stopping, or parking is prohibited, or within 15 feet of any fire hydrant or
other emergency apparatus, or in any manner wherein such parking would cause a
hazard to persons property. It shall be the duty of every police officer to
take immediate steps by whatever means necessary and most expedient to remove
any obstruction that might cause a hazard to persons or property within the
corporate limits.
(2013 Code, § 17-51) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedules
   
I.   Speed limits
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of 35 mph on the following
streets in the town: Vanderbilt Road, north from the Town Hall to the town
limits with the City of Asheville.
(2013 Code, § 17-35.1)
   (B)   No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of 25 mph on the following
streets in the town: Amherst Road; Arboretum Road; Brooklawn Chase; Brookside
Road; Browntown Road; Buena Vista Road; Busbee Road; Cedar Chine Road;
Cedarcliff Road; Cedar Hill Drive; Chauncey Circle; Deerfield Road; East Forest
Road; Eastwood Road; Fairway Place; Fir Tree Lane; Forest Road; Frith Drive;
Greenwood Place; Greenwood Road; Hemlock Road; Hilltop Road; Holly Hill Road;
Lone Pine Road; Niagara Drive; Park Road; Parkway Road; Ridgefield Place;
Southwood Road; Stuyvesant Crescent; Stuyvesant Road; Valley Springs Road;
Vanderbilt Road South from the Town Hall; Westwood Road; and White Oak Road.
(2013 Code, § 17-35.2)
   (C)   No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of ten mph on Stuyvesant
Road between Browntown and Southwood as posted.
Statutory reference:
   Speed restrictions and authority of town relative thereto, see G.S. § 20-141
   When speed limits not applicable, see G.S. § 20-145
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ANIMALS
      
91.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
92.   HEALTH AND SAFETY
      
93.   TOWN BEAUTIFICATION
      
94.   ABANDONED, JUNKED AND NUISANCE VEHICLES
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Cruelty to animals
   
90.02   Animals at large
   
90.03   Impoundment
   
90.04   Pens and enclosures
   
90.05   Limitation on household pets
   
90.06   Certain animals expressly prohibited
   
90.07   Killing dangerous animals
   
90.08   Dangerous animals
   
90.09   Effective date
   
90.10   Wild animals
   
90.11   Feeding wild animals
Bird Sanctuary
   
90.20   Designated
   
90.21   Trapping, hunting, or shooting wild birds prohibited; exceptions
   
90.22   Erection of signs
Dogs
   
90.35   Identification of dogs and inoculation of dogs
   
90.36   Restraint of dogs
   
90.37   Impoundment of dogs
   
90.38   Reclaiming impounded dogs
   
90.39   Control of dangerous (very unruly) dogs
 
   
90.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Confinement or leashing of vicious dogs, see G.S. §§ 67-4.1 through 67-4.5
   Dogs running at large, see G.S. § 67-12
   License tax on privilege of keeping domestic animals, see G.S. § 160A-212
   Regulation of domestic animals, see G.S. § 160A-186
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall cruelly treat any animal in any way; any person who
inhumanely beats, underfeeds, overloads, abandons, or mistreats any animal in
any way shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section punishable as
provided below.
   (B)   Pursuant to G.S. § 14-4, any person found guilty of violating §
90.01 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and fined $500.
(2013 Code, § 4-1) (Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
Statutory reference:
   City may define and prohibit abuse of animals, see G.S. § 160A-182
   Cruelty to animals, see G. S. § 14-360
§ 90.02 ANIMALS AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any cow, calf, horse, mule,
sheep, or any other such animal to run at large in the town.
(2013 Code, § 4-2) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.03 IMPOUNDMENT.
   Any animal caught running at large may be picked up by the police, and,
unless immediately claimed, such animals shall be disposed of as deemed best by
the police or other designated official.
(2013 Code, § 4-3)
Statutory reference:
   Impoundment of stock, see G.S. §§ 68-17 through 68-25
§ 90.04 PENS AND ENCLOSURES.
   (A)   All pens where household pets of any kind are kept within the town
limits shall be temporary, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition, and
may only be located in the rear yard.
   (B)   If, in the opinion of the Chief of Police or Town Manager, or upon
complaint of any person, any such pen is deemed to be unsanitary so as to
create a health hazard or a nuisance from offensive odors, said official shall
have the authority to close such pen and require removal of any animal kept
therein.
(2013 Code, § 4-4) (Ord. passed 4-11-2017) Penalty, see §
90.99
Cross-reference:
   Health and Safety, see §§
92.01 through
92.05
§ 90.05 LIMITATION ON HOUSEHOLD PETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep on any lot or premises
more than six household pets, no more than three of which may be dogs.
HOUSEHOLD PETS means dogs, cats and rabbits, but shall not include:
      (1)   Small domesticated rodents such as gerbils, guinea pigs, hamsters,
rats or mice;
      (2)   Small birds such as canaries, parakeets, finches, parrots, or
mynas; or
      (3)   Any amphibian, fish or non-venomous reptiles. It shall be unlawful
for any person to keep on any lot or premises any venomous reptile.
   (B)   Should a person have more than six household pets as a result of a
litter or litters, the person shall notify the Town Manager within 30 days of
the birth of the litter. The person shall have up to six months to reduce the
number of household pets so that the number is in compliance with this section.
   (C)   Persons keeping household pets shall provide appropriate care and
exercise appropriate control over the household pets and shall not allow or
cause the condition or behavior of household pets to constitute a nuisance.
Should the condition or behavior of household pets unreasonably interfere with
the use and enjoyment of other residents of the town, the town may require the
owner of the household pets to take action to abate the nuisance including the
removal of some or all of the household pets.
(2013 Code, § 4-5) (Ord. passed 4-11-2017) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.06 CERTAIN ANIMALS EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to keep within the corporate limits of the town any
hog, pig, horse, pony, cattle, goat, sheep, chicken, duck, turkey, goose, swan
or any other animals or fowl commonly known as farm animals. Property owners
keeping horses on their property, as of the effective date of this section,
shall be allowed to continue keeping horses so long as they own the property.
If the property is sold or transferred, this permission to keep horses shall
terminate.
(2013 Code, § 4-6a) (Ord. passed 4-11-2017) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.07 KILLING DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   The members of the Police Department or any other designated persons are
authorized to kill any dangerous animal of any kind when it may be necessary
for the protection of any person or property in the town.
(2013 Code, § 4-7) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.08 DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
   (A)   An animal that:
      (1)   Without provocation has killed or inflicted severe injury on a
person;
      (2)   Without provocation has killed or inflicted severe injury on
another domestic animal;
      (3)   Is determined by a police officer or an animal control officer to
be a potentially dangerous animal; or
      (4)   Is to be treated in accordance with §
90.39, “control of dangerous dogs”.
   (B)   Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of
fighting or any animal trained for fighting.
(2013 Code, § 4-7)
§ 90.09 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective November 15, 1982.
(2013 Code, § 4-40)
§ 90.10 WILD ANIMALS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      WILD ANIMAL. Any animal normally found in wild state, particularly feral,
dangerous, non-domesticated animals which generally do not live in or about
human habitation. Wild animals include, but are not limited to: bears, non-
human primates, all felines other than domesticated house cats, racoons,
skunks, squirrels, venomous snakes, elephants, camels, coyotes, wolves and any
hybrid or crossbreed of such animals having similar characteristics of the
animals specified herein.
   (B)   No person shall keep a wild animal on any lot or premises within the
town limits.
(Ord. passed 4-11-2017)
§ 90.11 FEEDING WILD ANIMALS.
   (A)   The keeping, possessing, harboring, feeding, or attracting of animals,
wild, feral or domesticated, which threaten the public health, safety and
welfare of the town are prohibited. Prohibited actions include, but are not
limited to, attracting bears or other wild animals that may pose a danger to
humans, wildlife, or domestic animals, or cause damage to property including
property owned by others. Provided, however, nothing herein shall be construed
to prohibit keeping or maintaining a bird feeder or feeding birds, unless
keeping a bird feeder attracts bears or other wild animals posing a threat to
the public health safety and welfare, and an animal control officer, police
officer, or other town officer orders the cessation of the feeding of the
birds. The determination as to whether an animal or animals and the attraction
of same poses a threat to the public health, safety and welfare shall be in the
discretion of the town.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, a threat to the public health, safety
and welfare of the town and a danger to humans, wildlife or domestic animals
shall mean the potential for human injury or death, the potential risk of
disease transmission between animal species and humans, or the increased
potential for death or injury to bears, livestock, domestic animals, humans, or
property.
(Ord. 2025-04, passed 9-9-2025)
BIRD SANCTUARY
§ 90.20 DESIGNATED.
   The area within the corporate limits of the town and all lands owned or
leased by the town outside the corporate limits is hereby designated as a bird
sanctuary.
(2013 Code, § 4-19)
§ 90.21 TRAPPING, HUNTING, OR SHOOTING WILD BIRDS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot, or otherwise kill, within
the sanctuary established in §
90.20, any native wild bird; provided, however, that it shall be lawful to trap
starlings or similar birds or fowl when such birds or fowl are found to be
congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a
nuisance or menace to health and property.
   (B)   Pursuant to G.S. § 14-4, any person found guilty of violating §
90.21 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and fined $500.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
§ 90.22 ERECTION OF SIGNS.
   Artistic signs may be erected giving notice of the regulations herein
provided. Such signs shall be of a design as may be approved by the Board and
shall be erected at such places as may be designated by the Board.
(2013 Code, § 4-21)
DOGS
§ 90.35 IDENTIFICATION OF DOGS AND INOCULATION OF DOGS.
   (A)   All persons owning, controlling, keeping, or maintaining any dog
within the town shall provide and keep on such dog a collar or harness
containing an identification tag on which is inscribed the owner’s, keeper’s,
or controller’s name, address, and telephone number.
   (B)   All persons owning, controlling, keeping, or maintaining any dog
within said town shall also ensure that such dog has been currently inoculated
against rabies and shall provide and keep on such dog’s collar or harness a
current rabies inoculation tag.
(2013 Code, § 4-32)
§ 90.36 RESTRAINT OF DOGS.
   (A)   Every person owning or having possession, charge, care, custody, or
control of any dog shall keep such dog exclusively upon his or her premises;
however, such dog may be off premises if it is under the physical control of a
competent person and physically restrained by a chain, leash, or harness, not
to exceed eight feet in length and held in the hand of said person.
   (B)   At all times dogs shall be under sufficient control so as not to
disturb neighbors by barking excessively, and more particularly after dark.
(2013 Code, § 4-33) (Ord. passed 5-11-2005) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.37 IMPOUNDMENT OF DOGS.
   (A)   Any dog seen violating or reported to have violated §
90.36 shall be picked up and impounded by the Police Department.
   (B)   The impounding officer shall make reasonable attempts to notify the
owner or keeper of said dog of the dog’s impoundment.
   (C)   As soon as possible after the expiration of 48 hours from the time the
dog is impounded, such dog shall be turned over to the County Animal Shelter
for disposition according to the rules regulations and policies of said County
Animal shelter.
(2013 Code, § 4-34)
§ 90.38 RECLAIMING IMPOUNDED DOGS.
   (A)   The owner of any dog impounded pursuant to §
90.37 shall have the right to redeem said dog while said dog is in the custody
of the Police Department by paying a fee to the town, in an amount as set by
the Board of Commissioners from time to time.
   (B)   After any dog impounded pursuant to §
90.37 is turned over to the County Animal Shelter pursuant to §
90.37, the owner of such dog shall have only those rights to redeem said dog
afforded such owner by the rules regulations and policies of the County Animal
Shelter.
(2013 Code, § 4-35)
§ 90.39 CONTROL OF DANGEROUS (VERY UNRULY) DOGS.
   (A)   No person shall own control keep or maintain in the town a dangerous
(very unruly) dog unless said dog is confined within a secure building or
enclosure which building or enclosure shall be clearly marked with a warning
sign.
   (B)   Pursuant to G.S. § 14-4, any person found guilty of violating §
90.39 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and fined $500.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
90.02 shall be subject to a penalty as provided in §
10.99.
(2013 Code, § 4-2) (Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
CHAPTER 91: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
   
91.01   Destruction of street signs
   
91.02   Construction of private drives; permit
   
91.03   Hauling building materials and construction debris
   
91.04   Permit required for cutting, excavating under, or boring within
roadways of the town
 
   
91.99    Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Authority to regulate travel on public streets during civil emergencies, see
§
34.06(e)
   General provisions of motor vehicles, see §§
70.01 through
70.04 
   Littering, see §
51.02
   Traffic, see Title VII
Statutory reference:
   General authority relative to establishment and control of streets and
sidewalks, see G.S. § 160A-296
§ 91.01 DESTRUCTION OF STREET SIGNS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or cause to be removed,
or to mutilate, deface, destroy, or injure in any manner any road or street
sign located in the town.
   (B)   Pursuant to G.S. § 14-4, any person found guilty of violating §
91.01 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and fined $250.
(Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
§ 91.02 CONSTRUCTION OF PRIVATE DRIVES; PERMIT.
   (A)   No private drive or entranceway shall be constructed upon any public
street or road shoulder in the town without adequate provision through or under
said way to preserve the pre-existing flow and drainage of surface water along
the margin of the street or road affected.
   (B)   Before constructing or causing the construction of any drive or
entranceway upon a public street or road shoulder, the owner of the lot or lots
to be sewed thereby shall notify the Town Clerk in writing and the Clerk shall
issue to the owner a permit for such construction when the same complies with
the requirements of this section.
   (C)   (1)   Private driveways and entranceways constructed within the town
right-of-way shall be constructed of stone base or asphalt and any damages or
disturbance of same resulting from maintenance or installation of underground
facilities located in said right-of-way shall be repaired or replaced by the
Town or other entity causing the damage.
      (2)   Such repair or replacement or existing driveways or entrances or
curbing or obstruct ions constructed of concrete, brick pavers, or similar
materials shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner. The
construction of curbing or obstructions across the town right-of-way is
prohibited.
         (a)   No person, firm, corporation, governmental body, or agency shall
construct or cause to be constructed any drive or entranceway upon or
connecting to any public street or road shoulder in the town which drive or
entranceway shall serve or be designed to serve dwelling(s), residence(s),
building(s), business(es) or separately platted lot(s), or any area, without
first receiving written permission from the Town Board of Commissioners. This
chapter shall not, however, apply to those applicants who receive driveway
entrances by obtaining a certificate of zoning compliance for a new residence.
The Board may grant or deny permission or may grant permission upon such terms
as it, in its discretion, deems reasonably necessary to protect the best
interest of the town.
         (b)   In determining whether or not to grant permission and if
granted, under what conditions, the Board may consider and employ the
provisions of G.S. §§ 160A-11, 160A-174, 160A-296, 160A-300, and 160A-307, and
all other applicable statutes now or hereafter enacted by the State General
Assembly.
(2013 Code, § 15-4) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 HAULING BUILDING MATERIALS AND CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of any lot or lots where
construction is taking place to have all construction debris removed from the
site and to ensure that any building materials and construction debris which
may be dropped on the streets or other public ways is cleaned up and taken
away.
   (B)   In the event it becomes necessary for the town to remove such building
materials or debris, the costs incident to such removal shall be assessed
against the owner of the property where such construction is taking place.
(2013 Code, § 15-5) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR CUTTING, EXCAVATING UNDER, OR BORING WITHIN
ROADWAYS OF THE TOWN.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, governmental unit, water or sewer
authority, or public or private utility shall cut or excavate under, bore
under, or in any way damage, any roadway owned or maintained by the town
without first obtaining the written permission from the Town Chief
Administrative Officer. Any applicant for such permission shall file a written
application, stating the reason for the cut or excavation, and the proposed
location of same, the length of time required to complete the project, and
shall restore the roadway to its original condition. Wherever boring under the
roadway surface can be done without unreasonable expenses as determined by the
town’s Chief Administrative Officer, such boring, rather than roadway cut,
shall be used.
   (B)   On receipt of an application, the town’s Chief Administrative Officer
shall consult with and obtain the advice of The Director of Public Works before
granting written permission or imposition of any conditions or limitations on
such permission. This chapter shall not apply to any act or project under the
direction of the Director of Public works of the town. The violation of this
chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(2013 Code, § 15-6) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
(2013 Code, § 15-4) (Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Abatement of nuisances
   
92.02   Stagnant water
   
92.03   Obstruction of natural drainage
   
92.04   Cleanliness of premises
   
92.05   Removal of dead animals
Fire and Fire Protection
   
92.20   Burning trash within the town prohibited
   
92.21   Lots to be kept free from fire hazards
   
92.22   False fire alarms
Statutory reference:
   Fire protection generally, see G.S. § 58-82-1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever a nuisance shall exist on any premises in the town, the
Chief of Police or the County Health Officer shall give notice to the owner or
occupant of the premises of the existence of the nuisance and shall direct that
the nuisance be abated.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person receiving a notice to abate a
nuisance, given pursuant to this section, to fail to start abatement of the
nuisance within 24 hours after such notice.
   (B)   In the event the owner or occupant of the premises shall fail to abate
a nuisance on his or her premises after having been given notice pursuant to
division (A) above, the town may abate the nuisance and the costs of abatement
shall be certified to the tax collector and collected as taxes.
(2013 Code, § 10-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Abatement of public health nuisances, see G.S. § 160A-193
§ 92.02 STAGNANT WATER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow stagnant water to accumulate or
stand in ponds, holes, ditches, vats, or otherwise upon any lot or premises so
as to be detrimental to health. Such stagnant water shall be subject to
abatement as a nuisance as provided in §
92.01.
(2013 Code, § 10-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.03 OBSTRUCTION OF NATURAL DRAINAGE.
   No person shall erect any dam or obstruction of any kind which shall prevent
the natural flow of water or which shall cause the same to be collected or
dammed in a pool or pools upon any lot in the town, or upon any street, road,
or alley; nor shall they do or cause to be done any work, the effect of which
will cause the formation of such pool or pools; provided, however, that nothing
in this section shall prevent the owner or owners of any lot or lots from
filling up the same as may be found desirable if adequate drainage is provided
through or across the same to care for the surface water that may be collected
or diverted from its natural flow.
(2013 Code, § 10-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.04 CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES.
   (A)   Owners or occupants of premises shall be required to keep such
premises free from noxious weeds, trash or any other form of refuse which may
be dangerous or detrimental to the public health or which may be unsightly.
   (B)   Proper maintenance requires that grass and weeds are to be cut neatly
as reasonably required.
   (C)   Areas, such as decks, porches, yards and play areas, and the like,
that are in view of neighboring property or in view from the streets, shall be
maintained and arranged in an orderly open, uncluttered manner, utilizing
furniture and appointments appropriate to the area.
   (D)   Failure to comply with this provision shall constitute a misdemeanor
and shall also be subject to abatement as a nuisance as provided in §
92.01.
(2013 Code, § 10-4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.05 REMOVAL OF DEAD ANIMALS.
   It shall be the duty of the owner to remove any dead animal from the town
within eight hours.
(2013 Code, § 10-5)
Cross-reference:
   Animals, see
Ch. 90
Statutory reference:
   Removal of dead animals and fowl, see G.S. § 106-403
FIRE AND FIRE PROTECTION
§ 92.20 BURNING TRASH WITHIN THE TOWN PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or cause to be burned any trash,
refuse, shavings, paper, leaves, litter, or other material of any kind outside
any house, or on any street, sidewalk, alley, lot, or yard, within the
corporate limits.
(2013 Code, § 8-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.21 LOTS TO BE KEPT FREE FROM FIRE HAZARDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to remain or accumulate on any
lot or premises any rubbish, refuse, or articles of combustible or inflammable
nature.
(2013 Code, § 8-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.22 FALSE FIRE ALARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to give any false alarm of fire, by
means of the fire alarms system or otherwise.
(2013 Code, § 8-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Giving false fire alarms, see G.S. § 14-286
CHAPTER 93: TOWN BEAUTIFICATION
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Protection of parkways
   
93.02   Policy regarding signs
   
93.03   Signs and posters generally
   
93.04   Definitions
   
93.05   Signs and posters; requirements
Parks and Recreation
   
93.15   Definition
   
93.16   Hours of operation, unauthorized presence
   
93.17   Damage to plants, turf, rocks, structures, streams
   
93.18   Prohibited acts in parks and facilities
   
93.19   Vehicles and motorized wheeled vehicles
   
93.20   Animals and wildlife
   
93.21   Advertising; solicitations
   
93.22   Private for profit activities
   
93.23   Enforcement
 
   
93.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 PROTECTION OF PARKWAYS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully destroy, injure,
mutilate, carry away, break, or in any manner deface any tree, shrub, plant,
grass, or other property of any kind within or upon any of the roads, streets,
public grounds, or parkways of the town, nor shall any person allow any animal
or pet belonging to him or her or in his or her charge to injure any such
property.
   (B)   It shall further be unlawful for any person to allow any animal or to
drive any vehicle upon any of the grass or grass-plots along the roadways and
streets.
(2013 Code, § 15-1) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.02 POLICY REGARDING SIGNS.
   This subchapter sets forth the Town of Biltmore Forest policies and
regulations regarding the size, type and location of signs. The subchapter is
intended to regulate size, type and location of signs, ensure that signs are
not located in the public right of way, do not pose a threat to public safety,
do not unreasonably interfere with aesthetic quality and are consistent with
the nature of a primarily residential community. It is not the intent of this
subchapter to regulate the content of signs or to limit the right of free
speech.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 2-9-2021; Ord. 2022-03, passed 3-8-2022)
§ 93.03 SIGNS AND POSTERS GENERALLY.
   Except as set forth herein, no sign of any kind, including posters,
advertisements, billboards, announcements and like, shall be erected by any
person in any district zoned R-l, R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-5 unless the sign, type,
size and intended location comply with this subchapter or unless prior approval
of the sign type, size, and intended location are first obtained from the Town
Manager or Board of Commissioners. Any sign erected in violation of this
subchapter shall be promptly removed.
(2013 Code, § 15-2) (Ord. 2021-02, passed 2-9-2021; Ord. 2022-03, passed 3-8-
2022)
§ 93.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGNS. Signs identifying a company or individual constructing
or renovating a house or building on property in the town.
   IDEOLOGICAL SIGNS. Signs advocating support for a particular system of ideas
and ideals which may form the basis of an economic or political theory and
policy.
   INVISIBLE FENCING SIGNS. Signs advertising the location of underground
(invisible) fencing on a property or the location of installed underground
utilities.
   NO TRESPASSING SIGNS. Signs providing notice, in a manner reasonably likely
to come to the  attention of intruders, not to enter the property on which the
sign(s) are located.
   ON-PREMISES COMMERCIAL SIGNS. Signs located on or attached to buildings in
the zoning districts in the town where commercial businesses are allowed.
   POLITICAL SIGNS. Signs advocating support for a particular candidate for
political office or political party.
   REAL ESTATE SIGNS. Signs advertising the sale or lease of residential or
commercial real property.
   SECURITY COMPANY SIGNS. Signs indicating that a security system has been
installed on a property.
(Ord. 2021-02, passed 2-9-2021; Ord. 2022-03, passed 3-8-2022)
§ 93.05 SIGNS AND POSTERS; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Real estate signs. No person, either as owner or real estate agent,
shall post any sign except as follows:
      (1)   One sign per lot, not to exceed six square feet in size, not to
contain any electrical component and not to be lighted in any way;
      (2)   If the sign is posted by a real estate agency, the wording shall be
limited appropriately to indicate that the property is for sale or rent, the
name and telephone number of the agency, the listing firm website, and the
multiple listing service number, texting code, or individual website assigned
to the home for sale;
      (3)   If the sign is posted by an owner, the wording shall be limited to
appropriately indicate that the property is for sale or rent, the name of
seller, if so desired, a telephone number, and individual website assigned to
the home for sale;
      (4)   Wording shall be the same on both sides of the sign if both sides
are exposed to the roadway;
      (5)   The sign shall be set back at least 20 feet from the nearest edge
of the pavement of the public road on which the house fronts or faces and in no
event shall the sign be located within any public road right-of-way;
      (6)   No portion of the sign shall extend more than four feet above the
ground;
      (7)   The sign shall be removed no later than three days after the
closing of the sale of the property;
      (8)   If a sign is for commercial use in the R-4 or R-5 Residential
Zoning District and does not comply with the limitations herein, application
must be made to the Board of Commissioners for approval; and
      (9)   The owner of a residential lot and the real estate agent placing a
real estate sign on the residential lot shall each be responsible for any
violation of this section.
   (B)   Construction signs. Signs advertising the name of an individual or
company constructing or renovating a house or other building on a property are
allowed as follows:
      (1)   On any residential lot on which construction or renovation has
begun, neither the general contractor nor the owner of the residential lot
shall post or permit to be posted more than one sign in addition to any sign
required by law to be posted (e.g. building permits and the like);
      (2)   The general contractor may place one sign on the residential lot on
which construction or renovation has begun, which sign shall not exceed six
square feet in size and shall be limited in wording to the street number or
address of the property and the name, address, and telephone number of the
general contractor. The general contractor's sign shall also be subject to
divisions (A)(1), (A)(4), (A)(5), and (A)(6) above. The general contractor's
sign shall be removed from the property not later than three days from the
completion of construction by the general contractor or occupancy by the owner
of the property being constructed, whichever comes first; and
      (3)   The sign shall be set back at least 20 feet from the nearest edge
of pavement of the public road on which the house fronts or faces. The sign
shall not be posted in the public right-of-way.
      (4)   The owner of the residential lot and the general contractor shall
be responsible for any violation of this section.
   (C)   No trespassing signs. No trespassing signs are allowed on private
property provided the signs are erected as follows:
      (1)   The sign(s) shall be posted in a manner reasonably likely to come
to the attention of intruders and include notice not to enter the premises,
with verbiage limited to the following, or some combination thereof:
         (a)   No Trespassing
         (b)   Do Not Enter
         (c)   Private Property
      (2)   The sign(s) shall not exceed two square feet in size, not contain
electrical components, and not be lighted in any way, including reflective,
luminous, or "glow in the dark" components.
      (3)   The sign(s) must be set back at least ten feet from the nearest
edge of the pavement on the public road or street, and in no event shall the
sign be located within any public road or right-of-way.
      (4)   If a property has multiple driveways, a sign may be allowed at each
driveway entrance.
      (5)   There may be no more than one sign every 50 feet. There may be no
more than four signs on a single parcel.
      (6)   Signs may not be placed within a side yard or rear yard setback,
according to the setbacks in place for that specific zoning district. The only
exception to this provision is found in division (C)(7) below.
      (7)   Properties that abut non-residential property may place no
trespassing signs on the property line, but only on the property line where
these properties abut non-residential property.
      (8)   No portion of the sign(s) shall extend more than two feet above the
ground.
      (9)   Signs may not include neon, "day-glow", or fluorescent colors.
      (10)   The owner of a residential property placing a no trespassing sign
on the property shall be responsible for any violation of this section.
   (D)   Political and ideological signs. Political and ideological signs are
allowed on private property provided the signs are erected as follows:
      (1)   Each sign shall not exceed four square feet in size and not contain
any electrical component or be lighted in any way;
      (2)   The sign shall not be located within the town owned public right-
of-way or on town property and must be set back at least 20 feet from the
nearest edge of the paved road on which the house fronts or faces and shall not
encroach on the public right-of-way;
      (3)   No portion of the sign is to extend more than four feet above the
ground;
      (4)   A sign located on private property requires the owner's approval;
      (5)   Up to four political signs may be placed on private property
beginning 30 days before the beginning of early voting for a primary or general
election. Political signs should be removed within five days after the primary,
general or special election; and
      (6)   Political and ideological signs are not allowed on town property.
   (E)   Security company signs. Security company signs are allowed on private
property as follows:
      (1)   On any residential or business property with a commercial security
system, up to two signs bearing the name of the security company and
appropriate contact information, may be posted;
      (2)   The signs shall not exceed one square foot in size, not contain
electrical components and not be lighted in any way;
      (3)   The signs shall be set back at least ten feet from the nearest edge
of the pavement on the public road or street.
   (F)   Invisible fencing signs. Signs indicating the presence and location of
underground fencing are allowed as follows:
      (1)   On any property with an underground "invisible fence," up to two
signs noting the presence of the invisible fence and the name of the company
providing the fence may be posted on the property;
      (2)   The signs shall not exceed one square foot in size, not contain
electrical components and not be lighted in any way;
      (3)   The signs shall be set back at least ten feet from the nearest edge
of the pavement on the public road or street.
      (4)   For the purpose of this subchapter, temporary flags indicating the
installation of underground (invisible) fencing shall be removed no later than
45 days after installation.
   (G)   Flags for underground utilities. Flags for underground utilities are
allowed on a temporary basis to indicate the presence and location of
underground utilities.
   (H)   Signs located in the R-4 and R-5 Zoning Districts.
      (1)   On any lot occupied by a business in the R-4 and R-5 Districts, on-
premises signs are allowed provided the following definitions and permit
requirements are met.
      (2)    For the purpose of this division (H), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         ATTACHED SIGN. Any sign attached to, applied on, or supported by the
front wall or wall facing street of a building.
         CLEARANCE. The vertical distance from the established finished grade
to the lowest edge of the sign.
         DEVELOPMENT IDENTIFICATION SIGN. A sign bearing only the name of the
multiple tenant development.
         ERECT. To construct, build, raise, assemble, install, place, replace,
locate, affix, attach, display, alter, use, create, paint, draw, illuminate, or
in any other way bring into being or establish.
         FREESTANDING POLE SIGN. A sign which is permanently affixed to the
ground by a
pole or other structure and which is not part of the building.
         GRADE. The lowest point at which a sign is attached to the ground.
         GROUND SIGN. A freestanding sign flush to the ground and not elevated
upon poles or
stanchions and not attached to the building.
         HEIGHT. The vertical distance between the highest part of the sign or
its supporting structure, whichever is highest, and the base of the sign at
grade.
         INTERNALLY ILLUMINATED. Any sign designed to provide artificial light
either through exposed lighting on the sign face or through transparent or
translucent material, from a light source within the sign.
         LOT. A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a
building or group of buildings devoted to a common use.
         MULTIPLE TENANT DEVELOPMENT. A development in which there exists a
number of individual or separate activities and in which there are appurtenant-
shared facilities (such as parking areas).
         NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any sign which was allowed when erected or
displayed but which does not conform with the standards of this subchapter, and
any sign which was not allowed but was nonetheless impermissibly created or
displayed before the effective date of this subchapter and any amendments
thereto.
         ON-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign used for the purpose of displaying,
advertising, identifying, or directing attention to a business, products,
operations, or services sold or offered on the lots where the sign is located.
         SETBACK. The horizontal distance between the leading face of the curb
of a street and the closest point of a sign or sign structure on such lot.
Where there is not a curb, the measurement shall be made from the edge of the
pavement.
         SIGN. Any words, lettering, numerals, parts of letters or numerals,
figure, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices, designs, trade names, or
trademarks by which anything is known, made of any material, except live
vegetation, including any surface, fabric, or other material background
structure designed to carry such devices, as are used to designate or attract
attention.
         SIGN STRUCTURE. Any structure which supports, has supported or is
capable of supporting a sign.
         SINGLE TENANT. A single business establishment, activity or use.
         WALL SIGN. Any sign painted or attached flat against and parceled to
the exterior wall or surface of a building or other structure and/or which
projects from the wall or surface.
      (3)   On-premises single-tenant signs.
         (a)   Allowed within the R-4 and R-5 Zoning District may be either:
            1.   Freestanding. Pole or ground; or
            2.   Attached. Wall.
         (b)   Two business identification signs are allowed per lot, only one
of which shall be a freestanding or ground sign. For freestanding or attached
signs, the total allowable area per face of selected sign(s) shall not exceed
40 square feet per face, with two faces per freestanding or ground sign
allowed. In the event the freestanding sign is less than the 40 square feet per
face allowed, the size of the attached sign erected may be increased by that
difference. Signs may be internally or externally illuminated.
         (c)   Additionally, the following requirements must be met based on
the type of sign selected:
            1.   If freestanding pole or ground, then the sign shall be a
maximum of eight feet in height with a minimum setback of ten feet; and
            2.   If wall, then the maximum projection from a wall shall be six
inches.
      (4)   On-premises multiple-tenant development signs.
         (a)   On-premises multiple-tenant development signs allowed within the
R-4 and R-5 Zoning District may be either:
            1.   Freestanding; pole or ground attached; or
            2.   Wall.
         (b)   For a multiple-tenant development, the development itself is
allowed one identification sign. For a freestanding sign, the total allowable
area per face of selected sign shall not exceed 60 square feet with two faces
per freestanding or ground sign allowed. If freestanding pole or ground, the
sign shall be a maximum of 20 feet in height and minimum setback of 15 feet.
Individual tenants within the development shall be allowed one attached wall
sign not to exceed ten square feet, and at the due discretion of the Board of
Commissioners, not more than two, not to exceed ten square feet. The maximum
projection from a wall shall be six inches.
   (I)   The owner of the business establishment erecting a sign shall be
responsible for any violation of this subchapter.
   (J)   Any sign removed by the town for violation of division (A) or (B) of
this section shall be disposed of by the town within five days from the date
the sign is removed from the residential lot unless the residential lot owner,
real estate agent or general contractor, as the case may be, claims said sign
within the five-day period.
(2013 Code, § 15-2) (Ord. passed 9-15-1987; Ord. passed 12-8-1990; Ord. passed
9- -2002; Ord. 2021-02, passed 2-9-2021; Ord. 2022-03, passed 3-8-2022)
PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 93.15 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this section, PARKS shall be defined as all parks,
outdoor athletic facilities (including courts, fields, and school athletic
fields as applicable), greenways or trails, and open space areas owned, leased
and/or operated, maintained and administered by the town.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 11-14-2023)
§ 93.16 HOURS OF OPERATION, UNAUTHORIZED PRESENCE.
   Park properties are open daily to the public from 5:00 a.m. to sunset,
except when:
   (A)   The Town Manager or his or her designee may provide alternate hours of
operations for a park property or facility as appropriate. Changes in hours
will be posted at the facility and/or on the town’s website as appropriate.
   (B)   A park or recreation program on park property or in facilities may
operate during extended hours.
   (C)   A rental agreement issued by the town may authorize alternate hours of
operation or the extended use of a park property or facility.
   (D)   The Town Manager or his or her designee may establish a temporary
holiday schedule for a park or facility.
   (E)   Town personnel or authorized emergency personnel may open or close any
park property in the event of emergency, inclement weather, or appropriate
official purpose. Such opening or closing will be posted in advance when
possible, for public notice.
   (F)   No person shall enter or be present within a park property or facility
when closed as indicated by posted hours or when gates or other access to the
park or facility are shut. Violation of the foregoing may subject the violator
to civil or criminal penalties.
   (G)   Parking may be permitted overnight at a park property only by
permission of the town.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 11-14-2023)
§ 93.17 DAMAGE TO PLANTS, TURF, ROCKS, STRUCTURES, STREAMS.
   (A)   No person shall deface, destroy, injure, misuse, or remove any park
property.
   (B)   No person shall cut, break, move, take, or otherwise injure, destroy
or deface any tree, shrub, plant, turf, rock or any building, fence, bridge,
sign or other structure; or foul any stream, or dump any earth, rubbish or
other substance or material in or upon any park without written permission of
the Town Manager or his or her designee. Such permission shall be given upon a
showing that the activity is consistent with all other ordinances and will not
result in permanent injury to the park.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 11-14-2023)
§ 93.18 PROHIBITED ACTS IN PARKS AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   Dangerous equipment. Practicing, playing or using any apparatus,
including any sports apparatus, that may, despite the exercise of reasonable
care, create a danger to any person because of its use in a public area,
including but not limited to the following: golf, disc golf, horseshoes,
spears, javelins, shot put, lawn darts, archery and discus in park areas is
prohibited except in areas expressly authorized or provided for such purposes.
   (B)   Swimming is prohibited in all parks except in facilities expressly
authorized for that purpose. Personal bathing is prohibited.
   (C)   No person shall possess, use, or distribute illegal drugs or any
controlled substances on park property.
   (D)   Smoking and use of a vaping device in parks and park property is
prohibited. It shall be unlawful to smoke or vape in any town park or park
property held for public recreation in the town.
   (E)   No person shall possess or discharge any fireworks, model rockets, or
other explosive materials or devices on park property, except as authorized by
the Town Manager or his or her designee.
   (F)   No person shall operate any device to amplify sound which creates
excessive or otherwise create excessive noise to disturb the peace and public
enjoyment of park property, except as authorized by approval by the Town
Manager or his or her designee.
   (G)   Use of metal detectors or use of neodymium magnets are not permitted
in parks, except as authorized by approval by the Town Manager or his or her
designee.
   (H)   Recreational drones and any radio-controlled aerial device are not
permitted within any park.
   (I)   No person shall make or kindle any open fire. Private portable grills
may be used in certain park areas as approved by the Town Manager or his or her
designee.
   (J)   No person shall urinate or defecate on park property other than in the
restrooms or designated sanitary facility.
   (K)   No person shall dump, abandon, discard, release or spill as refuse,
bulk trash, landscape material, liquid, or similar objects or substances on
park property or park dumpster unless provided expressly for public use and
authorized by posted signage.
   (L)   No person shall misuse or abuse park property by utilizing it in any
manner other than as appropriate according to its intended design.
   (M)   No person in a park shall conduct himself or herself by word or by
act, in a riotous, disorderly, boisterous, threatening or other manner so as to
disturb the peace and good order of the park.
   (N)   No person in a park shall solicit another to engage in an act of sex
perversion or solicit or request another to commit, perform or engage in any
lewd, lascivious, obscene, or indecent act or behavior.
   (O)   No person shall establish or maintain any camp or other temporary
lodging place or sleeping place, within the park, without the specific written
permit from the Town Manager or his or her designee.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 11-14-2023)
§ 93.19 VEHICLES AND MOTORIZED WHEELED DEVICES.
   (A)   No person shall ride or drive any motor vehicle, golf cart,
motorcycle, electric scooter, motor-driven cycle, or any other form of off-
highway, motor-driven vehicle upon any park land except upon the roads or on
areas which are designed and provided for such purposes. This shall not include
the operation of mobility assisted devices such as electric wheelchairs or
motor vehicles engaged in property maintenance or in other services authorized
by the town. All ordinances regarding operation of a motor vehicle upon public
streets or highways apply to operation upon streets within park land. There
shall be no parking at any time except in designated areas.
   (B)   No bicycles, skateboards or rollerblades are to be ridden in areas
that have been posted by signs that expressly prohibit such.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 11-14-2023)
§ 93.20 ANIMALS AND WILDLIFE.
   (A)   Except in designated areas, no person shall bring or possess an animal
on park property without keeping it at all times on a physical leash that is
attached to the animal by collar or harness and that is under the control of
the owner.
   (B)   No person who brings an animal onto park property shall fail to
immediately clean up and remove the animal’s feces or other waste from park
property and dispose of the waste in a receptacle designated for that purpose.
   (C)   Livestock of any kind are prohibited in any park, unless authorized by
the Town Manager or his or her designee.
   (D)   Horseback riding is prohibited except upon facilities expressly
designed for that purpose.
   (E)   Lawful activities of any public safety K-9 Team in the performance of
their duties is permitted.
   (F)   No person shall abandon or release any animal, whether domestic or
wild, anywhere on or about park property, except as authorized by the Town
Manager or his or her designee.
   (G)   No person shall, in any park, set a trap or snare, remove or annoy,
disturb or poison any wild animal or bird or injure or destroy any nest or
habitat.
   (H)   Fishing is permitted at designated town facilities following North
Carolina Wildlife Resource Commission guidelines and regulations.
   (I)   Service animals are permitted in town parks and facilities as provided
by the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 11-14-2023)
§ 93.21 ADVERTISING; SOLICITATIONS.
   No person shall, without written permission of the Town Manager or his or
her designee, erect, paint, post or otherwise affix or distribute any signs,
advertisements, or circulars on park property. The sales of anything or the
solicitation of funds or donations within any park are forbidden except upon
written permission of the director of parks and recreation or designee. Such
permissions shall be given upon a showing that there will be compliance with
all laws and ordinances and a further showing that the activity will not injure
the parks or interfere with the right of others to use the park.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 11-14-2023)
§ 93.22 PRIVATE FOR PROFIT ACTIVITIES.
   Profit making activities for commercial entities or individuals will not be
permitted in any public facility or upon park lands unless approved in writing
by the Town Manager or his or her designee.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 11-14-2023)
§ 93.23 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   A violation of an offense listed in this subchapter may, at the
discretion of the charging officer be subject to a criminal complaint or
infraction utilizing a state uniform citation.
   (B)   When an officer elects to charge criminally, the officer shall charge
the violation as either an infraction or a misdemeanor, as indicated in the
applicable section. The violation shall be subject to a maximum fine amount of
$500. Jurisdiction for infractions and misdemeanors shall be proper in the
general court of justice for the county.
(Ord. 2023-08, passed 11-14-2023)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
(2013 Code, § 19-10) (Ord. passed - - ; Ord. 2019-02, passed 9-17-2019; Ord.
2021-01, passed 1-12-2021; Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
CHAPTER 94: ABANDONED, JUNKED AND NUISANCE VEHICLES
Section
   
94.01   Intent
   
94.02   Definitions
   
94.03   Administration
   
94.04   Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized
   
94.05   Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized
   
94.06   Junked motor vehicle regulated
   
94.07   Removal of vehicles; pre-towing notice required; appeals
   
94.08   Exceptions to prior notice requirements
   
94.09   Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements
   
94.10   Right to probably cause hearing before sale or final disposition of
vehicle
   
94.11   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings
   
94.12   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle
   
94.13   Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property
   
94.14   Protection against criminal or civil liability
   
94.15   Exceptions
   
94.16   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle
§ 94.01 INTENT.
   It shall be the intent of this chapter to promote and enhance the aesthetic
appearance of the town; to protect property values in the town; and to enhance
public safety. It is further the intent of this chapter to promote and enhance
the attractiveness and safety of the town’s residential streets by controlling
and regulating abandoned, junked and nuisance vehicles.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-14-2023)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303, an
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE is a motor vehicle which:
      (1)   Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or
ordinance;
      (2)   Is left on a public street or highway for longer than two days;
      (3)   Is left on property owned or operated by the town for longer than
24 hours; or
      (4)   Is left on private property without the consent of the owner,
occupant or lessee thereof, for longer than two hours.
   AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL. Any code enforcement officer or police officer on duty
that day or the Town Manager, respectively, is designated to authorize the
removal of vehicles under the provisions of this chapter.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303.2, a
vehicle that does not display a current license plate upon that vehicle and
that:
      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or
      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it
originally was intended to move.
   MOTOR VEHICLE OR VEHICLE. All machines designed or intended to travel over
land by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.
   NUISANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle on public or private property that is determined
and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance and unlawful
and including a vehicle found to be:
      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats or
other pests;
      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over
eight inches in height;
      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;
      (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil or other
flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor;
      (5)   One which has areas of confinement, such as trunks, hoods and the
like, which cannot be operated from inside the area of confinement;
      (6)   One so situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or
turning over;
      (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal
waste or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind;
      (8)   One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp
edges of metal, glass or other rigid materials; or
      (9)   The creation of another similar condition(s) or circumstance(s)
which exposes the public to safety or health hazards.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-14-2023)
§ 94.03 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Police Department and the Town Manager shall be responsible for the
administration and enforcement of this chapter. The Police Department shall be
responsible for administering the removal and disposition of vehicles
determined to be “abandoned” on the public streets and highways within the town
and on property owned by the town. The Town Manager or Town Manager’s designee
shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of
“nuisance” or “junked motor vehicles” located on private property. The town
may, on a case-by-case basis, contract with private tow truck operators or
towing businesses to remove, store, and dispose of abandoned vehicles, nuisance
vehicles and junked motor vehicles in compliance with this chapter and
applicable state laws. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the
legal authority or powers of officers of the Town Police Department in
enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-14-2023)
§ 94.04 ABANDONED VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Upon investigation, a proper authorizing official of the town may
determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard or an
abandoned vehicle as defined above, and order the vehicle removed.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the
real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle
to remain on the property after it has been declared an abandoned vehicle.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-14-2023)
§ 94.05 NUISANCE VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Upon investigation, a proper authorizing official of the town may
determine and declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard or a nuisance
vehicle as defined above, and order the vehicle removed.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to
remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-14-2023)
§ 94.06 JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATED.
   (A)   Upon investigation, the Town Manager or Town Manager’s designee may
order the removal of a junked motor vehicle as defined in this chapter after
finding in writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh
the burdens imposed on the private property owner. The findings shall be based
on a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent owner against the
corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community,
neighborhood, or area appearance. The following, among other relevant factors,
may be considered:
      (1)   Protection of property values;
      (2)   Protection of public health and safety;
      (3)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; or
Provided, however, no vehicle that is used on a regular basis for business or
personal use shall be removed or disposed of pursuant to this division (A).
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant
of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered
removed.
   (C)   A vehicle wholly enclosed inside a garage, other building, and not
visible to the public shall not be considered a junked vehicle for the purposes
of this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-14-2023)
§ 94.07 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; PRE-TOWING NOTICE REQUIRED; APPEALS.
   (A)   Notice required. Except as set forth in §
94.08, an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which is to be removed shall be
towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of the vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor
vehicle, if the names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person
entided to the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee, or occupant of
the real property upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class
mail. Reasonable diligence shall include notification to the registered owner
of the vehicle at his or her last known address according to the latest
registration certificate or certificate of title on file with the North
Carolina Division of Motor Vehicles; notice to the owner of real property as
recorded in the Buncombe County Registry; notice to the owner, lessee or
occupant as contained in the records of the town. The person who mails the
notice shall retain a written record to show the name and address to which
mailed, and the date mailed. If the names and addresses cannot be ascertained
or if the vehicle to be removed is an abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be
given by affixing on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the
vehicle a notice indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the town on a
specific date (no sooner than two days after the notice is affixed). The notice
shall state that the vehicle will be removed by the town on specified date, no
sooner than two days after the notice is affixed or mailed, unless the vehicle
is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time.
   (B)   Appeals. The registered owner or person entitled to possession of a
vehicle which has been determined to be an abandoned vehicle on private
property, nuisance vehicle or junked motor vehicle who has received a notice
pursuant to division (A) of this section may appeal the determination. In the
case of notice for removal of a junked motor vehicle where the determination
has been made that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the
burdens on the private property owner, in accordance with §
94.06(A), the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the junked
motor vehicle may appeal that determination. Any appeal shall be made within
ten days upon receipt of the notice for removal of the vehicle as provided in
division (A) of this section. All appeals shall be made to the Town Board of
Commissioners in writing. Appeals held pursuant to this section shall be
conducted by the Town Board of Commissioners within 45 days after the receipt
of a request for a hearing, and further proceedings to remove the vehicle shall
be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-14-2023)
§ 94.08 EXCEPTIONS TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENT.
   The following vehicles may be removed without prior notice to the owner or
person entitled to possession:
   (A)   Vehicles abandoned on the public streets. For vehicles left on the
public streets and highways, the Police Department or Town Manager hereby
determines that immediate removal of the vehicles may be warranted when they
are:
      (1)   Obstructing traffic;
      (2)   Parking in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting
parking;
      (3)   Parked in a no-stopping or standing zone;
      (4)   Parked in loading zones;
      (5)   Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed under
any town ordinance.
   (B)   Nuisance vehicles and abandoned vehicles on private property. These
vehicles may be removed without giving prior notice in those circumstances
where the authorizing official finds a special need for prompt action to
protect and maintain the public health, safety, and welfare. By way of
illustration and not limitation, such circumstances include vehicles blocking
or obstructing ingress or egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked
in a location or manner posing a traffic hazard or vehicles causing damage to
public or private property.
   (C)   Vehicles left on private property. A vehicle may be removed that has
been left on private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or
lessee thereof for longer than two hours and the owner, occupant or lessee has
complied with §
94.13, or in those circumstances where there is a finding of a special need for
prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to otherwise maintain and
protect the public safety and welfare.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-14-2023)
§ 94.09 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; POST-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which has been ordered
removed may, as directed by the proper authorizing official of the town, be
removed to a storage garage or area by the tow truck operator or towing
business contracting to perform those services for the town. Whenever a vehicle
is removed, the authorizing town official shall immediately notify the last
known registered owner of the vehicle, the notice to include the following:
      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;
      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;
      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
      (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and
      (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause
hearing on the removal.
   (B)   The town shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by
telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written
notice, including the information set forth in divisions (A)(1) through (5) of
this section, shall also be mailed to the registered owner’s last known
address, unless the notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his or
her agent.
   (C)   If the vehicle is registered in North Carolina, notice shall be given
within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice shall be
given to the registered owner within 72 hours of the removal of the vehicle.
Written notice by mail shall be deemed to have been given upon deposit in the
US mail.
   (D)   Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is removed and
the vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates, the authorizing
town official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle
identification number to determine the last known registered owner of the
vehicle and to notify him or her of the information set forth in divisions (A)
(1) through (5) of this section.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-14-2023)
§ 94.10 RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OR FINAL DISPOSITION OF
VEHICLE.
   After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked motor
vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is entitled to a
hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing
the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in accordance with the
provisions of G.S. Chapter 20, Article 7A, as amended.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-14-2023)
§ 94.11 REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.
   At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the
towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double the
amount of the fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing business
having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of a vehicle,
the owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle shall not allow
or engage in further violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-14-2023)
§ 94.12 SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.
   Any abandoned, nuisance, or junked vehicle which is not claimed by the owner
or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the tow truck
operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of the
vehicle shall be carried out in accordance with G.S. Chapter 44A, Article 1.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-14-2023)
§ 94.13 CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   Except as provided in §
94.06(A), as a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private
property if the owner, occupant or lessee of the property could have the
vehicle removed under applicable state laws. In no case will a vehicle be
removed by the town from private property without a written request of the
owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a vehicle is a nuisance
vehicle or is a junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed by the Town
Manager pursuant to §
94.06(A). The town shall require any person requesting the removal of an
abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle from private property to indemnify
the town against any loss, expense or liability incurred because of the
removal, storage or sale thereof.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-14-2023)
§ 94.14 PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.
   Any person who removes a vehicle pursuant to this chapter shall not be held
liable for damages for the removal of the vehicle to the owner, lien holder or
other person legally entitled to the possession of the vehicle removed;
however, any person who intentionally or negligently damages a vehicle in the
removal of the vehicle, or intentionally or negligently inflicts injury upon
any person in the removal of the vehicle, may be held liable for damages.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-14-2023)
§ 94.15 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle:
   (A)   Which is located in a bona fide “automobile graveyard” or “junkyard”
as defined in G.S. §§ 136-143 et seq. and G.S. §§ 160A-303.1 and 160A-303.2;
   (B)   Which is in an enclosed building;
   (C)   Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a
lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the
enterprise; or
   (D)   Which is in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful place and manner by the town.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-14-2023)
§ 94.16 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any
storage facility designated by the town any vehicle which has been impounded
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless and until all towing and
impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of the fees, have been paid.
(Ord. 2023-02, passed 3-14-2023)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
110.01   Adoption of state laws
   
110.02   Sunday sales
§ 110.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAWS.
   The state law regulating intoxicating liquors, as expressly set out in the
state statutes, specifically, G.S. §§ 18B-1 et seq., and any and all other
regulations governing the use and sale of intoxicating liquors, is hereby
specifically adopted and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as
fully as if set out at length herein
(2013 Code, § 3-1)
§ 110.02 SUNDAY SALES.
   Pursuant to the authority granted by G.S. 160A-205.3 and 18B-1004(c) any
establishment located in Biltmore Forest and holding an ABC permit issued
pursuant to G.S. 18B-1001 is permitted to sell beverages allowed by its permit
beginning at 10:00 a.m. on Sundays.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 1-9-2018)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   TOWN OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: TOWN OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Firearms and other weapons
   
130.02   Sounds impacting residential life
   
130.03   Offenses against the public peace
   
130.04   Regulation of solicitation
   
130.05   No human burials permitted
   
130.06   Removal of fallen tree limbs
   
130.07   Permitting the posting of signs prohibiting the carrying of concealed
weapons on certain municipal property
   
130.08   Regulating loitering and temporary structures
   
130.09   Prohibiting public urination and defecation
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall shoot, discharge or release within the corporate
limits any firearms, spring-propelled devices, or guns, including a bow, which
discharges sharp pointed arrows designed to penetrate. This section shall not
apply to any law enforcement officer or representative of any governmental unit
charged with the duties of protecting life or property or enforcing laws and
regulations while engaged in the performance of official duties.
   (B)   It is further provided that this section shall not apply in defense of
life; however, for promoting public health, safety, and welfare of the town,
this section shall not preclude the officers or persons designated by the town
for this purpose pursuant to any depredation permit issued by the State
Wildlife Resources Commission or pursuant to the town’s participation in the
North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission’s Community Deer Management
Assistance Program.
   (C)   Pursuant to G.S. § 14-4, any person found guilty of violating §
130.01 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and fined $500.
(2013 Code, § 12-1) (Ord. 2019-01, passed 8-13-2019; Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-
11-2022)
§ 130.02 SOUNDS IMPACTING RESIDENTIAL LIFE.
   (A)   (1)   As a means of controlling and reducing noise levels in the town,
all construction activities and property maintenance, including delivery of
worker’s material, machinery, or equipment to or from a work site, must be
conducted from 7:30 a.m. until 6:00 p.m., on Monday thru Saturday.
      (2)   Such activities are prohibited on Sundays, New Year’s Day, Memorial
Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. These
restrictions apply on all properties within the town, except for clubs.
   (B)   Should conditions on any property within the town occur that have the
potential of injury or damage to persons or property during prohibited hours,
persons in charge or involved in such matters shall contact the town’s police
officer in charge, present the problem, and seek permission to take appropriate
action.
   (C)   Any sound from radio, music, or other noises are not permitted to the
extent that they disrupt the quiet enjoyment of property.
(2013 Code, § 12-2) (Ord. passed 11-12-2006) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE.
   (A)   It is intended by this section to prohibit the commission of and to
provide punishment pursuant to G.S § 14-4 for the following acts:
      (1)   Disturbing the peace;
      (2)   Resisting arrest and resisting any officer of the town in the
lawful performance of his or her duties;
      (3)   Impersonating any officer of the town;
      (4)   Assembling for the purposes of gambling;
      (5)   Committing a breach of the peace;
      (6)   Appearing in an intoxicated condition outside the offender’s own
home;
      (7)   Making unusual or unnecessary noises calculated to disturb the
peace and good order;
      (8)   Violent or boisterous conduct calculated to disturb the peace and
quiet of other persons;
      (9)   Using profane or obscene language towards others in such manner as
to be offensive;
      (10)   Committing riotous acts;
      (11)   Maliciously interfering with pedestrians or with traffic; or
      (12)   Indecent acts in the presence of others.
   (B)   Pursuant to G.S. § 14-4, any person found guilty of violating §
130.03 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and fined $500.
(2013 Code, § 12-3) (Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate loud noises, see G.S. § 160A-184
   Disorderly conduct in public places, see G.S. § 14-132
§ 130.04 REGULATION OF SOLICITATION.
   Solicitation on private property within the Town of Biltmore Forest for
commercial purposes is not allowed. Solicitation for charitable, religious,
educational and political purposes within the town is allowed. The town
recognizes and acknowledges that free speech rights associated with charitable,
religious, educational and political purposes are protected under the United
States Constitution. The town reserves the right to impose reasonable
limitations on such solicitation to protect the safety and security of its
residents. Private property owners always have the right to limit or prohibit
solicitation for any purpose on their property.
(2013 Code, § 12-4) (Ord. 2025-02, passed 3-12-2025) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Regulation of solicitation, see G.S. § 160A-178
§ 130.05 NO HUMAN BURIALS PERMITTED.
   (A)   There being no existing church cemeteries or duly licensed cemeteries
by the State Cemetery Commission, no human body shall be buried inside the
corporate limits of the town.
   (B)   Pursuant to G.S. § 14-4, any person found guilty of violating §
130.05 shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and fined $500.
(2013 Code, § 12-5) (Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
§ 130.06 REMOVAL OF FALLEN TREE LIMBS.
   In the event a tree or limb located on private property falls out onto town
property such as a road, road right-of-way, or public park, the town shall
remove the same, haul it away, and dispose of the same. The property owner
shall pay the disposal fee incurred by the town, but the town shall bear the
costs of clean up and hauling to the disposal site. The property owner shall be
solely responsible for cleaning up and disposing of all portions of fallen tree
or limb not located on town property.
(2013 Code, § 12-6) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.07 PERMITTING THE POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING THE CARRYING OF CONCEALED
WEAPONS ON CERTAIN MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Posting of signs required. The Board of Commissioners is hereby
authorized and instructed to post conspicuous signage at appropriate locations
on or within each park and each building or portion of a building owned, leased
as lessee, operated, occupied, managed, or controlled by the town as well as
the appurtenant premises to such the building, indicating that carrying a
concealed handgun is prohibited therein.
   (B)   Location of signs. Signs on buildings shall be visibly posted on the
exterior of each entrance by which the general public can access the building.
The Board of Commissioners shall exercise discretion in determining the number
and appropriate sign location of signs to be placed on or within appurtenant
premises and parks.
(2013 Code, § 12-7)
§ 130.08 REGULATING LOITERING AND TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      PUBLIC PLACE. Any place to which the general public has access and a
right of resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose, but does
not necessarily mean a place devoted solely to the uses of the public. It shall
also include the front or immediate area of any store, shop, restaurant, or
other place of business and also public grounds, areas or parks.
   (B)   General provisions.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to stand alone or congregate
with other persons on any street or sidewalk or public place within the town
limits with the intent to, or who shall in fact:
         (a)   Obstruct any public street, public highway, public sidewalk or
any other public place or building by hindering or impeding or tending to
hinder or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic, or
pedestrians; or
         (b)   Obstruct the entrance to any business establishment without so
doing for some lawful purpose, if contrary to the expressed wish of the owner,
lessee, managing agent or person in control or charge of the building or
premises.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person, singly or in groups, to erect
on any property, public or private, any temporary shack, shanty, tent or
structure for place of temporary habitation or abode, for the purpose of living
thereon and in such a manner as to create a place of camping, or temporary
abode; provided, however, that this section shall have no application to any
individuals or group of individuals who are living in temporary quarters on the
premises of another with that landowner’s permission or consent, or who is
engaged in the lawful and proper activities of any Boy Scout or Girl Scout
organization, or auxiliary, or any other civic enterprise or project.
      (3)   When any person causes or commits any of the conditions in this
section, a police officer or any law enforcement officer shall order that
person to stop causing or committing such conditions and to move on or
disperse. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such orders shall be guilty
of a violation of this section.
   (C)   Penalty. In accordance with G.S. § 14-4, any person who violates this
section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined more than
$50 but not more than $500.
(Ord. 2022-01, passed 1-11-2022)
§ 130.09 PROHIBITING PUBLIC URINATION AND DEFECATION.
   (A)   General provisions. Except in designated water closets or toilet
facilities, it shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate on any
public place, sidewalk, street, alleyway or right-of-way, or in any public
building, or on private property. Having the permission of the owner or person
in lawful possession of the real property shall constitute an affirmative
defense to the charge of urinating or defecating on private property.
   (B)   Penalty. In accordance with G.S. § 14-4, any person who violates this
section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined more than
$50 but not more than $500.
(Ord. 2022-02, passed 1-11-2022)
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
(2013 Code, § 12-8) (Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
152.   SUBDIVISIONS
      
153.   ZONING
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Building permit required
   
150.02   Building permit fees
   
150.03   Roof coverage; approved materials
   
150.04   Exceptions
   
150.05   Dormer windows
   
150.06   Wood shingle roofs
   
150.07   Power of condemnation
State Codes
   
150.20   Adoption of State Building Code
   
150.21   Adoption of State Plumbing Code
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, or build any
building or structure of any kind or description within the corporate limits
without first obtaining a building permit.
(2013 Code, § 5-1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.02 BUILDING PERMIT FEES.
   The following fees shall be charged for all building permits:
   (A)   For the first $2,000 estimated cost: $12; and
   (B)   For each additional $1,000 estimated cost: $2.
(2013 Code, § 5-2)
§ 150.03 ROOF COVERAGE; APPROVED MATERIALS.
   The following list of material is suggested for roof coverage:
   (A)   Brick or concrete surface;
   (B)   Clay or Portland cement tile;
   (C)   Tin or slate;
   (D)   Asbestos shingles one-eighth-inch thick or thicker;
   (E)   Pitch or felt, built-up type, four or five plies, gravel, or slag
surface; and
   (F)   Asbestos-asphalt, built-up type, four or five plies, smooth, or grit
surface.
(2013 Code, § 5-3)
§ 150.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   All of the following classes of buildings may be covered with coverings set
forth in §
150.03 or with standard asphalt-rag-felt prepared roofing, or asphalt-rag-felt
shingles, or by other types of coverings having equivalent fire-resistive
properties when approved and labeled by the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc.,
Chicago, Illinois:
   (A)   Dwellings;
   (B)   Frame buildings; or
   (C)   Buildings not exceeding two stories, or 30 feet in height and 2,500
square feet in area, and not used for factories, warehouses, or mercantile
purposes.
(2013 Code, § 5-4)
§ 150.05 DORMER WINDOWS.
   The top and sides of dormer windows shall be covered same as the roof or
with other material having equivalent fire-resistive properties.
(2013 Code, § 5-5)
§ 150.06 WOOD SHINGLE ROOFS.
   If a wood shingle roof is damaged by a fire more than 20%, the entire roof
shall be replaced. If a wood shingle roof is to be repaired more than 10% in
any one year, the entire roof shall be replaced.
(2013 Code, § 5-6)
§ 150.07 POWER OF CONDEMNATION.
   The Building Inspector shall have the power to condemn and have removed any
wood shingle roof that, in his or her opinion, is in such a deteriorated
condition as to be excessively inflammable.
(2013 Code, § 5-7)
STATE CODES
§ 150.20 ADOPTION OF STATE BUILDING CODE.
   All rules and regulations adopted by the state for the proper construction
and erection of all buildings, as provided in G.S. §§ 143-136 et seq., are
hereby adopted by reference and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances
as fully as if set out at length herein, and shall control general construction
the same, except as the same may be amended or modified in this section.
(2013 Code, § 5-18)
§ 150.21 ADOPTION OF STATE PLUMBING CODE.
   All rules and regulations adopted by the state pertaining to plumbing are
hereby adopted and incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as
if set out at length herein and made apart of the Building Code of the town,
except as may be modified or amended in this section.
(2013 Code, § 5-29)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Statutory authorization
   
151.02   Findings of fact
   
151.03   Statement of purpose
   
151.04   Objectives
   
151.05   Definitions
   
151.06   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
151.07   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas
   
151.08   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
151.09   Compliance
   
151.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.11   Interpretation
   
151.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
151.13   Legal status provisions
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
151.25   General standards
   
151.26   Specific standards
   
151.27   Standards for floodplains without established base flood elevations
   
151.28   Standards for riverine floodplains with BFE but without established
floodways or non-encroachment areas
   
151.29   Floodways and non-encroachment areas
Administration
   
151.40   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
151.41   Floodplain development application, permit, and certification
requirements
   
151.42   Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator
   
151.43   Corrective procedures
   
151.44   Variance procedures
   
151.45   Appeals
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   Pursuant to authority granted by the State Legislature as contained in G.S.
Ch. 143, Art. 21, pt. 6; Ch. 160A, Art. 19, pts. 3, 5, and 8; and Ch. 160A,
Art. 8, delegated local governmental units have the authority and
responsibility to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners, does ordain
as follows.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood-prone areas within the jurisdiction of the town are subject
to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the
occupancy in flood-prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood-prone areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights, or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the conduction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.04 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Protect human life, safety, and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e., water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, cable, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges)
that are located in flood-prone areas;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas; and
   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a special
flood hazard area.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same
parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports, and
storage sheds are common urban ACCESSORY STRUCTURES. Pole barns, hay shed, and
the like qualify as ACCESSORY STRUCTURES on farms, and may or may not be
located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated Zone AO on a community’s flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths determined to be from one to
three feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where
velocity flow may be evident.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). A determination of the water surface elevations
of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. When the BFE has
not been provided in a special flood hazard area, it may be obtained from
engineering studies available from a federal, state, or other source using
FEMA-approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with the
freeboard, establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY. A building, portion of a building, or exterior
area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically
reactive products.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DISPOSAL. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on
any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid
waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into
any waters, including groundwaters.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated
floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, post, piers,
pilings, or columns.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures, or development into a floodplain, which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURE HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was
completed before the initial effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD INSURANCE. The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAN (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). An examination, evaluation, and determination
of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate),
flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. The flood insurance study report includes
flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFMs),
if published.
   FLOOD-PRONE AREA. See FLOODPLAIN.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances, and other applications of police power. This term describes
federal, state, or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage
   FLOOD-PROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities,
structures, and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   FLOOD ZONE. A geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or
flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the
area.
   FREEBOARD. The height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to account for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed. The base flood elevation (BFE), plus the
FREEBOARD establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, limited to a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloaded of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. As defined in G.S. Ch. 130, Art. 9, a
facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling,
recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the
structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.
      (1)   Any structure that is:
         (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
         (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
         (c)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks
in communities with a certified local government (CLG) program; or
         (d)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a
historic district designated by a community with a certified local government
(CLG) program.
      (2)   Certified local government (CLG) programs are approved by the U.S.
Department of the Interior in cooperation with the State Department of Cultural
Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having met the
requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended in
1980, being 54 U.S.C. §§ 300101 et seq.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG). The elevation of the ground, sidewalk, or patio
slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion of the
building.
   LOWEST FLOOR. Lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement).
An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than a basement
area is not considered a building’s LOWEST FLOOR; provided, that such an
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, not including the land value and that of
any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. MARKET VALUE may be
established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of this chapter, the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGDV) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as
corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a reference for
establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which base flood
elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel to
determine datum used.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot
as designated in the flood insurance study report.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture, government,
governmental subdivision, agency or instrumentality, public corporation, or any
other legal or commercial entity.
   POST-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map.
   PRE-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred before the effective date of the initial flood insurance
rate map.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure is above ground.
   PUBLIC SAFETY and/or NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A vehicle, which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
   REFERENCE LEVEL. The top of the lowest floor for structures within special
flood hazard areas designated as Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99, or AO.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The base flood elevation, plus the
freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations (BFEs)
have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE, plus two feet of
freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has been established,
this elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the
ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.
   SALVAGE YARD. Any nonresidential property used for the storage, collection,
and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including, but not limited to,
vehicles, appliances, and related machinery.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any facility involved in the disposal of
solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35).
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36), any place
at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or
any other method.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as determined in §
151.07.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided, the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the
building.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any
one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. See definition of “substantial
improvement”. SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means flood-related damage sustained by a
structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.
      (1)   Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during any one-year
period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the
structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term
includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the
actual repair work performed.
      (2)   The term does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any correction of existing violations of state or community
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure; provided, that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in §§
151.25 through
151.29 and
151.40 through
151.45 is presumed to be in VIOLATION until such time as that documentation is
provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION (WSE). The height, in relation to mean sea level, of
floods of various magnitudes, and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel, or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   ZONE A. Designates the flood hazard area without base flood elevations
established.
   ZONE AE. The 1% annual chance 100-year floodplain with base flood elevations
established.
   ZONE X-SHADED. The 0.2% annual chance 500-year floodplain.
   ZONE X-UNSHADED. Designates areas outside the 500-year floodplain.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction of the town.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   (A)   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the
cooperating technical state (CTS) agreement between the state and FEMA in its
flood insurance study (FIS) and its accompanying flood insurance rate maps
(FIRM), for the county dated January 6, 2010, which are hereby adopted and
incorporated as part of this code of ordinances as fully as if set out at
length herein.
   (B)   The initial flood insurance rate maps are as follows for the
jurisdictional areas at the initial date: the county unincorporated area, dated
August 1, 1980; the town, dated May 6, 1996.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the
provisions of §
151.07.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.09 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions; however, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.11 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.12 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that
land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the town or by any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.13 LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Effect on rights and liabilities under this chapter.
      (1)   (a)   This chapter in part comes forward by reenactment of some of
the provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted January 6,
2010, and it is not the intention to repeal, but rather to reenact and continue
to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights
and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced;
         (b)   The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action, suit,
or proceeding instituted or pending; and
         (c)   All provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance of the
county enacted on August 1, 1980, as amended, which are not reenacted herein
are repealed.
      (2)   The date of the initial flood damage prevention ordinance for each
municipal jurisdiction within the county as follows:
         (a)   City of Asheville: June 16, 1980;
         (b)   Town of Black Mountain: April 15, 1980;
         (c)   The Town of Biltmore Forest: none;
         (d)   Town of Montreal: February 10, 2005;
         (e)   Town of Weaverville: May 6, 1996; and
         (f)   Town of Woodfin: February 1, 1980.
   (B)   Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits. Nothing herein
contained shall require any change in the plans, construction, size, or
designated use of any development or any part thereof for which a floodplain
development permit has been granted by the Floodplain Administrator or his or
her authorized agents before the time of passage of this chapter; provided,
however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding permit
within a period of six months subsequent to the date of issuance of the
outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Effective date. This chapter shall become effective on January 6,
2010.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 151.25 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are required.
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
   (D)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding to the regulatory flood protection elevation. These
include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/
kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable
boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designated to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (H)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall
meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this chapter.
   (I)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this
chapter and located totally or partial within the floodway, non-encroachment
area, or stream setback, provided, there is no additional encroachment below
the regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway, non-encroachment
area, or stream setback, and provided, that such repair, reconstruction, or
replacement meets all of the other requirements of this chapter.
   (J)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in §
151.44(J). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or flood-proofed to at least the
regulatory flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the
provisions of §
151.41(C).
   (K)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (N)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by federal or state laws including § 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334.
   (O)   When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area,
the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
   (P)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood
elevation (BFE) shall apply.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.26 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas where the base flood elevation (BFE) data
has been provided, as set forth in §
151.07 or §
151.27, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
151.25 are required.
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the
reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.05.
   (B)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.05. Structures located in A, AE, AO, and A1-30 Zones may be flood-proofed
to the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation; provided,
that all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are water-tight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify that the standards of this division (B) are satisfied.
Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set
forth in §
151.41(C), along with the operational maintenance plans.
   (C)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that
the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.05.
      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the state regulations for manufactured homes adopted by the
Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. § 143-143.15. Additionally, when the
elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above
the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or
engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in
height, an engineering certification is required.
      (3)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of §
151.41(C).
      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved, or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood-prone areas. This
plan shall be filed with an approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the
local Emergency Management Coordinator.
   (D)   Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed areas, of new construction and
substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor:
      (1)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only
be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior
door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion
of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms,
except to enclose storage areas;
      (2)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood-resistant materials at least
to the regulatory flood protection elevation;
      (3)   (a)   Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30, flood openings
to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters; and
         (b)   To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified
by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
design criteria:
            1.   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
            2.   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
            3.   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit;
            4.   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the adjacent grade;
            5.   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
            6.   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefor, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
   (E)   Additions/improvements.
      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more
nonconforming than the existing structure; or
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (2)   Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the
existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall require
only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
only must comply with the standards for new construction; or
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
   (F)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:
      (1)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully
licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities, and has not permanently attached additions);
or
      (2)   Meet all the requirements for new construction.
   (G)   Temporary nonresidential structures.
      (1)   Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for a
temporary structure, the applicant must submit to the Floodplain Administrator
a plan for the removal of such structure(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash
flood, or other type of flood warning notification.
      (2)   The following information shall be submitted in writing to the
Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
         (a)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to one
year;
         (b)   The name, address, and phone number of the individual
responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;
         (c)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);
         (d)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the
entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
         (e)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside
the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
   (H)   Accessory structures.
      (1)   When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, and the like)
are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the following criteria
shall be met:
         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas);
         (b)   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
         (c)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
         (d)   Accessory structures shall be constructed an placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
         (e)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
the provisions of §
151.25(A);
         (f)   All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.25(D); and
         (g)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection
elevation in conformance with the provisions of division (D)(3) above).
      (2)   An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square feet
that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an elevation or
flood-proofing certificate. Elevation or flood-proofing certifications are
required for all other accessory structures in accordance with §
151.41(C).
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.27 STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS.
   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as approximate Zone A and
established in §
151.07 where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the
following provisions, in addition to the provision of §
151.25, shall apply.
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or new development shall be permitted within a distance of 20
feet each side from top bank or five times the width of the stream, whichever
is greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall
not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
   (B)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection elevation
shall be determined based on the following criteria.
      (1)   When the base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other
sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas
shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and shall be
elevated or flood-proofed in accordance with standards in §§
151.26 and
151.29.
      (2)   When floodway or non-encroachment data is available from a federal,
state, or other source, all new construction and substantial improvements
within floodway and non-encroachment areas shall also comply with the
requirements of §§
151.26 and
151.29.
      (3)   All subdivision, manufactured home park and other development
proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if development is
greater than five acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured home sites. Such
base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in accordance
with §
151.07 and utilized in implementing this chapter.
   (C)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a federal,
state, or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be elevated
or flood-proofed (nonresidential) to or above the regulatory flood protection
elevation, as defined in §
151.05. All other applicable provisions of §
151.26 shall also apply.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.28 STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BFE BUT WITHOUT ESTABLISHED
FLOODWAYS OR NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   Along rivers and streams where base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided
by FEMA or is available from another source but neither floodway nor non-
encroachment areas are identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM
or in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all development
within such areas:
   (A)   Standards of §§
151.25 and
151.26; and
   (B)   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated, no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting
technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.29 FLOODWAYS AND NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   (A)   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located
within the special flood hazard areas established in §
151.07. The floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas
due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris
and potential projectiles.
   (B)   The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in §§
151.25 and
151.26, shall apply to all development within such areas.
      (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other developments shall be permitted unless:
         (a)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice, and presented to the Floodplain Administrator
prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or
         (b)   A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has been approved
by FEMA. A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained upon completion
of the proposed encroachment.
      (2)   If division (B)(1) above is satisfied, all development shall comply
with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   No new manufactured homes shall be permitted. Replacement
manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be
permitted, provided, the following provisions are met:
         (a)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of §
151.26(C); and
         (b)   The no encroachment standards of division (B)(1) above.
      (4)   No new habitable structures, included structures used for working,
sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom facilities, shall be permitted in
floodways and non-encroachment areas.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.40 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Town Manager or his or her designee, hereinafter referred to as the
Floodplain Administrator, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.41 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT, AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application requirements.
      (1)   Application for a floodplain development permit shall be made to
the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development activities located within
special flood hazard areas.
      (2)   The following items shall be presented to the Floodplain
Administrator to apply for a floodplain development permit:
         (a)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
            1.   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area
of development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and
other development;
            2.    The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated
on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
151.07, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard
area;
            3.   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
151.07;
            4.   The boundary of the floodway(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as
determined in §
151.07;
            5.   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in
§§
151.07,
151.27,
151.42, or
151.43; and
            6.   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be
altered or relocated as a result of proposed development;
         (b)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development
within a special flood hazard area, including, but not limited to:
            1.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed
reference level (including basement) of all structures;
            2.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure in Zone AE, A, or AO will be flood-proofed; and
            3.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility systems will be elevated or flood-proofed;
         (c)   If flood-proofing, a flood-proofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-
65) with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and
maintenance plan that includes, but is not limited to, installation, exercise,
and maintenance of flood-proofing measures;
         (d)   1.   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include
details of the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this
chapter are met.
            2.   These details include but are not limited to:
               a.   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e.,
fill, solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open
foundation on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls);
               b.   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces on walls in accordance with §
151.26(D)(3) when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AO, AE,
and A1-30;
         (e)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor;
         (f)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
         (g)   Certification that all other local, state, and federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received;
         (h)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of §
151.26(F) and (G) are met; and
         (i)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on
plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation.
   (B)   Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
      (1)   A description of the development to be permitted under the
floodplain development permit;
      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in §
151.07;
      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
reference level and all attendant utilities;
      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
protection of all public utilities;
      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines;
      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse, as
applicable;
      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AO, AE, or A1-30;
and
      (8)   Limitations of below BFE enclosure uses, if applicable (i.e.,
parking, building access and limited storage only);
   (C)   Certification requirements.
      (1)   Elevation certificates.
         (a)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81 -31) is recommended prior
to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit
holder to have established an elevation reference level, prior to construction.
The Floodplain Administrator can review the certificate data submitted.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder
prior to the beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or
failure to make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain
development permit.
         (b)   A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is
required after construction is completed and prior to certificate of
compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy.
      (2)   Flood-proofing certificate.
         (a)   If nonresidential flood-proofing is used to meet the regulatory
flood protection elevation requirements, a flood-proofing certificate (FEMA
Form 81-65), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and
maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of any new
construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the flood-proofed design elevation
of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea
level.
         (b)   Flood-proofing certification shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by
same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the
operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit
approval.
         (c)   Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required
corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to
construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold
the issuance of a certificate of compliance/occupancy.
      (3)   If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A, AO, AE, or A1-30
and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade,
an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the
provisions of §
151.26(C)(2).
      (4)   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of
the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation, a professional engineer’s
certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying
capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream
and downstream, and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior
to issuance of a floodplain development permit.
      (5)   The following structures, if located within Zone A, AO, AE, or A1-
30 are exempt from the elevation/flood-proofing certification requirement
specified in items divisions (C)(1) or (C)(2) above:
         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of §
151.26(F)(1);
         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of §
151.26(G); and
         (c)   Accessory structures less than 150 square feet meeting
requirements of §
151.26(H).
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.42 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:
   (A)    Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
   (B)   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that all necessary local, state, and federal permits have been received;
   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Department of Crime Control
and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the
National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA);
   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained;
   (E)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment areas unless
the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of §
151.45 are met;
   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with §
151.41(C);
   (G)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all
new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been flood-
proofed, in accordance with the provisions of §
151.41(C);
   (H)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public
utilities in accordance with the provisions of §
151.41(C);
   (I)   When flood-proofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of §§
151.26(B) and 151.41(C);
   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the special flood hazard areas, floodways, or non-encroachment areas (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to appeal the interpretation as provided in this subchapter;
   (K)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.07, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation (BFE)
data, along with floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a
federal, state, or other source, including data developed pursuant to §
151.27(B)(2), in order to administer the provisions of this chapter;
   (L)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway or
non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with §
151.07, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-
encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source in
order to administer the provisions of this chapter;
   (M)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of
this chapter and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974,
being 5 U.S.C. § 552a, as amended;
   (N)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to
a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall
make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the
work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the
terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action;
   (O)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation
of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor;
   (P)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain
Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked;
   (Q)   May refuse or cause to be refused a certificate of occupancy for any
building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site in
question, or cause the town permitting office to refuse to issue any permit
that has been applied for, or cause the town permitting office to freeze (or
suspend) active permits and inspections;
   (R)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each
member of his or her Inspections Department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the Department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action;
   (S)   Follow through with corrective procedures of §
151.43;
   (T)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests;
   (U)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the
FIS report, FIRM, and other official flood maps and studies adopted in
accordance with §
151.07, including any revisions thereto including letters of map change, issued
by FEMA. Notify the state and FEMA of mapping needs;
   (V)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including letters of
map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) and letters of map revision (LOMR); and
   (W)   Apply and enforce any and all provisions of this chapter. In
determining the amount of any penalty ordered under authority of this chapter,
the Floodplain Administrator shall give due consideration to the
appropriateness of the penalty with respect to the size of the business of the
person being charged, the gravity of the violation, the good faith of the
person, the record of previous violations, and, in general, the facts and
circumstances surrounding the violation.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.43 CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action.
      (1)   If the owner of a building or property shall fail to take prompt
corrective action, the Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written
notice, by certified or registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by
personal service, stating:
      (a)   The building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations; and
      (b)   A hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at a
designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter.
      (2)   Following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue an
order affirming modifying or rescinding the original finding or may enter such
other finding or order as the Floodplain Administrator may deem just and proper
consistent with the provisions of this chapter including, but not limited to,
order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
   (C)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of this chapter, he or she shall issue
an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation
within a specified time period, not less than 60 calendar days, nor more than
180 calendar days. Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is
imminent danger to life or other property, he or she may order that corrective
action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible.
   (D)   Appeal.
      (1)   Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action may
appeal the order to the Board of Adjustment by giving notice of appeal in
writing to the Floodplain Administrator and Clerk within ten days following
issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the
Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The Board of Adjustment shall hear an
appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke
the order.
      (2)   Any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Floodplain Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to
the procedure found in §
151.45.
   (E)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the
discretion of the court.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.44 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment as established by the town, hereinafter
referred to as the “Appeal Board”, shall hear and decide requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal
such decision to the Court as provided in G.S. Ch. 7A.
   (C)   Variances may be issued for:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the
definition as stated in §
151.05, provided provisions of divisions (I)(2), (I)(3), and (I)(5) below have
been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public
safety; or
      (3)   Any other type of development provided it meets the requirements of
this section.
   (D)   In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under §
151.05 as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (E)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance;
   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
chapter;
   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction
below the base flood elevation (BFE) increases risks to life and property, and
that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood
elevation (BFE) will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up
to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be maintained
with a record of all variance actions, including justification for their
issuance;
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
the state upon request;
   (I)   Conditions for variances shall be as follows:
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances;
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or
non-encroachment area if the variance would result in any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge;
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief; and
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit
approval; and
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (J)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas; provided, that all
of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community;
      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood
hazard area;
      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or flood-proofed
to at least the regulatory flood protection elevation;
      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal, state, and
local laws; and
      (5)   The town has notified the Secretary of the State Department of
Crime Control and Public Safety of its intention to giant a variance at least
30 calendar days prior to granting the variance.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.45 APPEALS.
   (A)   Types of appeals. The Town Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide
all appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the
Floodplain Administrator. In deciding appeals, it may hear both those based
upon an allegedly improper or erroneous interpretation of this chapter and
those based upon alleged hardship resulting from strict interpretation of this
chapter.
   (B)   Procedure for filing appeals. No appeal shall be heard by the Board of
Adjustment unless notice thereof is filed within 30 days after the interested
party receives notice of the order, requirement, decision, or determination by
the Floodplain Administrator. The applicant must file his or her application
for a hearing with the Floodplain Administrator, who shall act as clerk for the
Board of Adjustment in received this notice. All applications shall be made
upon the form specified for that purpose, and all information required thereon
shall be complete before an appeal shall be considered as having been filed.
   (C)   Hearings. Hearings shall be conducted as follows.
      (1)   Time. After receipts of notice of appeal, the Board Chairperson
shall schedule the time for a hearing, which shall be at a regular or special
meeting within 31 days from the filing of such notice of appeal.
      (2)   Notice of hearing. The Board of Adjustment shall mail notices of
the hearing to the affected parties to the action appealed from, and to such
other persons as the Floodplain Administrator shall direct, at least five days
prior to the hearing. Such notice shall state the location of the building or
lot, the general nature of the question involved in the appeal, and the time
and place of the hearing.
      (3)   Conduct of hearing.
         (a)   Any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney at the
hearing.
         (b)   The order of business for the hearing shall be as follows:
            1.   The Chairperson, or such person as he or she shall direct,
shall give a preliminary statement of the case;
            2.   The applicant shall present the argument in support of his or
her application;
            3.   Persons opposed to granting the application shall present the
argument against the application;
            4.   Both sides will be permitted to present rebuttals to opposing
testimony; and
            5.   The Chairperson shall summarize the evidence, which has been
presented, giving the patties opportunity to make objections or corrections.
         (c)   Witnesses may be called and factual evidence may be submitted,
but the Board of Adjustment shall not be limited to consideration of only such
evidence as would be admissible in a court of law. The Board of Adjustment may
view the premises before arriving at a decision. All witnesses before the Board
of Adjustment shall be placed under oath and the opposing party may cross
examine them.
   (D)   Rehearings. An application for a rehearing may be made in the same
manner as provided for an original hearing. Evidence in support of the
application shall initially be limited to that which is necessary to enable the
Board of Adjustment to determine whether there has been a substantial change in
the facts, evidence, or conditions in the case. The application for rehearing
shall be denied by the Board of Adjustment if, from the record, it finds that
there has been no substantial change in facts, evidence, or conditions. If the
Board of Adjustment finds that there has been a change, it shall thereupon
treat the request in the same manner as any other application.
   (E)   Decisions. Decisions shall be made in the following manner.
      (1)   Time. A decision by the Board of Adjustment shall be made within 30
days from the time of hearing.
      (2)   Form. Written notice by certified or registered mail of the
decision in a case shall be given to the applicant by the Floodplain
Administrator as soon as practical after the case is decided. Also, written
notice shall be given to owners of the subject property, if not the applicant,
and to other persons who have made written request for such notice. The final
decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be shown in the record of the case as
entered in the minutes of the Board of Adjustment and signed by the Floodplain
Administrator and the Chairperson upon approval of the minutes of the Board of
Adjustment. Such record shall show the reasons for the determination, with
summary of the evidence introduced and the findings of fact made by the Board
of Adjustment. Where a variance is granted, the record shall state in detail
any exceptional difficulty or unnecessary hardship upon which the appeal was
based and which the Board of Adjustment finds to exist. The decision may
reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement,
decision, or determination appeal from. The record shall state in detail what,
if any, conditions, and safeguards are imposed by the Board of Adjustment in
connection with the granting of a variance.
      (3)   Expiration of permits. Unless otherwise specified, any order or
decision of the Board of Adjustment granting a variance shall expire if a
floodplain development permit, building permit, or certificate of occupancy for
such use is not obtained by the applicant within one year from the date of the
decision.
      (4)   Voting. The concurring vote of four-fifths of the members of the
Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement,
decision, or determination of the Floodplain Administrator; to decide in favor
of the applicant any matter upon which the Board of Adjustment is required by
this subchapter to pass; or to grant a variance from the provisions of this
subchapter.
      (5)   Public record of decisions. The decisions of the Board of
Adjustment, as filed in its minutes, shall be a public record, available for
inspection at all reasonable times.
   (F)   Appeals from decision of Board of Adjustment.
      (1)   Appeals from the Board of Adjustment may be taken to the courts
pursuant to G.S. § 160A-388 as same is effective on and after January 1, 2010
in accordance Session Law 2009-421.
      (2)   Every final decision granting or denying a permit under this part
shall be subject to review by the superior court of the county, with the right
of jury trial at the election of the party seeking review. The time and manner
of election of a jury trial shall be governed by G.S. 1A-1, Rule 38(b) of the
Rules of Civil Procedure. Pending the final disposition of an appeal, no action
shall be taken that would be unlawful in the absence of a permit issued under
this part.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   In addition to revoking or refusing to issue a floodplain development
permit, the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized agent may refuse or
cause to be refused a certificate of occupancy for any building or other
improvements constructed or being constructed on the site in question, or cause
the town permitting office to refuse to issue any permit that has been applied
for, or cause the town permitting office to freeze (or suspend) active permits
and inspections until the applicant has taken the corrective procedures set
forth in the notice and cured the violations described therein.
   (C)   Failure to remove any artificial obstruction or enlargement or
replacement thereof, that violates this chapter or the provision of any permit
issued under the authority of this chapter may subject the person in violation
of this chapter to a fine of not more than $5,000 per day, and such fine shall
constitute a separate violation of this chapter for each day that the failure
continues after written notice from the Town Board of Commissioners. Any fine
imposed hereunder shall be a civil penalty which may be recovered by the town
in a civil action in the nature of a debt.
   (D)   In addition to or in lieu of other remedies, the Town Board of
Commissioners may, by and through its Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized agent, institute any appropriate action or proceeding to restrain or
prevent any violation of this chapter or of the provisions of any permit issued
under the authority of this chapter, or to require any person, firm, or
corporation that has committed a violation to remove a violating obstruction or
restore the conditions existing before the placement of the obstruction by any
manner or means at law or in equity.
(2013 Code, Ch. 21) (Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Short title
   
152.02   Authority
   
152.03   Jurisdiction
   
152.04   Purpose
   
152.05   Compliance
   
152.06   Definitions
   
152.07   General requirements
   
152.08   Exceptions
   
152.09   Amendments
   
152.10   Legal provisions
Procedure for Review and Approval of Subdivision Plats
   
152.25   Generally
   
152.26   Subdivision Administrator
   
152.27   Pre-application procedure
   
152.28   Sketch plan
   
152.29   Preliminary plat
   
152.30   Start of construction
   
152.31   Improvements; installation or guarantees
   
152.32   Final plat
   
152.33   Recording of the final plat
   
152.34   Effect of plat approval on dedications
   
152.35   Re-subdivision procedures
Improvements Required and Minimum Standards of Design
   
152.50   Generally
   
152.51   Suitability of land
   
152.52   Streets and roads
   
152.53   Pedestrian ways
   
152.54   Blocks
   
152.55   Water and sewer systems
   
152.56   Stormwater drainage
   
152.57   Sedimentation control
   
152.58   Lots
   
152.59   Easements
   
152.60   Street lighting
   
152.61   Final development plans
 
   
152.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Preliminary Plat Checklist
   
Appendix B:   Final Plat Checklist
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Subdivision Regulations
of The Town of Biltmore Forest, North Carolina”.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.02 AUTHORITY.
   The Town Board of Commissioners, pursuant to the authority granted by the
G.S. §§ 160A-371 through 160A-376, hereby ordains and enacts into law these
articles and sections for the purpose of providing for the orderly growth and
development of the town.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.03 JURISDICTION.
   These regulations shall govern all subdivision of land lying within the
corporate limits of the town, as now or hereafter established.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.04 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and standards for the
development and subdivision of real estate within the corporate limits of the
town in an effort, to among other things, ensure proper legal description,
identification, monumentation, and recordation of real estate boundaries;
further the orderly layout and appropriate use of the land; provide safe,
convenient, and economic circulation of vehicular traffic; provide suitable
building sites which are readily accessible to emergency vehicles; assure the
proper installation of streets and utilities and other improvements; and help
conserve and protect the physical and economic resources of the town and its
environs.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.05 COMPLIANCE.
   All plats for the subdivision of land shall conform to the requirements of
these regulations, and shall be submitted in accordance with the procedures and
specifications established herein. No plat or a subdivision of land within the
town shall be filed or recorded by the County Register of Deeds until it has
been submitted in accordance with these provisions and given final plat
approval by the Town Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.06 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. Biltmore Forest Town Board of Commissioners.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line delineating the minimum allowable distance
between the property line and a building on a lot, within which no building or
other structure shall be placed except as otherwise provided. Front setback
lines shall be measured from the street line.
   CORNER LOT. A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A street permanently terminated by a turn-around.
   EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner of use, by the public, a
corporation, or person(s), of a strip of land for specified reasons.
   INDIVIDUAL SEWER SYSTEM. Any septic tank or ground absorption system serving
a single source or connection and approved by the County Sanitarian.
   INDIVIDUAL WATER SYSTEM. Any well or spring used to supply a single
connection.
   LOT. A portion of a subdivision or any other parcel of land intended as a
unit for transfer of ownership, or for development, or both. The word LOT
includes the words PLOT or PARCEL.
   PLANNING COMMISSION. Biltmore Forest Planning Commission.
   PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM. Any sewer system owned and operated by the Town of
Biltmore Forest or the Metropolitan Sewerage District in Buncombe County. Plans
for public sewer system extensions serving two or more connections to a public
system shall be approved by the State Division of Environmental Management.
   PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. The water system operated by the Town of Biltmore
Forest. Water systems serving 15 or more residential connections or serving
more than 25-year-round residents are classified as public water supplies, and
plans and specifications must be approved by the State Division of
Environmental Health. Also, water supply systems serving from two to 14
connections shall be regulated by the County Board of Health and plans shall be
approved by the Buncombe County Health Department, Environmental Health
Section.
   REGISTERED ENGINEER. A professional engineer who has been duly registered
and licensed as a professional engineer pursuant to G.S. Ch. 89C.
   REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR. A person duly registered to practice land
surveying pursuant to G.S. Ch. 89C.
   RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A group residential development where
more than one principal building is proposed to be constructed on a single
tract or a clustered housing development or any residential complex containing
at least six or more units, shall be deemed a RESIDENTIAL PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT. (PUD). Multi-family structures shall have no less than three,
three dwelling units per structure. Residential units within a RESIDENTIAL
PLANNED UNIT development may include single-family detached or attached units,
townhouse developments, condominiums, and other multi-family type residential
units, excluding time-sharing units, mobile homes, and mobile home parks.
   SHALL. The word SHALL is always mandatory and not merely directory.
   STREET. A dedicated right-of-way intended for vehicular traffic, which
affords the principal means of access to abutting properties.
   STREET LINE. The edge of the roadway pavement.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm, or corporation who subdivides or develops any
land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined.
   SUBDIVISION. As defined by state, law shall mean all divisions of a tract or
parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions, for
the purpose of sale or building development whether immediate or future, and
shall include all divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or
a change in existing streets; but the following as defined by state law shall
not be included within this definition nor be subject to the subdivision
regulations of this chapter; however, divisions (1) through (4) below are
regulated through the town’s zoning ordinance.
      (1)   The combination or recombination of portions of previously
subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased
and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the town as
required by this chapter.
      (2)   The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres where no
street right-of-way dedication is involved.
      (3)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land, for the
widening or opening of streets.
      (4)   The division of a tract of land in single ownership whose entire
area is no greater than two acres into not more than three lots, where no
street right-of-way dedication is involved, and where the resultant lots are
equal to or exceed the standards of the town, as required by this chapter.
   SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATOR. An official or designated person of the Town of
Biltmore Forest responsible for assisting in the administration and enforcement
of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.07 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Conformity to surrounding development and street extension; street
connections to existing town streets.
      (1)   The proposed street layout shall be coordinated with the street
system of the surrounding area. Where possible, existing principal streets
shall be extended.
      (2)   (a)   All proposals for street extensions or proposals for
connecting a street to an existing town street shall require a street permit
from the town. In order to receive such a permit, all proposals for street
extensions or proposals for connections to any existing town streets shall be
reviewed and approved by the Town Board of Commissioners.
         (b)   If the proposal is part of a subdivision plan, the application
for the permit should be made with the preliminary plat and the street permit
shall be issued when the Board of Commissioners approve the preliminary plat
for the subdivision. All other street extensions or street connections to an
existing street not involving a subdivision shall require a permit and
application for a new street permit shall be made at the Town Hall.
         (c)   Persons making such proposals shall prepare and present street
plans and traffic generation data to demonstrate the impact upon the town’s
existing street system. All street plans shall be prepared by a registered
engineer. All proposed streets shall meet the requirements and standards of the
State Department of Transportation, Division of Highways’ Subdivision Roads
Minimum Construction Standards (latest edition as revised), as specified in §
152.52. The Board of Commissioners shall require the street plans to be
reviewed and a recommendation provided to the Board by the Planning Commission,
and the town’s consulting engineer.
         (d)   The Board of Commissioners shall either approve or disapprove
each application for a new street permit. If the Board of Commissioners
determine that the proposal will either cause traffic congestion or impair
traffic safety, or be detrimental to the existing surrounding neighborhoods, or
be detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of its citizens, the Town
Board of Commissioners shall have the authority to prohibit the extension or
connection to any existing town street by disapproving the new street permit.
The Board shall state the reasons for applying or disapproving each
application.
   (B)   Access to adjacent properties. Where, in the opinion of the Board of
Commissioners, it is desirable to provide for street access to an adjoining
property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of
such property and a temporary turn-around shall be provided.
   (C)   Large tracts or parcels. Where land is subdivided into large parcels
than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for
the opening of future streets and logical further re-subdivision.
   (D)   Alleys. Alleys shall be provided to the rear of all lots used for
other than residential purposes. Alleys are prohibited in residential blocks
unless such are approved by the Board of Commissioners. All dead-end alleys
shall be provided with a turn-around.
   (E)   Street names. Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment with
existing streets, shall be assigned the same name of the existing street. For
all other proposed streets, in order to avoid confusion for emergency vehicles,
the name of proposed streets shall not duplicate an existing street name in the
county. It is the responsibility of the subdivider to contact the County Street
Addressing office to obtain approval of the street name.
   (F)   Surveying and placements of monuments. The Standards of Practice for
Land Surveying, as adopted by the State Board of Registration for Professional
Engineers and Land Surveyors, under provisions of G.S. Ch. 89C, shall apply
when conducting surveys.
   (G)   Final plats. All final plats to be recorded in the County Register of
Deeds shall meet all the mapping requirements set forth in G.S. § 47-30, as
amended.
   (H)   Preparation of plans by a registered engineer. All plans for streets,
drainage, water and sewer systems, and sedimentation control, as required in
this chapter, shall be prepared by a registered engineer. The engineer’s seal
shall be affixed to such plans. As specified in this chapter, the town’s
consulting engineer shall review these plans and provide recommendations to the
Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners as to the suitability of the
proposed systems.
   (I)   Natural assets. In any subdivision, due consideration will be given to
preserving natural features such as trees, ponds, streams, rivers, lakes, and
for any historical sites which are of value not only to the subdivision but to
the town as a whole.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.08 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   In compliance with the town zoning ordinance and in specified zoning
districts, the standards and requirements of this chapter may be modified in
the case of a plan for a residential planned unit development (see definition
in §
152.06). Residential planned unit developments shall be reviewed as a
conditional use under the zoning ordinance and approved by the Zoning Board of
Adjustment. It is the intent of this section to encourage flexibility and
innovation in the design of structures and land development, and to provide an
opportunity to develop land areas in a manner different from the standards
arrangement of one principal building on one lot.
   (B)   It is further intended that a residential planned unit development
will be in harmony with the character of the zoning district in which it is
located, and that adequate standards will be maintained to assure the public
health, safety, and general welfare. Residential planned unit developments
shall be prepared and submitted in accordance with
Ch. 153.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.09 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Amendment procedures. This chapter may be amended from time to time by
the Board of Commissioners. Before taking any action on a proposed amendment to
this chapter, the Board of Commissioners shall request the Planning Commission
to provide a recommendation on each proposed amendment. The Planning Commission
shall have 32 days after the proposed amendment has been presented to them to
submit its recommendations to the Board of Commissioners. Failure of the
Planning Commission to submit recommendations within the 32-day period shall
constitute a favorable recommendation.
   (B)   Public hearing. Before enacting any amendment to this chapter, the
Board of Commissioners shall hold a public hearing. A notice of such public
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county
once a week for two successive weeks, the first publication shall not appear
less than ten days or more than 25 days prior to the date fixed for the public
hearing. In computing such period, the day of publication is not to be included
but the day of the hearing shall be included. The notice shall include the
time, place, and date of the hearing and include a description of the change or
amendment to this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.10 LEGAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Abrogation. This chapter shall neither repeal, abrogate, annual,
impair, nor interfere with any existing subdivisions, the plats of which are
properly recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds prior to the effective
date of this chapter, nor with existing easements, covenants, deed
restrictions, agreements, or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to
law, prior to the effective date of this chapter.
   (B)   Effective date.
      (1)   This chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after its
adoption by the Town Board of Commissioners, July 17, 1984.
      (2)   Since the original adoption of this chapter, the ordinance has been
amended on May 19, 1987, June 13, 1989, March 19, 1991, November 29, 1994, and
January 26, 1995. All amendments are included herein and are a part of this
chapter text.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION PLATS
§ 152.25 GENERALLY.
   (A)   The Town Board of Commissioners and Planning Commission shall be
involved in the review of proposed subdivisions as stated in this subchapter.
The Planning Commission will serve in an advisory capacity and shall make
recommendations to the Board of Commissioners on preliminary and final plats.
The Board of Commissioners shall make the final approvals on all preliminary
and final plats.
   (B)   No final plat of a subdivision within the town shall be recorded by
the County Register of Deeds until it has been submitted to the Town Planning
Commission for review and recommendation and has been approved by the Town
Board of Commissioners as provided herein. To secure such approval of a final
plat, the subdivider shall follow the procedure established in this subchapter.
Furthermore, no street shall be maintained by the town nor street dedication
accepted for ownership and maintenance, nor shall water, sewer, or other town
facilities or services be connected with any subdivision for which a final plat
is required to be approved until all construction has been completed and the
final plat has been approved by the Town Board of Commissioners. Pursuant to
G.S. § 47-30.2, no final plat shall be recorded without the certification of
the appropriate review officer.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.26 SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Town Board of Commissioners shall appoint a Subdivision
Administrator who shall be responsible for assisting in the administration and
enforcement of the ordinance. The Administrator shall initially receive all
plats, plans, and other information in order to prepare the material for review
by the Planning Commission and the Board of Commissioners. The Administrator
shall be responsible for transmitting all engineering plans for streets, water
and sewer systems, drainage, and sedimentation control to the town’s consulting
engineer, and town departments for review and recommendation prior to
preliminary plat approval.
   (B)   When the developer’s engineering plans are required to be reviewed by
a state agency, county government, or other organization, the developer/
subdivider shall be responsible for transmitting such plans to the appropriate
agency and obtaining necessary approvals so that such approvals may be
submitted along with the preliminary plat.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.27 PRE-APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   Every subdivision applicant is required to meet the Subdivision
Administrator or his or her designee in a pre-application conference prior to
the submittal of a subdivision plat. The purpose of this conference is to
provide clarification and assistance in the preparation and submission of plats
for approval. The sketch plan, if provided, shall be presented for staff review
during the conference.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.28 SKETCH PLAN.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Prior to preliminary plat application, the subdivider may submit a
sketch plan of the proposed subdivision to the Town Planning Commission. The
purpose of submitting the sketch plan is to afford the subdivider an
opportunity to obtain the advice and assistance of the Planning Commission in
order to facilitate the subsequent preparation and approval of the preliminary
plat. This procedure does not require formal application or fee.
      (2)   The sketch plan shall be submitted to the Chairperson of the
Planning Commission at least 14 days prior to a regularly scheduled Planning
Commission meeting or to a meeting specially called by said Chairperson to
consider such plan. Although not required, it is suggested that a sketch plan
be submitted for all subdivisions to ensure that preliminary ideas and plans
are consistent with the regulations of this chapter prior to preparing
extensive engineering details.
   (B)   Contents required. A simple sketch plan shall be drawn at a scale of
no less than 100 feet to one inch and shall show the proposed street layout
with approximate pavement width; approximate right-of-way width; proposed lot
layout and approximate number of lots; the location of existing and proposed
water and sewer lines; existing physical features, including streets,
structures, and utilities; significant natural features, including wooded
areas, ponds, streams, and marshes; sketch view of any proposed drainage
facilities; proposed use of land; tract boundary; total acres; subdivider’s
name and address; subdivision name; north point; and a sketch vicinity map
showing the location of the subdivision in relation to neighboring tracts,
subdivisions, roads, and waterways.
   (C)   Sketch plan review procedure.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall review and either approve, approve
conditionally, or disapprove each sketch plan and record such decision in the
minutes of the Planning Commission. First consideration of said plan shall be
at the first regularly scheduled meeting or special meeting called by the
Chairperson after the sketch plan is submitted in accordance with this chapter.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall take action on the sketch plan at its
first consideration or within 32 days of its first consideration, and provide
advice that will be helpful to the subdivider in the preparation of the
preliminary plat.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.29 PRELIMINARY PLAT.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   For all subdivisions, the subdivider shall submit the preliminary
plat, containing all required information to the Chairperson of the Planning
Commission at least 14 days prior to the regularly scheduled Planning
Commission meeting or to a meeting specially called by the Chairperson to
consider such plat. Five copies of said preliminary plat shall be required;
provided, that additional copies may be required by the Subdivision
Administrator. A subdivision fee shall be paid to the town prior to submission
of the preliminary plat to the Planning Commission and shall be based upon the
schedule of fees as adopted by the Board of Commissioners.
      (2)   The subdivision filing fees shall be used by the town to pay for
the administrative and consulting engineering expenses involved in reviewing
proposed subdivisions.
   (B)   Contents required.
      (1)   The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale
of not less than 100 feet to one inch, and shall be drawn on a sheet 18 inches
by 24 inches, or 24 inches by 36 inches, or such other size acceptable to the
County Register of Deeds.
      (2)   The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a registered land
surveyor and shall contain the following information:
         (a)   Subdivision name, subdivider’s name, north arrow, scale (denoted
graphically, and numerically), date of plat preparation, location of
subdivision (township, county, and state), name, and seal of registered
surveyor preparing plat;
         (b)   The boundaries of the tract or portion thereof to be subdivided,
with all bearings and distances accurately shown;
         (c)   Property lines and owners’ names of adjoining properties and/or
adjoining subdivisions of record;
         (d)   Significant natural features, including wooded areas, marshes,
major rock outcrops, lakes or streams, soils information, and other natural
features affecting the site, and the 100-year floodplain where applicable;
         (e)   Existing physical features, including buildings, streets,
railroads, power lines, drainage ways, sewer and water lines, utility
easements, and town limit lines both on or adjacent to the land to be
subdivided;
         (f)   Topographic contour lines at five-foot intervals when the area
to be subdivided exceeds two acres or has proposed streets which will exceed
800 lineal feet;
         (g)   A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in
relation to the surrounding area;
         (h)   All proposed lot and street right-of-way lines with approximate
dimensions, lot and block numbers, all easements, designation of any dedication
or reservations to be made, building setback lines, and proposed use of land if
other than single-family residences;
         (i)   Proposed streets showing pavement widths, right-of-ways, curbing
(if any), a street profile, proposed street names, and the location of any
required street lights;
         (j)   A review of proposed street plan. A letter shall accompany the
preliminary plat indicating that street plans have been reviewed in the
following manner: prior to preliminary plat approval, street plans for all
subdivisions within the town shall be reviewed by the town’s consulting
engineer and a recommendation provided to the Planning Commission and Board of
Commissioners indicating whether the proposed street plans meet the street
requirements as specified in §
152.52;
         (k)   Proposed water and sewer system layouts shall show the location
of lines, line sizes, approximate location of manholes, pumps, hydrants, force
mains, and the connection of the proposed system(s) with the existing system
(s). A typical trench section view and relationship to roadway shall be
provided for water, sewer, telephone, gas, and electricity;
         (l)   1.   A letter of approval for proposed sanitary sewer and water
distribution. Letters of approval shall accompany the preliminary plat
indicating that plans for proposed public sewer and water systems have been
reviewed and approved by the town Public Works Department, the Metropolitan
Sewerage District, and the appropriate state agency (see §
152.55). Water and sewer plans shall be reviewed by the town’s consulting
engineer with a recommendation provided to the Planning Commission and Board of
Commissioners prior to preliminary plat approval; and
            2.   Where individual systems are permitted (see §
152.55), a letter of approval from the County Health Department shall be
submitted with the preliminary plat indicating that each lot has adequate land
area and soil conditions to accommodate the proposed methods of water supply
and sewage disposal.
         (m)   An approved sedimentation control plan shall be submitted with
the preliminary plat when there are plans for a land-disturbing activity of one
acre or more (see §
152.57). The plan must be reviewed by the town’s consulting engineer with a
recommendation provided to the Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners
prior to preliminary plat approval;
         (n)   Sketch view of proposed, drainage ways, storm sewers, culverts,
retaining ponds, or areas where water is to be diverted through grading; and
other evidence necessary to assure that the proposed method of drainage will
meet the objectives of §
152.56. Drainage provisions must be reviewed by the town’s consulting engineer
with a recommendation provided to the Planning Commission and Board of
Commissioners prior to preliminary plat approval;
         (o)   Proposed location and description of any other improvements,
including, but not limited to, pedestrian or bikeways, reserved open space or
recreational facilities, commercial areas, or buffer strips; and
         (p)   Total acreage in tract to be subdivided; smallest lot size;
total number of lots; lineal feet in streets; and zoning district.
   (C)   Preliminary plat review procedure.
      (1)   (a)   The Planning Commission shall review and shall recommend the
Board of Commissioners either approve, approve conditionally, or disapprove
each preliminary plat.
         (b)   First consideration of the preliminary plat shall be at the next
regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting or special meeting called by
the Chairperson of the Planning Commission that follows at least 14 days after
the plat is submitted.
         (c)   The Planning Commission shall take action on the preliminary
plat at its first consideration or within 32 days of its first consideration.
Should the Planning Commission fail to act on the preliminary plat within the
prescribed period, the subdivider may seek preliminary plat approval at the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Commissioners.
      (2)   (a)   Before making final review of the preliminary plat, the
Planning Commission may refer copies of the plat and any accompanying material
to those public agencies concerned with new development; provided, that failure
of the Planning Commission to receive comment shall not delay Planning
Commission action on said plat within the prescribed time limit.
         (b)   Said agencies could include, but are not limited to:
            1.   District Highway Engineer;
            2.   County Health Department;
            3.   Superintendent of Schools; and
            4.   The Soil Conservation Service.
      (3)   (a)   If the Planning Commission recommends approval of the
preliminary plat, such approval shall be indicated on four copies by the
Chairperson or other authorized member of the Planning Commission.
         (b)   One copy shall be transmitted to the Subdivision Administrator,
one copy shall be returned to the subdivider, one copy shall be retained by the
Planning Commission, and one copy transmitted to the Town Board of
Commissioners for its review.
      (4)   (a)   If the Planning Commission recommends disapproval or
conditional approval of said plat, the reasons for such action shall be stated
in writing and entered in the records of the Planning Commission, and such
recommendations shall be attached to four copies of the plat with copies
distributed in the same manner as specified in this division (C).
         (b)   If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the subdivider may make
changes and submit a revised plat which revision shall be submitted, reviewed
and acted upon by the Planning Commission pursuant to this division (C), or the
subdivider may seek approval from the Board of Commissioners.
      (5)   (a)   1.   Within 45 days from receiving the Planning Commission
recommendation, the Board of Commissioners shall approve, approve
conditionally, or disapprove the preliminary plat and the reasons for such
action shall be stated in writing and entered in the Board’s minutes.
            2.   If the Board approves the preliminary plat, such approval
shall be indicated on four copies by the Subdivision Administrator with one
copy transmitted to the subdivider, one copy transmitted to the Planning
Commission, and one copy retained by the Subdivision Administrator.
         (b)   1.   If the Board of Commissioners disapproves or approves
conditionally the preliminary plat, the reasons for such action or references
to conditions shall be stated in writing and attached to four copies of the
plat with copies distributed in the same manner as stated above.
               2.   If the plat is disapproved by the Board, the subdivider may
make changes but must resubmit the plat for review and recommendation by the
Planning Commission and approval by the Board of Commissioners in accordance
with the procedures outlined in this division (C).
      (6)   (a)   Approval of the preliminary plat shall be valid for one year
unless a written extension is granted by the Board of Commissioners on or
before the one-year anniversary of said approval.
         (b)   If the final plat is not submitted for approval within said one-
year period, or any period of extension, the said approval of the preliminary
plat shall be null and void.
      (7)   Preliminary plat certificates shall be as follows.
         (a)   Recommendation of approval of preliminary plat.
 
   This certifies that the Town Planning Commission recommends approval of the preliminary plat for
the _______________________________ subdivision at its meeting on the ______ day of _______, 20____.
 
      
 
 
                                 ___________________________
                                       Chairperson,
                                       Town Planning Commission
_____________________
Date
 
         (b)   Approval of preliminary plat.
 
   This certifies that the Town Board of Commissioners approves the preliminary plat of the
___________ subdivision at its meeting on the _______ day of _________, 20____.
 
                                    ___________________________
 
 
 
                                    Subdivision Administrator
_____________________
Date
 
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.30 START OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   (1)   Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Town Board of
Commissioners, the subdivider may proceed with the installation or arrangement
for roads, utilities, and other improvements as required.
      (2)   If and when a building permit is required, then such permit may be
obtained only after the approval of the preliminary plat by the Board of
Commissioners.
   (B)   The subdivider/developer shall be responsible for notifying the
Subdivision Administrator at least three days in advance of the actual
construction of roads or the installation of water and sewer lines and other
major improvements so that the Subdivision Administrator and the town’s
consulting engineer may inspect the materials and construction practices
utilized during construction.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.31 IMPROVEMENTS; INSTALLATION OR GUARANTEES.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Board of
Commissioners, the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final
plat and the installation or arrangement for required improvements in
accordance with the approved preliminary plat and the requirements of this
chapter.
      (2)   Prior to approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall have
installed improvements specified in this chapter; however, if the subdivider is
confronted with adverse conditions or unusual circumstances which would likely
be overcome if a delay in the installation of said improvements was permitted,
which conditions and circumstances are found to exist by the Board of
Commissioners, and, further, that it should appeal to the Board of
Commissioners that a requested delay would serve the interests of the town and
the subdivision, then the subdivider shall guarantee the installation of the
specified improvements as provided below.
   (B)   Improvements guarantees.
      (1)   Agreement and security required.
         (a)   1.   In lieu of requiring the completion, installation, and
dedication of all improvements prior to final plat approval, the town may enter
into an agreement with the subdivider whereby the subdivider shall agree to
complete all required improvements.
            2.   Once said agreement is signed by both parties and the security
required herein is provided, the final plat may be approved by the Board of
Commissioners.
         (b)   1.   To secure this agreement, the subdivider shall provide,
subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners, the following
guarantees, not exceeding one and one-quarter times the entire cost of
installing all required improvements as specified on the approved preliminary
plat for that portion of the subdivision to be shown on the final plat.
            2.   The estimate of the cost of improvements shall be prepared by
the subdivider and submitted to the Subdivision Administrator for approval.
            3.   The Board of Commissioners shall determine the method of
improvements guarantees.
               a.   Cash or equivalent security. The subdivider shall deposit
cash or other instrument readily convertible into cash at face value, either
with the town or in escrow with a financial institution designated as an
official depository of the town. The use of any instrument other than cash
shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners.
               b.   Surety performance bond(s).
                  i.   The subdivider shall obtain a performance bond(s) from a
surety bonding company authorized to do business in the state.
                  2.   The bond(s) shall be payable to the town.
                  3.   The duration of the bond(s) shall be until such time as
the improvements are approved by the Board of Commissioners, The Board of
Commissioners shall not give said approval until it has been satisfied that all
required improvements have been installed.
            3.   Letter of credit.
               a.   A satisfactory, irrevocable letter of credit as approved by
the Town Attorney and Board of Commissioners, and deposited with the Town
Clerk, shall be submitted.
               b.   When a letter of credit is submitted, the following
information shall be contained in said letter:
                  i.   Shall be entitled irrevocable letter of credit;
                  ii.    Shall indicate that the town is the sole beneficiary;
                  iii.   The amount (of the letter of credit) as approved by
the town;
                  iv.   Account number and/or credit number that drafts may be
drawn on;
                  v.   List of improvements that shall be built that the letter
is guaranteeing;
terms in which the town may make drafts on the account; and
                  vi.   Expiration date of the letter.
               c.   If cash or other instrument is deposited in escrow with a
financial institution as provided above, then the subdivider shall file with
the Board of Commissioners an agreement between the financial institution and
himself or herself guaranteeing that the escrow account shall be held in trust
until released by the Board of Commissioners and may not be used or pledged by
the subdivider for any other matter during the term of escrow.
      (2)   Default.
         (a)   Upon default, meaning failure on the part of the subdivider to
complete the required improvements, then the Board of Commissioners may require
the subdivider or the financial institution holding the escrow account to pay
all or any portion of the bond or escrow account fund to the town.
         (b)   Upon payment, the Board of Commissioners, in its discretion, may
expend all or such portion of said funds, as it deems necessary to complete all
or any portion of the required improvements.
      (3)   Release of guarantee security.
         (a)   The Board of Commissioners may release a portion of any security
posted as the improvements are completed and recommended for approval by the
Subdivision Administrator within 32 days after receiving the Subdivision
Administrator’s recommendation, the Board of Commissioners shall approve or not
approve said improvements.
         (b)   If the Board of Commissioners approves said improvements, then
it shall immediately release any security posted.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.32 FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   (a)   The final plat shall constitute only that portion of the
preliminary plat, which the subdivider proposed to record and develop at the
time of submission.
         (b)   No final plat shall be approved unless and until the subdivider
shall have installed in that area represented on the final plat all
improvements required by this chapter, or shall have guaranteed their
installation as provided for in §
152.31.
      (2)   The subdivider shall submit four copies and one original of the
final plat to the Chairperson of the Planning Commission no less than 14 days
prior to a regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting or to a meeting
specially called by the Chairperson of the Planning Commission to consider the
plat.
   (B)   Contents required.
      (1)   (a)   The original of the final plat shall be prepared on linen or
Mylar film, drawn on a sheet 18 inches by 24 inches, or 24 inches by 36 inches,
or such other size acceptable to the County Register of Deeds and at a scale of
not less than 100 feet to one inch, and shall conform substantially to the
preliminary plat as approved.
         (b)   The plat shall conform to the provisions of the G.S. § 47-30, as
amended.
      (2)   The final plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor and
shall include the following information:
         (a)   Subdivision name; north arrow; scale denoted graphically and
numerically; date of plat preparation; and township, county, and state in which
the subdivision is located; and the name(s) of the owner(s) and the registered
land surveyor (including the seal and registration number of the registered
land surveyor);
         (b)   The exact boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided fully
dimensioned by lengths and bearings, and the location of intersecting boundary
lines of adjoining lands;
         (c)   The names and deed references (when possible) of owners of
adjoining properties and adjoining subdivisions of record (proposed or under
review);
         (d)   All visible and apparent rights-of-way, watercourses, utilities,
roadways, and other improvements shall be accurately located where crossing or
forming any boundary line of the property shown;
         (e)   Sufficient engineering data to determine readily and reproduce
on the ground every straight or curved boundary line, street line, lot line,
right-of-way line, easement line, and setback line, including dimensions,
bearings, or deflection angles, radii, central angles, and tangent distances
for the centerline of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the
boundary of curved streets;
         (f)   The accurate locations and descriptions of all monument markers
and control points;
         (g)   The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire
subdivision and the lots numbered consecutively throughout each block;
         (h)   Minimum building setback lines;
         (i)   1.   Street names and right-of-way lines of all streets and the
location and width of all adjacent streets and easements; and
            2.   Designation shall be made as to whether said streets are to be
designated as public or private.
         (j)   The location and dimensions of all rights-of-way, utility, or
other easements, natural buffers, pedestrian or bicycle paths, and areas to be
dedicated to public use with the purpose of each stated;
         (k)   A letter from the design engineer certifying to the town that
the facilities and improvements were installed in accordance with the plans and
specifications approved with the preliminary plat by the Board of
Commissioners; and
         (l)   The following certificates shall be lettered and inked on the
original of the final plat in such a manner as to ensure that said certificates
will be legible on any prints made therefrom.
            1.   Certificate of approval by the Planning Commission.
 
   I __________ Chairperson of the Planning Commission, hereby certify that said Commission
recommends approval of the final plat of the subdivision entitled _________ on the _____ day of
__________ 2____.
 
 
 
                                    ___________________________
                                    Chairperson,
                                    Town Planning Commission
 
            2.   Certificate of ownership and dedication.
 
   I (We) hereby certify that I am (we) the owner(s) of the property shown and described hereon and
that 1 (we) hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my (our) free consent, establish minimum
building lines, and dedicate all streets, sewers, water lines, walks, parks, and other sites to public
or private use as noted. Further, I (we) certify the land as shown hereon is within the town.
 
 
 
 
 
Date___________________                        _________________________
                                       Owner
                                       _________________________
                                       Owner
 
            3.   Surveyor certificate. As required by G.S. § 47-30, as amended;
            4.   Certification of approval of the installation and construction
of streets, utilities, and other required improvements.
 
   I hereby certify that streets, utilities, and other required improvements have been installed
in an acceptable manner and according to town specifications and standards in the subdivision
entitled ___________ , or that a guarantee of the installation of the required improvements in an
amount satisfactory to the town has been received.
 
 
Date___________________                     _________________________
                                    Subdivision Administrator
 
            5.   Certificate of completion and warranty.
 
   The undersigned certifies that he or she is an officer, to wit: (title of officer) of
(name of corporation), a corporation, and that he or she has been authorized to execute this
certificate pursuant to authority granted by resolution of the board of directors of (name of
corporation), copy of which resolution is attached hereto.
 
a. (Name of corporation), through the undersigned, hereby certifies that all improvements
required under the authority of the town subdivision regulations have been installed and
completed (or guaranteed pursuant to § 152.31) in accordance with the approved preliminary
plat and engineering plans for subdivision, and that said improvements are in compliance with
the minimum construction standards specified by said regulations.
 
   (Name of corporation), through the undersigned, further certifies that it knows of no
defects from any cause and will fully warrant said improvements to be free from defects in
material and workmanship for a period of either one year from the date of final plat approval
when such improvements are completed and installed prior to final plat approval, or one year
from the date of the Board of Commissioners’ approval of completed guaranteed improvements,
whichever event last occurs, In the event defects are discovered in any of said improvements
during the one-year period, (name of corporation) will replace and/or repair the defective
improvements at its own expense. Furthermore the (name of corporation) shall post a bond by
an approved surety company, or other approved method of security, for this one-year period in
an amount acceptable to the town to assure that the funds are available to replace and/or
repair the defective improvements.
 
NAME OF CORPORATION
 
Attest:                        By:
 
_____________________
Secretary
 
_____________________
Date
 
STATE OF NORTH CAROLINA COUNTY OF BUNCOMBE
 
   I, _____________ Notary Public of said state and county certify that __________ personally
came before me this day and acknowledged that (s) he or she is______________ Secretary of
_________ , a corporation, and that by authority duly given and as the act of the
corporation, the foregoing; instalment was signed in its name by its ______ President, sealed
with its corporate seal, and attested by self as its _________ Secretary.
 
      Witness my hand and notarial seal, this the ____ day of __________ , 20 _____.
 
                                    _____________________
                                    Notary Public
My Commission Expires ___________
 
            6.   Certificate of approval for recording plat.
 
   This certifies that the Town Board of Commissioners approved the final plat of the_____
subdivision at its meeting on the _____ day of ______ , 20__.
 
Date___________________                     _________________________
                                    Subdivision Administrator
 
            7.   Presentation of certificates. The certificates stated in
division (B)(2)(l)2. through division (B)(2)(l)5. above must be presented on
the final plat and signed by the designated person prior to Planning Commission
review and recommendation.
   (C)   Final plat review procedure.
      (1)   The subdivider shall submit the final plat to the Planning
Commission within one year of the date of preliminary plat approval (unless an
extension was granted), and at least 14 days prior to a regularly scheduled
Planning Commission meeting or to a meeting specially called by the Chairperson
of the Planning Commission to consider the plat, and shall submit at least four
copies of the final plat and one original of the final plat. Additional copies
may be requested by the Subdivision Administrator.
      (2)   Before acting on the final plat, the Planning Commission may
request reports from any person or agency directly affected by the proposed
development. Such reports shall certify compliance with or note deviations from
the approved preliminary plat and the requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   First consideration of the final plat shall be at the next
regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting or special meeting called by
the Chairperson of the Planning Commission that follows at least 14 days after
the final plat is submitted. The Planning Commission shall recommend approval
or disapproval of the final plat at its first consideration or within 32 days
of its first consideration. If the Planning Commission fails to act on the
final plat within the prescribed period, the subdivider may seek final approval
of the plat at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of
Commissioners. Prior to the final plat approval, certificates in divisions (B)
(2)(l)2. through (B)(2)(l)5. above must be presented on the final plat and
signed by the designated person.
      (4)   If the Planning Commission recommends approval of the final plat,
such approval shall be indicated on the original and each copy of the final
plat by certificate a from section division (B)(2)(l) above upon recommending
approval of the final plat, the Planning Commission shall submit, with
recommendations, said plat to the Board of Commissioners, and copies of the
plat with recommendations shall be distributed in the same manner as set forth
below in division (C)(5) below.
      (5)   If the Planning Commission recommends disapproval of the final
plat, the Planning Commission shall find in writing the provisions of this
chapter with which the plat does not comply and the facts constituting
noncompliance with said provision(s). One copy of said findings shall be sent
to the subdivider within five days of disapproval, one copy shall be retained
by the Planning Commission as a part of its proceedings, one copy shall be
transmitted to the Board of Commissioners, and one copy shall be filed with the
Subdivision Administrator. If the final plat is disapproved, the subdivider may
make such changes as needed to bring the plat into compliance with the
provisions of this chapter and resubmit the same for reconsideration by the
Planning Commission pursuant to the procedures set forth in this division (C),
or the subdivider may seek approval from the Board of Commissioners.
      (6)   The Board of Commissioners shall approve or, disapprove the final
plat within 45 days after receiving the final plat and the Planning
Commission’s recommendation.
      (7)   If the final plat is approved by the Board of Commissioners, such
approval shall be indicated pursuant to division (B)(2)(l) above on the
original tracing and on each copy of the final plat. The original tracing of
the final plat shall be recorded by the subdivider with the County Register of
Deeds within 30 days after the date of Board of Commissioners approval. One
print and the original of the plat shall be returned to the subdivider, one
print shall be filed with the Planning Commission, one print shall be filed
with the Subdivision Administrator, and one print shall become a permanent
record of the Board of Commissioners.
      (8)   If the final plat is disapproved by the Board of Commissioners, the
reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in writing, specifying the
provision(s) of this chapter with which the final plat does not comply. One
copy of such reasons shall be retained by the Board of Commissioners as a part
of its proceedings, one copy shall be transmitted to the Planning Commission,
one copy shall be transmitted to the subdivider, and one copy shall be retained
by the Subdivision Administrator. If the final plat is disapproved, the
subdivider may make such changes as will bring the final plat into compliance
with this chapter and resubmit the final plat for review and approval in
accordance with the procedures outlined in this division (C).
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.33 RECORDING OF THE FINAL PLAT.
   Within 30 days after the final plat has been approved by the Board of
Commissioners, it shall have been recorded with the County Register of Deeds.
Should the 30-day time limit expire before the plat is recorded, it must be
resubmitted to the Planning Commission for reprocessing. Upon adoption of this
chapter, the Register of Deeds shall not thereafter file or record a final plat
of a subdivision located within the town until said plat has been approved by
the town. Without the approval of the Board of Commissioners, the filing or
recording of a subdivision plat shall be null and void.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.34 EFFECT OF PLAT APPROVAL ON DEDICATIONS.
   (A)   The approval of a final plat shall not be deemed to constitute or
effect the acceptance by the town of the dedication of any street, public
utility line, or other public facility shown on the plat; however, the Board of
Commissioners shall pass a resolution to actually accept any dedication made to
the public of lands or facilities for streets, parks, public utility lines, or
other public purposes.
   (B)   The Board of Commissioners shall pass a resolution formally accepting
dedicated improvements no sooner than:
      (1)   One year from the date of final plat approval when such
improvements are completed prior to final plat approval; or
      (2)   No sooner than one year from the date of the Board of Commissioners
approval of completed guaranteed improvements, whichever event in division (B)
(1) above or this division (B)(2) last occurs.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.35 RE-SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES.
   For any replatting or resubdivision of land which has been previously
platted or subdivided, the same procedures and requirements shall apply as
prescribed in this chapter for an original subdivision.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED AND MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN
§ 152.50 GENERALLY.
   (A)   (1)   Each subdivision shall contain the improvements specified in
this subchapter, which shall be installed in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter and paid for by the subdividers.
      (2)   Each subdivision shall adhere to the minimum standards of design
established by this subchapter.
      (3)   All public utilities, streets, and other improvements shall be
inspected during construction by the design engineer, and the design engineer
shall certify to the town that the facilities were installed in accordance with
the plans and specifications approved by the Board of Commissioners, and such
certification shall be submitted with the final plat.
   (B)   All improvements shall be warranted by the developer for a period of:
      (1)   One year from the date of final plat approval when such
improvements are completed and installed prior to final plat approval; or
      (2)   One year from the date of the Board of Commissioners’ approval of
completed guaranteed improvements, whichever event, division (B)(1) above or
this division (B)(2) last occurs.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.51 SUITABILITY OF LAND.
   Where land to be subdivided is found by the Board of Commissioners to be
subject to the conditions of flooding, improper drainage, severe erosion,
slides, or to have other characteristics which pose an ascertainable danger to
health, safety, or property, the subdivider shall take measures necessary to
correct said conditions and to eliminate said dangers.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.52 STREETS AND ROADS.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   All lots to be platted shall have access to a street, and all
proposed streets shall be installed in accordance with the requirements set
forth below prior to final plat approval unless otherwise permitted pursuant to
§
152.30. All proposed streets shown on the final plat shall be designated as
either public or private streets. For all private streets, the subdivider shall
prepare a subdivision streets disclosure statement to be issued to a
prospective buyer. The subdivision streets disclosure statement shall include
an explanation of the consequences and responsibility for maintenance of the
private street.
      (2)   All streets and roads in the town shall be designed and built in
accordance with existing policies and standards of the State Department of
Transportation, and all subdivision streets and roads shall be designed and
built in accordance with the requirements as set forth by the Department of
Transportation, Division of Highways’ Subdivision Roads Minimum Construction
Standards, (latest edition as revised), with only the following variations:
         (a)    All pavement widths shall be at least 20 feet wide. All street
rights-of-way shall be 40 feet, but with the advance written consent and
agreement of the town’s Department of Public Works, there may be selected areas
within the right-of-way that certain sound and healthy trees may be left
standing, upon the determination by the Department of Public Works that the
placement and maintenance of utilities will not be adversely affected;
         (b)   All pavement surfaces shall be asphalted and all asphalt paving
material, including aggregate base course, bituminous base and surface courses,
and prime and tack coats shall meet the requirements of the applicable sections
of the latest edition of the State Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications for Roads and Structures. Bituminous concrete base course shall
be Type MB and bituminous concrete surface course shall be Type 1-2. Prime and
tack coats grades shall be specified with the job mix formula;
         (c)   Cul-de-sac streets shall be designed according to DOT standards;
however, permanent dead-end streets shall be no longer than 900 feet in length;
         (d)   All roadways shall be constructed of a minimum of eight inches
compacted aggregate base course, and two inches of bituminous surface course
Type 1-2;
         (e)   All pavements shall be designed by a licensed professional
engineer with such design being based on the load-bearing capabilities of the
proposed subgrade material in accordance with the California Bearing Ratio
(CBR) design method. The design shall also be based on the traffic loadings and
volumes anticipated for the proposed pavement, including temporary construction
vehicles. The calculations, traffic data and other design information,
including the soils testing data shall be submitted to the town prior to and as
a condition for the preliminary plat approval by the town’s Consulting
Engineer;
         (f)   Fill material shall meet the requirements of the classifications
in accordance with the Unified Soil Classification Systems as follows:
            1.   Acceptable classifications. GW, GP, GM, SW, SP, SC, SM, ML,
and CL; and
            2.   Unacceptable classifications. PT, OH, OL, CH, and MR
         (g)   Fill material for subgrade shall have a minimum laboratory dry
weight, ASTM 1557, of at least 100 pounds per cubic foot unless specifically
exempted from this requirement by the Town Engineer;
         (h)   The required thickness of the aggregate base course and the
asphalt base and surface courses shall be compacted thicknesses;
         (i)   The standard Proctor method of moisture density relationship
test, ASTM D-698, shall be used to determine the maximum laboratory dry density
and the optimum moisture content of the material, which is used for fill;
         (j)   The upper two feet of the soil subgrade in paved areas shall be
compacted until its density is not less than 98% of the maximum dry density of
the same material. Fill beneath the pavement below a depth of two feet and fill
used to construct the roadway shoulders shall be compacted to a minimum of 95%
of the maximum laboratory dry density;
         (k)   Each layer of the aggregate base course material shall be
compacted to a density equal to at least 100% of the maximum laboratory dry
density. The bituminous concrete base and surface courses shall be compacted to
a density of at least 95% of the maximum theoretical density as determined by
the Marshall method test;
         (l)   Non-bituminous bases beneath a bituminous pavement of four
inches or less in thickness and non-bituminous bases beneath any bituminous
pavement on roadways with grades of 15% or greater shall receive a prime coat
treatment. Tack coat treatment shall be applied to side slopes with grades of
1:1 or steeper. Prime and tack coats shall be applied in accordance with the
State DOT specifications; and
         (m)   The State Department of Transportation’s Subdivision Roads
Minimum Construction Standards, contain the necessary design and construction
criteria for subdivision streets, including requirements for right-of-way,
pavement width, shoulder width, cut and fill slopes, design speed, minimum site
distance, intersection design, and the like, with the specific exception that
the right-of-way width for subdivision streets with shoulder section shall be
40 feet, and the pavement width with shoulder sections shall be at least 20
feet as referred to in division (A)(2)(a) above.
   (B)   Review of subdivision road plans. Street plans for all subdivisions
within the town shall be reviewed by the town’s Consulting Engineer and a
recommendation provided to the Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners
indicating whether the proposed street plans meet the street requirements as
specified in division (A) above prior to preliminary plat approval.
   (C)   Plan preparation. The plans for all streets shall be prepared by a
registered engineer.
   (D)    Proposals. Proposals for street extensions or connections to an
existing town street shall require a new street permit. (See §
152.07(A).)
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.53 PEDESTRIAN WAYS.
   Streets shall be designed or walkways provided to assure safe and reasonable
access to parks, playgrounds, and other places of public assembly.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.54 BLOCKS.
   The length, width, and shape of blocks shall be reasonably designed to
provide for the following: adequate building sites for the proposed use;
vehicular and pedestrian circulation; and control and safety of traffic.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.55 WATER AND SEWER SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Generally. The preliminary subdivision plat must be accompanied by
satisfactory evidence as to the proposed method and system of water supply and
sanitary sewage collection and disposal. The installation of all said systems
(except for individual systems septic tanks and wells) shall be required prior
to final plat approval, unless otherwise permitted pursuant to §
152.31.
   (B)   Public systems.
      (1)   All lots shall be provided with direct access to the town’s public
water and sewer systems, unless otherwise approved by the Board of
Commissioners, and when occupied, shall be connected to these public water and
sewer systems. The water and sewer systems shall be installed according to town
and Metropolitan Sewerage District’s (MSD) specifications and standards and
designed by a registered engineer, and plans for such systems must be reviewed
and approved by the town Public Works Department, MSD, and the appropriate
state agency. (See note in division (B)(3) below.)
      (2)   Letters of approval for such plans from the Town Public Works
Department, MSD, and the appropriate state agency shall be submitted with the
preliminary plat. Water and sewer plans shall also be reviewed by the town’s
Consulting Engineer and a recommendation provided to the Planning Commission
and Board of Commissioners stating the suitability of such proposed systems
prior to preliminary plat approval.
      (3)   Note: the plans and specifications for public water supply systems
serving 15 or more connections or more than 25 year-round residents shall be
approved by the State Division of Water Quality. Plans and specifications for
water supply systems serving less than 15 connections shall be approved by the
County Health Department. Plans for public sewer system extensions serving two
or more connections shall be approved by the State Division of Water Quality.
   (C)   Individual systems.
      (1)   Individual water and sewer systems shall not be permitted in any
proposed subdivision unless otherwise approved by the Board of Commissioners
due to topographic and engineering difficulties or other extremely extenuating
circumstances involved in extending the public water and/or sewer systems to
the lot(s) in the proposed subdivision.
      (2)   Where individual systems are allowed, such systems shall be
reviewed in compliance with State Administrative Code, and a written statement
or letter of approval from the County Health Department shall be submitted with
the preliminary plat indicating that each lot has adequate land area and soil
conditions suitable to accommodate the proposed methods of water supply and
sewage disposal. The statement from the Health Department shall be based upon a
field investigation and such statement shall be submitted with the preliminary
plat.
   (D)   Fire hydrants. Where a water line six inches or greater in diameter is
required in the public system, fire hydrants shall be installed on said line.
The hydrants shall be spaced so that coverage to all building sites along said
line may be provided with not more than 500 feet of hose and shall be located
to facilitate access, hose laying, and drainage.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
Cross-reference:
   Utilities, see
Ch. 50
§ 152.56 STORMWATER DRAINAGE.
   (A)   The method of providing for stormwater drainage shall be consistent
with the Department of Transportation’s drainage requirements as stated in
Subdivision Roads Minimum Construction Standards, and furthermore, it shall be
the responsibility of the developer to provide a drainage system, which is
designed by a registered engineer and will meet the following objectives:
      (1)   Connect onto an existing storm sewer system, where feasible;
      (2)   Provide for adequate drainage from all roads, parking lots, and
other developed areas;
      (3)   Provide a suitable building area on each lot intended for building
development, which is safe from inundation, erosion, or subsidence;
      (4)   Prevent both the unnecessary impoundment of natural drainage ways
and the creation of areas of standing water;
      (5)   Ensure that existing drainage ways serving adjacent properties are
maintained;
      (6)   Ensure that natural runoff levels are not substantially increased
in order to prevent harmful flooding downstream and to maintain desirable
groundwater levels;
      (7)   Prevent inundation of surface water into sanitary sewer systems;
and
      (8)   Protect all roads, driveways, utilities, and other types of
development from damages caused by improper drainage control.
   (B)   Prior to preliminary plat approval, drainage plans for all
subdivisions shall be reviewed by the town’s Consulting Engineer and a
recommendation provided to the Planning Commission and the Board of
Commissioners indicating whether the proposed drainage plan meets the above
objectives. Said drainage system shall be arranged prior to final plat
approval, unless otherwise permitted pursuant to §
152.31
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.57 SEDIMENTATION CONTROL.
   In order to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation pollution of streams,
springs, flat water bodies, or other drainage networks, and when there are
plans for a land-disturbing activity of one acre or more, the subdivider shall
show proof with the preliminary plat of an erosion and sedimentation control
plan which has been approved by the state agency having jurisdiction in
accordance with the State Administrative Code, Title 15A, Ch. 4, as adopted by
the State Sedimentation Control Commission, June 5, 1981, as amended. Prior to
preliminary plat approval, the sedimentation control plan shall be reviewed by
the town’s Consulting Engineer and a recommendation provided to the Planning
Commission and Board of Commissioners indicating whether the plan has provided
for adequate sedimentation control measures.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.58 LOTS.
   The district requirements of
Ch. 153 shall govern minimum lot size, lot widths, and building setbacks. These
requirements are found in §
153.007.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.59 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Utility easements. Easement for utilities shall be provided,
preferably centered on rear or side lot lines and shall be at least ten feet in
width.
   (B)   Drainage easements. An easement shall be reserved by the subdivider or
otherwise provided conforming with the lines of any drainage way into which
natural drainage has been diverted. Said drainage way shall be of sufficient
width to carry stormwater runoff from a ten-year storm.
   (C)   Buffer strips. A buffer strip at least 20 feet in width may be
required by the Board of Commissioners adjacent to a major street or a
commercial development. This strip shall be reserved for the planting of trees
and shrubs by the subdivider.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.60 STREET LIGHTING.
   Street lights of a design and materials meeting reasonable specifications of
the town shall be provided and installed at approved locations at the
developer’s expense at all intersections within new subdivisions and at
intersections of such new streets with existing streets in the town.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.61 FINAL DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
   Upon the final construction and installation of water and sewer lines,
streets, and drainage, the design engineer shall submit to the Town Public
Works Director a set of final development plans showing the above improvements
as constructed and installed. Any variations from the approved engineering
plans submitted with the preliminary plat shall be noted and explained.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   After the effective date of this chapter, any person who, being the
owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the town, thereafter
subdivides his or her land in violation of this chapter or transfers or sells
land by reference to, exhibition of, or any other use of a plat showing a
subdivision of the land before the plat has been properly approved under the
terms of this chapter and recorded in the County Register of Deeds, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument
of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring
land shall not exempt the transaction from this penalty.
   (B)   The town, through its Attorney or other official designated by the
Board of Commissioners, may enjoin illegal subdivision, transfer, or sale of
land by action for injunction. Further, violators of this chapter shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalties as provided for
in G.S. § 14-4. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 7-17-1984)
APPENDIX A: PRELIMINARY PLAT CHECKLIST
   The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not
less than one inch to 200 feet, and may be drawn on a sheet 18 by 24 inches or
24 by 36 inches, or such other size acceptable to the County Register of Deeds.
A fee in accordance with this chapter shall be paid to the town upon submission
of the preliminary plat. The preliminary plat shall be prepared by a registered
land surveyor and shall include the following information:
Name of subdivision   _______________________________
Date submitted      _______________________________
Location         _______________________________
Subdivider         _______________________________
Address            _______________________________   Telephone   ________________
Surveyor         _______________________________
Address            _______________________________   Telephone   ________________
Checklist:
Copies:
______      Five copies submitted to Planning Commission.
Title block:
______      Subdivision name, subdivider’s name, north arrow, scale (denoted
graphically and numerically), date of plat preparation, location of subdivision
(township, county and state), name, and seal of registered land surveyor
preparing the plat.
Vicinity map:
______      A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in
relation to the surrounding area.
Tract boundaries:
______      The boundaries of the tract or portion thereof to be subdivided,
with all bearings and distances accurately shown.
Property lines:
______      Property lines and owner’s names of adjoining properties and/or
adjoining subdivision of record.
Natural features:
______      Significant natural features, including wooded areas, marshes,
major rock outcrops, lakes or streams, soils information, and other natural
features affecting the site, and the 100-year floodplain, where applicable;
Existing physical features:
______      Existing physical features, including buildings, streets,
railroads, power lines, drainage ways, sewer and water lines, utility
easements, and town limit lines both on or adjacent to the land to be
subdivided.
Topographic lines:
______      Topographic contour lines at five-foot intervals when the area to
be subdivided exceeds two acres or has proposed streets which will exceed 800
lineal feet.
Proposed lot layout:
______      All proposed lot and street right-of-way lines with approximate
dimensions, lot and block numbers, all easements, designation of any dedication
or reservations to be made, building setback lines, and proposed use of land if
other than single-family residences.
Street layout:
______      Proposed streets showing pavement widths, right-of-ways, curbing if
any, a street profile, and proposed street names. A review of proposed street
plan, street plans shall be submitted to the town’s Consulting Engineer for
review and recommendation to the Planning Commission and Board of Commissioners
prior to preliminary plat approval.
Water and sewer layout:
______      Sketch view of proposed water and sewer system layouts showing
location of lines, line sizes, approximate location of manholes, pumps,
hydrants, force mains or treatment facilities, and the connection of the
proposed system(s) with existing systems. Atypical trench section shall be
shown.
______      Letters of approval for the plans for the proposed sanitary sewer
and water distribution systems from the appropriate agencies. (See §
152.55.)
______      Water and sewer plans shall be submitted to the town’s Consulting
Engineer for review and recommendation to the Planning Commission and Board of
Commissioners prior to preliminary plat approval.
Drainage system:
______      Sketch view of proposed drainage facilities, including approximate
location and dimensions of open drainage ways, storm sewers, culverts,
retaining ponds, or areas where water is to be diverted through grading, and
any other evidence necessary to assure the Board of Commissioners that the
proposed method of drainage meets the objectives of §
152.56.
______      Drainage provisions shall be submitted to the town’s Consulting
Engineer for review and recommendation to the Planning Commission and Board of
Commissioners prior to preliminary plat approval.
Sedimentation control:
______      An approved sedimentation control plan. (See §
152.57.)
______      Sedimentation plan shall be submitted to the town’s consulting
engineer for review and recommendation to the Planning Commission and Board of
Commissioners prior to preliminary plat approval.
Other improvements:
______      Proposed location and description of any other improvements,
including, but not limited to, pedestrian or bike ways, reserved open space or
recreational facilities, commercial areas, or buffer strips.
Site data:
______      Total acreage in tract to be subdivided, smallest lot size (square
feet), total number of lots, lineal feet in streets, and zoning district.
APPENDIX B: FINAL PLAT CHECKLIST
   The final plat shall meet the following requirements prior to any review of
the plat by the Planning Commission.
Date final plat submitted   ___________________________
Date preliminary plat approved ______________________
Name of subdivision _______________________________
Location _________________________________________
Subdivider _______________________________________
Address   ______________Telephone __________
Surveyor _________________________________________
Address ____________________Telephone__________________
ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS
________      Notice from the Subdivision Administrator approving required
improvements.
________      Submitted within 12 months of preliminary plat approval, unless
an extension has been granted by the Board of Commissioners.
________      Final plat is either 18 inches by 24 inches, or 24 inches by 36
inches, or such other size acceptable to the County Register of Deeds, and is a
scale of at least one inch equals 200 feet.
________      Four copies submitted and one reproducible.
REQUIRED DATA
Title block:
________      Subdivision name, north arrow, scale denoted graphically and
numerically, date of plat preparation, and township, county, and state in which
the subdivision is located, and the name(s) of the owner(s) and the registered
surveyor responsible for the subdivision (including the seal and registration
number of the registered surveyor).
Tract boundaries:
________      The exact boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided fully
dimensioned by lengths and bearings, and the location of intersecting boundary
lines and adjoining lands.
Adjoining property owners:
________      The names and deed references of owners of adjoining properties
and adjoining subdivisions of record (proposed or under review).
Location of improvements:
________      All visible and apparent rights-of-way, watercourses, utilities,
roadways, and other such improvements shall be accurately located where
crossing or forming any boundary line of the property shown.
Engineering data:
________      Sufficient engineering data to determine readily and reproduce on
the ground every straight or curved boundary line, street line, lot line,
right-of-way line, easement line, and setback line, including dimensions,
bearings or deflection angles, radii, central angles, and tangent distances for
the centerline of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the
boundary of curved streets.
Monuments:
________      The accurate locations and descriptions of all monument, markers,
and control points.
Lot and block numbers:
________      The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the entire
subdivision, and the lot numbered consecutively throughout each block.
Setback lines:
________      Minimum building setback lines.
Streets:
________      Street names and right-of-way lines of all streets and the
location and width of all adjacent streets and easements. Designation shall be
made as to whether said streets are to be designated as public or private.
Right-of-way:
________      The location and dimensions of all rights-of-way, utility or
other easements, natural buffers, pedestrian or bicycle paths, and areas to be
dedicated to public use with the purpose of each stated.
Certificates:
________      The certificates as required in section §
152.32(B)(2)(l).
Design engineer certification:
________      A letter as required in §
152.32(B)(2)(k).
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Title
   
153.002   Authority and enactment
   
153.003   Jurisdiction
   
153.004   Interpretations and definitions
   
153.005   Establishment of zoning districts and map
   
153.006   Permitted use table
   
153.007   Dimensional requirements
   
153.008   Special uses
   
153.009   Exceptions and modifications
   
153.010   Amendments
   
153.011   Violations and remedies
   
153.012   Legal status provisions
   
153.013   Conflicts of interest
General Regulations
   
153.025   Effect on every building and lot
   
153.026   Relationship of building to lot
   
153.027   Lot frontage
   
153.028   Required yards and other spaces
   
153.029   Accessory structures and buildings
   
153.030   Home occupations
   
153.031   Visibility at intersection and obstructions within town rights-of-way
   
153.032   Vacant structures and lots
   
153.033   Signs in residential districts, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5
   
153.034   Landscaping and grading plans, land disturbance, and sedimentation
control
   
153.035   Buffer strip required
   
153.036   Nonconforming land uses, or structures
   
153.037   Accessory structures or buildings utilized as dwellings
   
153.038   Off-street parking
   
153.039   Off-street loading and unloading space
   
153.040   No lot subdivision of platted and recorded lots
   
153.041   Minimum dwelling unit size
   
153.042   Subdivision of tracts of land
   
153.043   Maximum roof coverage
   
153.044   Material and color requirements for residential dwelling units
   
153.045   Site design and building form and mass for residential dwelling units
   
153.046   Material and color requirements for commercial buildings
   
153.047   Site design and building form and mass commercial buildings
   
153.048   Impervious surface coverage
   
153.049   Fence, gate and wall regulations
Tree Preservation
   
153.050   Purpose
   
153.051   Definitions
   
153.052   Removal of protected trees
   
153.053   Applications for removal of more than ten protected trees
   
153.054   Removal of unprotected trees
   
153.055   Enforcement
   
153.056   Drip line protection
   
153.057   Replacement of trees
   
153.058   Inspections, appeals, bond, and penalty
Buffers, Screening, and Landscaping Requirements
   
153.060   Purpose and intent
   
153.061   General information
   
153.062   Existing vegetation in R-4 or R-5 zones
   
153.063   Buffer strip and screen requirements
   
153.064   Parking lot landscaping requirements
   
153.065   Screening of dumpsters, loading docks, outdoor storage areas, and
utility structures
   
153.066   Street trees
   
153.067   Certification of completion
   
153.068   Maintenance
   
153.069   Residential screening of utility structures
   
153.070   Plant specifications
   
153.071   Commercial and recreational vehicles
Administration, Enforcement, and Appeals
   
153.085   General process; Duties of the Zoning Administrator, Board of
Adjustment, Planning Commission, Board of Commissioners, and courts on matters
of administration
   
153.086   Zoning Administrator
   
153.087   Certificate of zoning compliance required
   
153.088   Requirements prior to issuance of a building permit
   
153.089   Building permit required
   
153.090   Certificate of occupancy required
   
153.091   Construction of progress
   
153.092   Construction completion
   
153.093   Compliance
   
153.094   Notice of violations and inspections
   
153.095   Appeal from the Zoning Administrator
   
153.096   Revocation of development approval
Board of Adjustment
   
153.105   Establishment of Board of Adjustment
   
153.106   Selection of alternate members
   
153.107   Rules of conduct for members
   
153.108   General proceedings of the Board of Adjustment
   
153.109   Meetings
   
153.110   Powers and duties of the Board of Adjustment
   
153.111   Appeals and applications
   
153.112   Appeals from the Board of Adjustment
Design Review Board
   
153.125   Purpose and intent
   
153.126   Composition of Design Review Board and meeting procedure
   
153.127   Development subject to design review
   
153.128   Application required to be filed
   
153.129   Duties and powers of the Design Review Board
   
153.130   Submittal requirements
Development Agreements
   
153.145   Development agreements
   
153.146   Vesting
   
153.147   Breach and cure
   
153.148   Amendments
   
153.149   Change of jurisdiction
   
153.150   Recordation
 
   
153.999   Penalty
Editor’s note:
   Legislative history for the sections in this zoning chapter include the
initial zoning ordinance, passed 10-19-1983 and the latest amendment, passed 6-
8-2021. The following is a list of all zoning amendments: Ord. passed 10-19-
1983; Ord. passed 2-25-1986; Ord. passed 11-29-1994; Ord. passed 12-14-1999;
Ord. passed 1-9-2001; Ord. passed 10-9-2001; Ord. passed 7-9-2002; Ord. passed
3-7-2003; Ord. passed 11-9-2004; Ord. passed 12-14-2004; Ord. passed 7-12-2005;
Ord. passed 9-12-2006; Ord. passed 1-9-2007; Ord. passed 12-11-2007; Ord.
passed 6-10-2008; Ord. passed 9-16-2008; Ord. passed 2-8-2011; Ord. passed 9-
13-2011; Ord. passed 12-13-2011; Ord. passed 4-17-2012; Ord. passed 4-9-2013;
Ord. passed 7-9-2013; Ord. passed 8-12-2013; Ord. passed 8-11-2015; Ord. passed
2-11-2020; and Ord. passed 6-8-2021
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the “Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Biltmore
Forest, North Carolina”.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 8-12-2013)
§ 153.002 AUTHORITY AND ENACTMENT.
   The Town Board of Commissioners, pursuant to the authority granted by G.S.
Ch. 160D, hereby ordains and enacts into law the following articles and
sections for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, and general
welfare of the community.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.003 JURISDICTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all land within the
corporate limits of town, as established on the map entitled “Official Zoning
Map, Town of Biltmore Forest” with the exception of land owned by the town and
land used by the town or entities contractually obligated to the town to
provide fire protection and emergency medical services, but only during the
period of time that such parties are contractually required to provide those
services to the town.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
Editor’s note:
   This amendatory language was passed during a Board meeting, July 9, 2013
§ 153.004 INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Tense; singular and plural. Words used sed in the present tense
include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural, and
words used in the plural include the singular.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or building on the lot and located on the same lot with such
principal use or building. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES include, but are not limited
to, fences, walls, curbs, pools, play sets, statues, water features,
playhouses, decorative walls, sculptures, solar collectors, residential street
lamps, rock and stone moved from its original location to any other location on
the property, and the like.
      ALLEY. A public way which affords only a secondary means of access to
abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
      APARTMENT. A part of a building consisting of a room or rooms intended,
designed, or used as a residence by an individual or a single-family.
      APARTMENT, GARAGE. A part of a garage consisting of a room or rooms
intended, designed, or used as a residence by an individual or a single-family.
      BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. The Town of Biltmore Forest Board of Adjustment, and
shall include both regular and alternate members.
      BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The Town of Biltmore Forest Board of
Commissioners.
      BONA FIDE FARM. All land on which agricultural operations are conducted
as the principal use, including the cultivation of crops, the husbandry of
livestock and timber resources, and the management of open pasture land.
      BUFFER STRIP. A strip of land together with some form of screening such
as existing vegetation, planted vegetation, a landscaped earth berm or grade
change, or combination of the above. The purpose of the BUFFER STRIP is to
minimize the potential conflicts between adjoining land uses.
      BUILDING. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls,
and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals, or
property. Two structures shall be deemed a single building only if connected by
heated and enclosed living space.
      BUILDING, ACCESSORY. A detached building subordinate to the main building
on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to the main or principal
building and located on the same lot.
      BUILDING HEIGHT. The distance measured from the average ground level at
the building foundation to the highest point of the roof, but in no event above
40 feet from the highest point in the foundation. A chimney that complies with
the minimum the State Building Code requirements for height of a chimney shall
not be included in the calculations for height of the building; provided, that
the chimney shall not extend more than five feet above the immediately
adjoining ridge line of the roof.
      BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. A building used for the same purpose as the
principal use of the lot.
      BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line delineating the minimum allowable distance
between the property line and a building on a lot, within which no building or
other structure shall be placed except as otherwise provided. Front setback
lines shall be measured from the street line.
      CARETAKER. A person that maintains grounds or structures on a lot or
cares for the well-being of person(s) residing in the principal dwelling on a
lot, and resides on the premises without being charged a rental fee.
      CLOTHING AND JEWELRY SALE. The sale to the public of clothes and jewelry
that have been brought to the home for that purpose.
      CLUSTERED HOUSING DEVELOPMENT. Grouping or concentration of housing units
on lots smaller than permitted by the existing zoning to preserve open space
without increasing the allowable density of the development.
      COMMERCIAL SERVICE or PROFESSIONAL SERVICE. Establishments or professions
charging a fee for providing a service to the public.
      CONSUMER SERVICES. Businesses providing services to the public for
profit, including dining and restaurant services (not to include fast food
service restaurants), lodging and motel services, financial, real estate and
insurance services, and other personal services. In addition to the above,
CONSUMER SERVICES shall not include filling and gasoline service stations or
auto repair shops as defined by this chapter.
      DAY NURSERY and PRIVATE KINDERGARTEN. A use of land and buildings to
provide group care for children.
      DISTRICT. A section of the Town of Biltmore Forest in which zoning
regulations are uniform.
      DWELLING. Any building, structure, manufactured home, or mobile home, or
part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used,
and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually
enjoyed therewith. For the purposes of G.S. Ch. 160D, Art. 12, the term does
not include any manufactured home, mobile home, or recreational vehicle, if
used solely for a seasonal vacation purpose.
      DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building or portion thereof used or designed as
a residence for two or more families living independently.
      DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building arranged or designed to be occupied
by one family.
      DWELLING UNIT. A building, or portion thereof, providing complete and
permanent living facilities for one family.
      EASEMENT. A grant by a property owner of a strip of land for specified
purpose and use by the public, a corporation, or persons.
      ESTATE/AUCTION SALE. The one-time sale to the public of goods that is
held at the home. The goods and items offered for sale at the auction must be
personal property that has been owned by the resident(s) of the home. No goods
or items to be sold shall be shipped or transported to the home  from any other
location. The sale shall be limited to no more than two consecutive days and
the hours for the sale shall be between 10:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
      FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a single-dwelling unit; provided,
that unless all members are related by blood or marriage or adoption, no such
family shall contain over three persons, but further; provided, that domestic
servants, caretakers, and security personnel employed or living on the premises
may be housed on the premises without being counted as a FAMILY or FAMILIES.
      GARAGE/YARD SALE. The sale to the public of typical household items that
is held at the residence. The household items to be sold shall be items from
the residence where the sale is to occur. Each residence is limited to one such
sale per year. The sale shall not begin before 8:00 a.m. and shall end by 5:00
p.m.
      GASOLINE SERVICE STATION/AUTO REPAIR SHOP. Buildings and premises where
gasoline, automotive fuel, oil, grease, batteries, tires, and automobile
accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail, and where in addition the
following services may be rendered and sales made and no other. Sales and
servicing as follows: spark plugs, batteries, and distributors and distributor
parts; tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving; replacement
of mufflers and tail pipes, water hoses, fan belts, brake fluid, light bulbs,
fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield wipers and wiper blades, grease
retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors, and the like; radiator cleaning and
flushing; washing and polishing, the sale of automotive washing and polishing
materials; greasing and lubrication; providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil
pumps, and lines; minor servicing and repair of carburetors; emergency wiring
repairs; adjusting and repairing brakes, wheel balancing and alignment, minor
motor adjustments not involving removal of the head or crankcase or racing the
motor; sale of cold drinks, packaged foods, tobacco, and similar convenience
goods for filling station customers, as accessory and incidental to principal
operation; automobile body repair services; provision of road maps and other
informational materials to customers; provision of restroom facilities.
      GRADING. Any land-disturbing activity where the ground cover on or above
the soil surface is removed and reconfigured, including trees, grasses, or
pavements or other surfaces either natural or human-made.
      HOME BUSINESS ACTIVITY. A business conducted from the home such as
internet enterprise, professional office, or the making of crafts or items
where no one is employed that does not live in the home and no one comes to the
home for a business transaction as part of the activity.
      HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation providing a service carried on by the
occupants of a dwelling; provided, that certain conditions are met as listed in
§
153.008(C)(5).
      HOME STAY. Rental of a part of a dwelling unit or accessory structure for
consideration, including in kind compensation, to a transient person or persons
for a period of less than 90 days. Advertising and renting a room or rooms in a
dwelling unit of accessory structure on Airbnb or similar internet web sites
would be an example of a HOME STAY. HOME STAYS are not allowed in any zoning
district in Biltmore Forest.
      IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. Any paved, hardened, or structural surface,
including, but not limited to, buildings, driveways, walkways, parking areas,
patios, decks, streets, swimming pools, tennis courts, and other structures and
surfaces, that substantially reduces or prevents the infiltration of stormwater
into the ground.
      INCOMPATIBLE LAND USE. A land use requiring a special use permit from the
Board of Adjustment in property zoned R-4 or R-5 adjacent to land zoned R-1, R-
2, R-3, Public Service, or land zoned R-4 or R-5 in residential use.
      INDIVIDUAL SEWER SYSTEM. Any septic tank, ground absorption system,
privy, or other facility serving a single source or connection and approved by
the County Sanitarian.
      INDIVIDUAL WATER SYSTEM. Any well, spring, stream, or other source used
to supply a single connection.
      LEGISLATIVE DECISION. The adoption, amendment, or repeal of a regulation
under this chapter or an applicable local act. The term also includes the
decision to approve, amend, or rescind a development agreement consistent with
the provisions of G.S. Ch. 160D, Art. 10. Legislative decisions for development
regulations shall be approved on first reading by simple majority vote.
      LEGISLATIVE HEARING. A hearing to solicit public comment on a proposed
legislative decision.
      LIVING AREA. Includes the area inside the dwelling walls of each
particular floor, but shall not include basements, utility rooms, laundry
rooms, storage rooms (other than closets), pantries, garages, and attics.
LIVING AREA shall, however, include living rooms, dens, studies, kitchens,
bedrooms, breakfast rooms, bathrooms, and closets in any of said rooms, foyers,
entrance ways, and hallways connecting any of these rooms.
      LOT. A parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a building
or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary
accessories and open spaces belonging to the same. Includes the words PLOT or
PARCEL.
      LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines.
      LOT OF RECORD. Any lot for which a plat has been recorded in the Register
of Deeds Office of Buncombe County, or described by metes and bounds, the
description of which has been so recorded.
      LOT WIDTH. The distance between side lot lines measured at the front
building line.
      MAY. The word MAY is permissive.
      MOBILE HOME. A factory assembled, movable dwelling designed and
constructed to be towed on its own chassis, comprised of frame and wheels, to
be used without permanent foundation and distinguishable from other types of
dwellings in that the standards to which it is built include provisions for its
mobility on that chassis as a vehicle.
      NONCONFORMING USE. Any parcel of land, use of land, building, or
structure existing at the time of adoption of this chapter, or any amendment
thereto, that does not conform to the use or dimensional requirements of the
district in which it is located.
      ORDINANCE. The Zoning Ordinance of the Town of Biltmore Forest.
      PARKING SPACE. An area for parking a vehicle, plus the necessary access
space. PARKING SPACE(S) shall always be located outside the dedicated street
right-of-way and shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley.
      PARKS. Includes those areas developed either for passive or active
recreational activities. The development may include, but shall not be limited
to, walkways, benches, open fields, multi-use courts, swimming and wading
pools, amphitheaters, and the like. The term PARK shall not include zoos,
travel trailer parks, amusement parks, or vehicle, equestrian, or dog racing
facilities.
      PERSON or APPLICANT. Includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, corporation, company, trust, and an individual or governmental
unit.
      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A development where more than one principal
building is proposed to be constructed on a single tract or a clustered housing
development or any residential complex containing at least six or more units or
any building with a gross floor area of 50,000 square feet or more, shall be
deemed a PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). Multi-family structures shall have no
less than three dwelling units per structure. Residential units within a
planned unit development may include single-family detached or attached units,
townhouse developments, condominiums, and other multi-family type residential
units, excluding time sharing units, mobile homes, and mobile home parks.
      PLANNING COMMISSION. The Town of Biltmore Forest Planning Commission.
      PROTECTIVE BARRIER. A protective barrier is either:
         (a)   A temporary fence which is at least three feet high and
constructed in a post and rail configuration, using two by four posts and one
by four rails;
         (b)   A temporary fence with two by four posts placed no farther than
ten feet apart covered with a four-foot orange polyethylene laminar safety
fencing; or
         (c)   A temporary fence using an equivalent material.
      PUBLIC SEWER SYSTEM. Any sewer system owned and operated by a local
government in Buncombe County, or other sewage treatment facility serving two
or more connections, or any wastewater treatment system having a discharge to
surface waters when approved by the Division of Environmental Management of the
Department of Natural Resources and Community Development, or a ground
absorption system serving two or more connections when approved by the County
Sanitarian.
      PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. Water systems serving 15 or more residential
connections or serving more than 25 year-round residents are classified as
public water supplies, and plans and specifications must be approved by the
State Department of Human Resources, Division of Health Services. Also, water
supply systems serving from two to 14 connections shall be regulated by the
County Board of Health and plans shall be approved by the Buncombe County
Health Department, Environmental Health Section.
      RECREATION USER NONPROFIT. An indoor or outdoor recreation facility
operated on a nonprofit basis, according to the laws of North Carolina.
      RECREATION USER PROFIT. An indoor or outdoor recreation facility operated
on a profit basis.
      RESIDENTIAL DENSITY. The number of dwelling units per acre devoted to
residential buildings, accessory uses, and open spaces within the site, but
excluding land for streets and street right-of-ways. RESIDENTIAL DENSITY shall
be calculated by first subtracting the land area required for streets and
rights-of-way from the total or gross land area of the tract to derive a net
land area, and then dividing the number of dwelling units proposed to be built
by the net land area.
      RETAIL BUSINESS. Establishments selling commodities directly to the
consumer. Fast food service restaurants, gasoline service stations/auto repair,
or the dispensation of gasoline as an ancillary service to a retail use shall
be prohibited.
      ROOF COVERAGE. For the purposes of building construction and the
calculation of maximum roof coverage pursuant to §§
153.029(B)(1)(b) and
153.043 (and any other section of this chapter dealing with roof coverage),
ROOF COVERAGE shall be the area contained under the roof of the primary
building or any accessory structure/building and shall also include any
impervious deck surface or any other above-grade impervious surface extending
from or being attached to any primary building or accessory structure/building.
Both heated and unheated enclosed spaces or any open space within, under or
covered by the roof of the primary building or accessory structure/building or
by any above-grade impervious surface (such as a deck, and the like), extending
from the primary building or accessory structure/building shall be included in
the calculation of ROOF COVERAGE.
      ROOT PROTECTIVE ZONE. A circle encompassing an area around an existing
tree or shrub that is the greater of the following two distances:
         (a)   A one-foot radius for every one inch of tree or shrub trunk
caliper (diameter); or
         (b)   A measurement of the furthest or most outward branch or limb
from the main trunk when that distance is then drawn as a circle around the
remaining portion of the tree or shrub, commonly referred to as the ‘drip
line’. The minimum ROOT PROTECTION ZONE in any case is a radius of eight feet
measured from the tree trunk.
      SHALL. The word SHALL is mandatory.
      SHORT TERM RENTAL. Rental of a dwelling unit or accessory structure for
consideration, including in kind compensation, for a period of less than 90
days. SHORT TERM RENTALS are not allowed in any zoning district in Biltmore
Forest.
      SPECIAL USE. A use permitted in specified zoning districts only after
review by the Board of Adjustment and found to meet specific conditions and
procedures as set forth in this chapter to maintain the safety and general
welfare and orderly development of the community.
      STREET (ROAD). A right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords the
principal means of access to abutting properties. STREET also includes the
words ROAD and HIGHWAY.
      STREET LINE. The edge of the roadway pavement.
      STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected, including, but not limited
to, buildings, which requires location on the land or attachment to something
having permanent location on the land.
      SUBSTANTIAL COMPLETION. For the purpose of building construction; the
completion of all exterior work on the building; the completion of all
plumbing, electrical, and HVAC work; the completion of all window installation;
the completion of all interior and exterior door installation, the completion
of all wall construction, painting, and/or covering, the completion of all
floor installation and/or covering; and the completion of all other work
necessary to receive a certificate of occupancy from the Buncombe County
Inspections Department. Minor work typically noted on a punch list may be
incomplete and the structure shall be deemed to be substantially completed.
      SUBSTANTIAL PROGRESS. For the purpose of building construction, it is
expected that construction of the building is continuous and that progress is
obvious and observable with inspections as required under the State Building
Code occurring on a regular basis.
      VARIANCE. As defined in G.S. § 160D-705(d) together with any amendments
thereto.
      WHOLESALE BUSINESS. The sale of goods in large quantities usually for
resale.
      YARD. A space on the same lot with a principal building, open,
unoccupied, and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky
except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted.
      YARD, FRONT. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal
building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street
or property line and the front line of the building, projected to the side lot
lines of the lot. Driveways, to the extent possible, shall enter the property
through the front yard. In the case of a lot with frontage on more than one
street, the side of the lot with the most street frontage shall be considered
the FRONT YARD; however, in the consideration and determination of applications
for special use or variance on such a lot, the Board of Adjustment shall take
into account and consider the visibility of both the FRONT and side yards to
the street and adjoining properties in any determination.
      YARD, REAR. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal
building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear
line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to the side lines
of the lot.
      YARD, SIDE. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal
building extending the full width of the lot and being situated between the
building and the side lot line and extending from the rear line of the front
yard to the front line of the rear yard. Notwithstanding the above definition,
for the purposes of determining compliance with minimum yard setback of §
153.007, the SIDE YARD shall be the entire length of each side lot line
extending from the front lot line to the rear lot line and shall equally apply
to lots with a principal building, lots without a principal building and vacant
lots. Driveways shall not be located in the side yard setback.
      ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. An official or designated person of the Town of
Biltmore Forest charged with enforcing and administering the zoning ordinance.
      ZONING MAP or BILTMORE FOREST ZONING MAP. The official zoning map of the
Town of Biltmore Forest.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.005 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP.
   (A)   Use districts. For the purpose of this chapter, the town is hereby
divided into the following use districts:
      (1)   R-1 Residential District;
      (2)   R-2 Residential District;
      (3)   R-3 Residential District;
      (4)   R-4 Residential District;
      (5)   R-5 Residential District; and
      (6)   P-S Public Service District.
   (B)   Establishment of district boundaries. The boundaries of these
districts are hereby established as shown on the official zoning map of the
town.
   (C)   Establishment of zoning map. A zoning map, entitled the “Official
Zoning Map of the Town of Biltmore Forest,” depicts all approved use districts
and their respective boundaries. Such map is hereby made a part of this chapter
and shall be maintained by the Town Zoning Administrator and updated to reflect
changes and amendments to this zoning ordinance. This map shall be available
for inspection by interested persons during normal business hours of the Town
Zoning Administrator. It shall be the duty of the Town Zoning Administrator to
maintain the map and post any changes thereto as they may be made.
   (D)   Rules governing district boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with
respect to the boundaries of any of the aforesaid districts as shown on the
zoning map, the following shall apply:
      (1)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of
streets, highways, alleys, streams, rivers, or other bodies of water, shall be
construed to follow such lines;
      (2)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines;
      (3)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following town limit lines
shall be construed as following such town limit lines;
      (4)   Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are
approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, highways or railroads, or
rights-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being
parallel thereto and at such distance therefor as indicated on the zoning map.
If no distance is given on the map, such dimension shall be determined by the
use of the scale shown on said zoning map; and
      (5)   Where physical features existing on the ground are at variance with
those shown on the official zoning map, or in other circumstances not covered
by divisions (D)(1) through (D)(4) above, the Board of Adjustment shall
interpret the district boundaries.
   (E)   Statement of district intents.
      (1)   R-1 Residential District.
         (a)   The R-1 Residential District encompasses most of the town’s
developed residential areas and contains residential structures of historical
and architectural significance in a most unique residential environment. The
intent of the R-1 District is to preserve and enhance the character of existing
neighborhoods and generally to provide a pleasant living environment. These
neighborhoods consist of single-family owner occupied detached dwelling units
placed on relatively large lots with considerable open spaces between
structures, thus creating a low-density residential environment.
         (b)   Nonresidential uses, including home occupations, have been
limited in this District as a means of maintaining the character of these
neighborhoods. Likewise, dimensional requirements pertaining to lot size,
building setbacks, yard requirements, and height limitations have been
established to promote the general welfare and preservation of the community.
         (c)   Future construction and alteration of existing structures should
be oriented at maintaining and enhancing the existing character of the
residential neighborhoods. Therefore, structures should be compatible in
materials, height, siting, color, texture, scale, and proportion to the other
structures in the neighborhood. The R-1 District also contains undeveloped
areas to provide locations for future single-family subdivisions.
         (d)   Consistent with, and to protect the existing character of the
neighborhoods in this District, home stays and short term rentals are not
allowed.
      (2)   R-2 Residential District.
         (a)   The R-2 Residential District is established to protect and
maintain existing neighborhoods, which are characterized by single-family
residences with smaller lots, and thus greater residential densities than found
in the R-1 District.
         (b)   As in the R-1, nonresidential uses, including home occupations,
have been limited in this District as a means of assuring a pleasant
residential atmosphere.
         (c)   Consistent with and to protect and preserve the character of the
neighborhoods in this District, home stays and short term rentals are not
allowed.
      (3)   R-3 Residential District.
         (a)   The R-3 Residential District is intended to provide locations
that will accommodate future residential growth south of the Blue Ridge
Parkway. This District is intended to provide locations for future subdivisions
and for planned unit residential developments as special uses when design plans
show that such developments will be compatible with the surrounding development
and available public services.
         (b)   This District is primarily a low-density residential district;
however, to accommodate contemporary design and building practices, it includes
residential planned unit developments as a conditional use at a maximum density
of eight dwelling units per acre. Nonresidential uses, including home
occupations, will also be limited in the R-3 District in order to maintain the
same quiet and pleasant living environment as found in the R-1 and R-
2 Districts.
         (c)   Consistent with and to protect and preserve the character of the
neighborhoods in this District, home stays and short term rentals are not
allowed.
      (4)   R-4 Residential District.
         (a)   The R-4 Residential District provides areas for residential
uses, and for special uses professional offices and commercial services. Urban
sprawl, strip commercial development, and congestion will be discouraged by
promoting good design and clustered development. These areas should provide
sufficient space for ample off-street parking and well designed entrances and
exits to avoid traffic congestion and safety hazards.
         (b)   Land uses in this District, other than single-family detached
dwelling units, will require a special use permit as a means of assuring and
promoting safety and good design. The integrity of residential uses in this
zone will be preserved by requiring a 20-foot wide buffer strip between
residential and nonresidential uses.
         (c)   Consistent with and to protect and preserve the character of the
neighborhoods in this District, home stays and short term rentals are not
allowed.
      (5)   R-5 Residential District.
         (a)   The medium-density district is established as a district where
both residential and business uses are accommodated. In addition, a wide range
of community facilities and services are also available. It is intended that
nonresidential uses, including business uses, shall be compatible with and
exist in harmony with the community in which they are located and that adequate
standards will be maintained pertaining to the public health, safety, and
welfare.
         (b)   In addition, these areas should provide sufficient space for
ample off-street parking and well designed entrances and exits to avoid
congestion and safety hazards. Most land use in this District will require a
special use permit as a means of assuring and promoting safety and good design.
         (c)   Consistent with and to protect and preserve the character of the
neighborhoods in this District, home stays and short term rentals are not
allowed.
      (6)   P-S Public Service District.
         (a)   This District is designed to provide for open green spaces,
including forestation and other natural vegetation throughout the jurisdiction.
         (b)   It is to be used to protect the ambiance of the community by
providing a series of natural buffers between residential and nonresidential
development.
         (c)   No structures or buildings shall be allowed on properties in the
District except structures and buildings associated with a public park or
recreational area or structures and buildings owned and operated by the town
and used for a public purpose.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021; Ord. 2025-05, passed 10-14-2025)
§ 153.006 PERMITTED USE TABLE.
   (A)   Table. The following tables show the land uses permitted in each
zoning district and the dimensional requirements for each zoning district,
including minimum lot sizes, minimum lot widths, and minimum setback
requirements.
Zoning Districts
USE R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
Zoning Districts
USE                                                        R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
Accessory buildings, structures and uses (does not include S   S   S   S   S
rental units by other than a family member)
Banks                                                                  S   S
Bone fide farms                                            S       S   S   P
Business or special schools (art, craft, dance, and the                S   S
like)
Churches/religious assembly                                            S   S
Clothing and jewelry sales*                                P   P   P   P   P
Country, athletic and social clubs                         S   S   S   S   S
Commercial business                                                        S
Commercial services (excluding retail trade)                           S   S
Day nurseries/day care                                                 S   S
Estate auction sale**                                      P   P   P   P   P
Fundraising events for nonprofits or political             P   P   P   P   P
campaigns****
Garage/yard sales***                                       P   P   P   P   P
Home business activity*****                                P   P   P   P   P
Home occupations                                                       S   S
Libraries                                                              S   S
Medical and dental services                                            S   S
Planned unit development******                                     S   S   S
Professional and business offices                                      S   S
Public recreational facilities - nonprofit (parks,         P   P   P   P   P
playgrounds, scenic parkways and open space)
Public utility station and substations                     S   S   S   S   S
Retail businesses                                                          S
Schools, public and private                                S   S   S   S   S
Single-family residential dwelling unit                    P   P   P   P   P
P = permitted
S = allowed as a special use (approval required by Board of Adjustment)
Blank space = not permitted
Use not lisped = not permitted zoning districts
 
   (B)   General provisions. The following are general provisions applicable to
the table in division (A).
      (1)   Only two clothing or jewelry sales maybe held per year at each
dwelling, not to exceed five consecutive days for each sale. Property owners
are required to contact the Zoning Administrator prior to holding the sale so
that the date of the sale may be noted. See §
153.004.
      (2)   Only one estate auction sale may be held during a resident’s
ownership of the property. Property owners are required to contact the Zoning
Administrator prior to holding the estate/auction sale so that the date of the
sale may be noted. See §
153.004 for additional limitations.
      (3)   Only one garage/yard sale may be held per year at each dwelling.
Property owners are required to contact the Zoning Administrator prior to
holding the sale so that the date of the sale may be noted. See §
153.004.
      (4)   Only four fundraising events may be held per year at each dwelling.
No such event shall last longer than five hours in a single day and any such
event must end by 11:00 p.m. There shall be no sales of goods or services at
any such event. Parking for such an event must not impede the normal flow of
traffic and must not be upon any other property without permission from the
other property owners
      (5)   No home business activity shall employ any person who does not live
in the home. No person shall come to the home for a business transaction of any
nature as part of the home business activity, including, but not limited to,
retail or commercial sales or fee for service transactions. See §
153.004.
      (6)   Where there is proposed more than one principal building per lot or
where there is proposed any building with a gross floor area of 50,000 square
feet or more, a planned unit development must be sought. See §
153.004 for additional requirements.
   (C)   Home stays and short term rentals are not allowed in any district.
There may be only two rentals of a dwelling unit or accessory structure in any
calendar year.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.007 DIMENSIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Table. The following table sets out dimensional requirements.
                   PUD         Minimum Yard Setback Requirement in Feet
          Minimum  Residential Minimum
          Lot Area Density     Lot      Front                         Maximu m
Districts In       Maximum     Width At Yard From Side Yard Rear Yard Height in
          Square   Number of   Building Street                        Feet
          Feet     Dwellings   Line in  Edge
                   Per Acre    Feet
                   PUD         Minimum Yard Setback Requirement in Feet
          Minimum  Residential Minimum
          Lot Area Density     Lot      Front                         Maximu m
Districts In       Maximum     Width At Yard From Side Yard Rear Yard Height in
          Square   Number of   Building Street                        Feet
          Feet     Dwellings   Line in  Edge
                   Per Acre    Feet
R-1       43,560   0           150      60        20        25        40
R-2       20,000   0           100      50        15        20        40
R-3       20,000   8           100      50        15        20        40
R-4       20,000   2           100      50        15        20        40
R-5       Footnote 8           100      50        15        20        40
          6
PS        No Min.  0           No Min.  No Min.   No Min.   No Min.   Not App.
 
   (B)   General provisions. The following are footnotes applicable to the
table in division (A).
      (1)   Footnote 1. The minimum lot area for lots not served by public
water and/or sewer shall be subject to approval by the County Health Department
to ensure the proper operation of septic tanks and wells. In no case, however,
shall minimum lot area be less than those specified in the table in division
(A).
      (2)   Footnote 2. The minimum lot width at the street line shall be 125
feet in the R-1 District, and 80 feet in the R-2, R-3, and R-4 Districts.
      (3)   Footnote 3. On all corner lots, a 30-foot side yard setback is
required.
      (4)   Footnote 4. Accessory structures, including driveways, shall meet
all setback requirements. Notwithstanding the foregoing, setback requirements
for driveway entrance columns or driveway entrance walls may be waived or
modified by the Board of Adjustment with the granting of a special use permit
in accordance with §
153.110(C), without the need for a variance pursuant to §
153.110(D).
      (5)   Footnote 5. Height requirements may be varied upon approval of the
Board of Adjustment.
      (6)   Footnote 6. Whichever is greater, 20,000 square feet, or twice the
gross floor area of the building.
      (7)   Footnote 7. An increase in the side and rear yard setbacks is
required for homes (structures) that exceed 25 feet in height. Homes
(structures) greater than 25 feet in height shall be setback from the side and
rear property lines an additional one and one-half feet for each one foot, or
portion thereof, that the home (structure) exceeds 25 feet in height.
      (8)   Footnote 8. Structures exceeding a roof coverage area of 7,000
square feet shall be set back from side and rear property lines an additional
20% of the required setback for each 500 square feet, or increment thereof,
that the roof coverage areas exceeds 7,000 square feet.
         Example:   The rear setback for a single story 8,200 square foot house
in the R-1 District would be calculated as follows:
                  8,200 - 7,000 = 1,200
                  1,200/500 = 2.4 (round to 3 to account for increment of
change)
                  3 x 20% = 60%
                  60% x 20 = 12
                  25 + 12 = 37
                  Rear setback will be 37 feet
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.008 SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   Purpose. The following special uses might not be appropriate without
specific standards and requirements to assure that such uses are compatible
with the other uses permitted in the designated districts. Such uses may be
permitted in a zoning district as special uses if the provisions of this and
all other sections of this chapter have been met.
   (B)   Development plan/site plan requirement.
      (1)   All applications for special use permits shall include a
development plan or site plan.
      (2)   If the special use request is for a subdivision or planned unit
development, the development plan shall contain a map or maps drawn to scale,
with the date of preparation, and shall contain, where applicable, the
following information:
         (a)   Existing site conditions, including contours, watercourses,
identified flood hazard areas, any unique natural or human-made features;
         (b)   Boundary lines of the proposed development, proposed lot lines,
and plot designs;
         (c)   Proposed location and use of all existing and proposed
structures;
         (d)   Location and size of all areas to be conveyed dedicated or
reserved as common open space, parks, recreational areas, school sites, and
similar public or semi-public uses;
         (e)   The existing and proposed street system, including location and
number of off-street parking spaces, service areas, loading areas, and major
points of access to public right-of-way. Notations of proposed ownership of the
street system (public or private);
         (f)   Approximate location of proposed utility systems, including
documentation approving the proposed water and sewer systems from the
appropriate local and state agencies. Documentation of an approved
sedimentation and erosion control plan shall also be submitted where required.
Provisions for stormwater drainage shall be shown;
         (g)   Location and/or notation of existing and proposed easements and
rights-of-way;
         (h)   The proposed treatment of the perimeter of the development,
including materials and/or techniques such as screens, fences, and walls;
         (i)   Information on adjacent land areas, including land use, zoning
classifications, public facilities, and any unique natural features;
         (j)   Where applicable, the following written documentation shall be
submitted:
            1.   A legal description of the total site proposed for
development, including a statement of present and proposed ownership;
            2.   The zoning district or districts in which the project is
located;
            3.   A development schedule indicating approximate beginning and
completion dates of the development, including any proposed stages;
            4.   A statement of the applicant's intentions with regard to the
future selling and/or leasing of all or portions of the development;
            5.   Quantitative data for the following: proposed total number and
type of residential dwelling units; parcel size; residential densities
(dwelling units per acre); and total amount of open space; and
            6.   Plan for maintenance of common areas, recreation areas, open
spaces, streets, and utilities.
         (k)   Any additional information required by the Board of Adjustment
in order to evaluate the impact of the proposed development. The Board of
Adjustment may waive a particular requirement if, in its opinion, the inclusion
is not essential to a proper decision of the project.
   (C)   Special use standards.
      (1)   Generally, the following standards are applied to specific special
uses. Before issuing a special use permit, the Board of Adjustment shall find
that all standards for specific uses listed in these sections as well as all
standards or requirements listed in division (B) above and § 153.110(C)( 1)
have been met.
      (2)   Planned unit developments.
         (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this division is to encourage and
provide for flexibility and innovation in the design and location of structures
and land development, to provide for mixtures of housing types, to provide for
the most efficient use of land resources, and to provide an opportunity to
develop land areas in a manner different from the standard arrangement of one
principal building on one lot. Residential densities are calculated on a
project basis, thus allowing the clustering of buildings in each proposed
planned unit development project in order to create useful open spaces and
preserve natural site features. It is further intended that a planned unit
development will be in harmony with the character of the district in which it
is located.
         (b)   Planned unit development defined. In this chapter, a PLANNED
UNIT DEVELOPMENT means a development where more than one principal building is
proposed to be constructed on a single tract or a clustered housing development
or any residential complex containing at least six or more units or any
building with a gross floor area of 50,000 square feet or more, shall be deemed
a PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD). Multi-family structures shall have no less
than three dwelling units per structure. Residential units within a planned
unit development may include single-family detached or attached units,
townhouse developments, condominiums, and other multi- family type residential
units, excluding time sharing units, mobile homes, and mobile home parks.
         (c)   Land development standards.
            1.   The following land development standards shall apply for all
planned unit developments.
            2.   These planned unit developments may be located only in certain
specified districts as special uses, subject to a finding by the Board of
Adjustment that the following conditions be met.
               a.   Ownership control. The land in a planned unit development
shall be under single ownership or management by the applicant before final
approval and/or construction, or proper assurances (legal title or execution of
a binding sales agreement) shall be provided that the development can be
successfully completed by the applicant.
               b.   Land uses permitted and location of PUDs. The uses
permitted within a planned unit development are limited to residential uses,
including multi-family residential units, and those land uses normally allowed
(as either permitted or special) in the zoning district within which the PUD is
located. PUDs shall be permitted in the R-3, R-4, and R-5 Districts. All PUDs
must be compatible with and not violate the intent of the zoning districts.
               c.   Density requirements. The proposed residential density of a
planned unit development (dwelling units per acre as shown in § 153.007) shall
conform to that permitted in the district in which the development is located.
If the planned unit development lies in more than one district, the number of
allowable dwelling units must be separately calculated for each portion of the
planned unit development that is in a separate district and must be combined to
determine the number of dwelling units allowable in the entire planned unit
development.
               d.   Frontage requirements. Planned unit developments shall have
access to a highway or road suitable for the scale and density of development
being proposed.
               e.   Minimum requirements.
                  i.   Waiver. The normal minimum lot size, setbacks, and
frontage requirements are hereby waived for the planned unit development;
provided, that the spirit and intent of this section are complied with in the
total development plan, as determined by the Board of Adjustment. The Board of
Adjustment shall exercise ultimate discretion as to whether the total
development plan does comply with the spirit and intent of this section.
                  ii.   Height limitations. No building or structure shall
exceed the height limitations of the district in which it is located, except as
approved by the Board of Adjustment.
                  iii.   Required distance between buildings. The minimum
distance between buildings shall be 20 feet or as otherwise specified by the
Board of Adjustment to ensure adequate air, light, privacy, and space for
emergency vehicles.
                  iv.   Streets. Every dwelling unit shall have access to a
public or private street, walkway, or other area dedicated to common use, and
there shall be provision for adequate vehicular circulation to all development
properties, in order to ensure acceptable levels of access for emergency
vehicles.
               f.   Privacy. Each development shall provide reasonable visual
and acoustical privacy for all dwelling units. Fences, insulation, walks,
barriers, and landscaping shall be used, as appropriate, for the protection and
aesthetic enhancement of property and the privacy of its occupants and adjacent
properties for screening of objectionable views or uses, and for reduction of
noise. Multi-level buildings shall be located in such a way as to dissipate any
adverse impact on adjoining low- rise buildings and shall not invade the
privacy of the occupants of such low-rise buildings.
               g.   Perimeter requirements.
                  i.   Structures located on the perimeter of the development
must be set back from property lines and right-of-way of abutting streets in
accordance with the provisions of the zoning ordinance controlling the district
within which the property is situated.
                  ii.   Structures other than single-family detached units,
located on the perimeter of the development, may require buffer strip or
screening in a manner which is approved by the Board of Adjustment.
               h.   Plans and documentation. Plans and accompanying
documentation shall ensure that the water and sewer systems proposed for the
planned unit development have been approved by the appropriate local and state
agencies, and submitted as part of the application.
               i.   Preliminary plans. Preliminary plans shall include parking
provisions for all proposed uses within the planned unit development in
accordance with § 153.038.
               j.   Pedestrian and bicycle path circulation system. Any
pedestrian and bicycle path circulation system and its related walkways shall
be designed to minimize conflicts between vehicle and pedestrian traffic.
               k.   Parking areas, service areas, and the like. Layout of
parking areas, service areas, entrances, exits, yards, courts, and landscaping,
and control of signs, lighting, noise, or other potentially adverse influences
shall be such as to protect the character of the district and desirable
character in any adjoining district.
               l.   Open spaces, recreational areas, and the like. Where
applicable, conveyance and maintenance of open space, recreational areas, and
communally owned facilities shall be in accordance with the Unit Ownership Act
(G.S. Ch. 47A) and/or any other appropriate mechanisms acceptable to the Board
of Adjustment.
      (3)   Country, athletic and social clubs.
         (a)   Off-street parking shall be sufficient to meet the requirements
found in §
153.038.
         (b)   The Board of Adjustment may require buffering along the side and
rear lot lines that meet the requirements as outlined in §
153.063, "Buffer Strip and Screen Requirements." This planting requirement may
be modified by the Board of Adjustment where adequate buffering exists in the
form of vegetation and/or terrain.
         (c)   The proposed hours of operation shall not be detrimental to the
surrounding property due to noise, lights, traffic, and the like.
         (d)   All developments shall be compatible with surrounding
residential uses, therefore, no signs with flashing lights shall be allowed.
The design of all proposed signs shall be submitted with the site plan, and all
non-flashing illuminated signs shall be placed so as not to cast light on
nearby residential uses.
      (4)   Public utility stations and substations.
         (a)   Structures shall be enclosed by a woven wire fence at least
eight feet high.
         (b)   The lot shall be suitably landscaped along the side and rear
property lines with vegetation that meets the requirements as outlined in §
153.063, "Buffer Strip and Screen Requirements." This planting requirement may
be modified by the Board of Adjustment where adequate buffering exists in the
form of vegetation and/or terrain.
         (c)   Entrances and exits shall be designated and designed accordingly
to promote public safety.
      (5)   Home occupation. An occupation providing a service carried on by
the occupants of a dwelling; provided, that:
         (a)   The occupation is conducted entirely within the dwelling and not
in an accessory building or out of doors;
         (b)   The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be
clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential
purposes;
         (c)   There shall be no display, no outside storage, no change in
outside appearance of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of
the conduct of such home occupations;
         (d)   Any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home
occupation shall be met off the street and not in the front yard;
         (e)   No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation
that creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses;
         (f)   In the case of electrical interference, no equipment or process
shall be used which creates a visual or audible interference in any radio or
television receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuations in the line
voltage off the premises; and
         (g)   No retail sales shall be conducted as part of the home
occupation.
      (6)   All commercial services, professional office uses, consumer
services, and retail businesses.
         (a)   Off-street parking shall be sufficient to meet the requirements
found in §
153.038.
         (b)   A driveway permit as required by the State Department of
Transportation shall be submitted along with the site plan, where applicable.
         (c)   Front setbacks along Hendersonville Road shall be considered on
a case-by-case basis by the Board of Adjustment with input from the Zoning
Administrator. The Board of Adjustment shall determine the setback upon
consideration of the most suitable location for parking. Required parking shall
be provided at either the side, rear, or front of the proposed development,
based upon the location of adjacent and/or nearby residential dwellings,
topography, existing or proposed screening, or other factors that may include
noise or glare. When parking is designated to be at the rear of the proposed
building, the front setback shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the
Board of Adjustment; when parking is designated to be at the front of the
proposed building, then the front setback shall be 50 feet.
      (7)   Libraries, schools, and churches. Libraries, schools and churches
shall provide a buffer that meets the requirements as outlined in §
153.063, "Buffer Strip and Screen Requirements".
      (8)   Accessory buildings.
         (a)   All accessory buildings shall meet the standards of the State
Building Code where applicable.
         (b)   All accessory buildings shall be of a design compatible with the
principal building on the lot and with the structures in the neighborhood.
         (c)   An additional parking space shall be required when an accessory
building is permitted for use as a dwelling by a family member.
         (d)   Accessory buildings shall comply with the district's setback
requirements.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.009 EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Compliance. Compliance with the requirements of this chapter is
mandatory; however, under the specific conditions enumerated in the following
sections, the requirements may be waived or modified as so stated.
   (B)   Front yard setback for dwellings. The front yard setback requirements
of this chapter for dwellings shall not apply on any lot where the average
front yard setback of existing buildings located within 100 feet on each side
of such lot is less than the minimum required front yard setback. In such
cases, the setback may be less than the required setback, but not less than the
average of the setback of the aforementioned existing buildings.
   (C)   Completion of buildings under construction. Nothing in this chapter
shall require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of a
building under construction at the date of the passage of this chapter;
provided, that construction of such building is diligently pursued and the
entire building is completed within 18 months from the date of passage of this
chapter. A building shall be deemed to be under construction upon the effective
date of this chapter if a building permit has been issued.
   (D)   Temporary uses. Temporary uses such as real estate sales field offices
or shelter for materials and equipment being used in the construction of a
permanent structure may be permitted by the Zoning Administrator, provided they
do not create health, safety, or nuisance hazards.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.010 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. This chapter, including the zoning map, may be amended by
the Town Board of Commissioners in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Initiation of amendments. Proposed changes or amendments may be
initiated by the Town Board of Commissioners, the Planning Commission, the
Board of Adjustment, or one or more owners of property within the area proposed
to be changed or affected. All proposed amendments shall be referred to the
Planning Commission for their review and recommendation to the Town Board of
Commissioners.
   (C)   Application. Before any action on a proposed change or amendment, an
application shall be submitted to the office of the Zoning Administrator at
least ten days prior to the Planning Commission’s meeting at which the
application is to be considered. The application shall contain the name(s) and
address(es) of the owner(s) of the property in question, the location of the
property, and a description and/or statement of the present and proposed zoning
regulation or district. All applications requesting a change in the zoning map
shall include a description of the property in question. The Planning
Commission and the Board of Commissioners will not consider an application for
property denied within the preceding 12 months by the Board of Commissioners.
   (D)   Application fee. A fee, in an amount as set by the Board of
Commissioners from time to time, shall be paid to the town for each application
for an amendment to cover costs of advertising and other administrative
expenses.
   (E)   Planning Commission action. Before taking any action on a proposed
amendment to the ordinance, the Board of Commissioners shall consider the
Planning Commission’s recommendations on each proposed amendment. The Planning
Commission shall have 32 days after the first consideration of the application
within which to submit its recommendations to the Board of Commissioners.
Failure of the Planning Commission to submit recommendations within the 32-day
period shall constitute a favorable recommendation.
   (F)   Public hearing.
      (1)   Before enacting any amendment to this chapter, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a public hearing. A notice of such public hearing
shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county once a
week for two successive weeks, the first publication shall not appear less than
ten days or more than 25 days prior to the date fixed for the public hearing.
In computing such period, the day of publication is not to be included, but the
day of the hearing shall be included. The notice shall include the time, place,
and date of the hearing and include a description of the property or the nature
of the change or amendment to the ordinance and/or map.
      (2)   (a)   Whenever there is a zoning classification action involving a
parcel of land, the owner of that parcel of land as shown on the county tax
listing, and the owners of all parcels of land abutting that parcel of land
(including parcels abutting the subject property by street, railroad, or other
transportation corridor) as shown on the county tax listing, shall be mailed a
notice by the Zoning Administrator of the proposed classification by first
class mail at the last address listed for such owners on the county tax
abstracts. The town may require the applicant to provide a fee equivalent to
the cost of producing and mailing notifications to owners as specified above.
         (b)   The person mailing such notices shall certify to the Town Board
of Commissioners that fact, and such certificate shall be deemed conclusive in
the absence of fraud. This provision shall apply only when tax maps are
available for the area to be zoned.
   (G)   Decision.
      (1)   The Town Board of Commissioners shall make a decision on the
proposed amendment to this chapter initiated by owners of private property
within the town within 60 days after the public hearing.
      (2)   There shall be no time limit after a public hearing for Board
action concerning all proposed amendments initiated by the Town Board of
Commissioners, the Planning Commission, or the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.011 VIOLATIONS AND REMEDIES.
   (A)   Violations.
      (1)   Whenever, by the provisions of this chapter, the performance of any
act is prohibited, or whenever any regulation, dimension, or limitation is
imposed on the use of any land, or on the erection or alterations, or the use
or change of use of a structure, or the uses within such structure, a failure
to comply with such provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate
violation and a separate offense.
      (2)   Each day of violation and noncompliance shall be considered a
separate offense.
   (B)   Remedies. If a building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, moved, or maintained, or any
building, structure, or land is used in violation of this chapter, the Zoning
Administrator, in addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate
action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, moving, maintenance, or use, to
restrain, correct, or abate the violation, to prevent occupancy of the
building, structure, or land, or to prevent any illegal act, conduct of
business, or use in or about the premises.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)  Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.012 LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Conflict with other laws.
      (1)   When provisions of this chapter require a greater width or size of
yards, or require a lower height of a building, or require a greater percentage
of a lot to be left unoccupied, or impose other higher standards than are
required in any other statute or local ordinance or regulation, provisions of
this chapter shall govern.
      (2)   When the provisions of any other statute or local ordinance or
regulation require a greater width or size of yards, or require a lower height
of a building, or require a greater percentage of a lot to be left unoccupied,
or impose other higher standards than are required by the provisions made by
this chapter, the provisions of that statute or local ordinance or regulation
shall govern.
   (B)   Effective date. This chapter shall take effect and be in force on
October 18, 1983.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.013 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   Pursuant to § 160D-109, the following regulations are set forth regarding
conflicts of interest for legislative decisions regarding a development
regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter as follows.
   (A)   Governing board. A governing board member shall not vote on any
legislative decision regarding a development regulation adopted pursuant to
this chapter where the outcome of the matter being considered is reasonably
likely to have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact
on the member. A governing board member shall not vote on any zoning amendment
if the landowner of the property subject to a rezoning petition or the
applicant for a text amendment is a person with whom the member has a close
familial, business, or other associational relationship.
   (B)   Appointed boards. Members of appointed boards shall not vote on any
advisory or legislative decision regarding a development regulation adopted
pursuant to this chapter where the outcome of the matter being considered is
reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable
financial impact on the member. An appointed board member shall not vote on any
zoning amendment if the landowner of the property subject to a rezoning
petition or the applicant for a text amendment is a person with whom the member
has a close familial, business, or other associational relationship.
   (C)   Administrative staff. No staff member shall make a final decision on
an administrative decision required by this chapter if the outcome of that
decision would have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial
impact on the staff member or if the applicant or other person subject to that
decision is a person with whom the staff member has a close familial, business,
or other associational relationship. If a staff member has a conflict of
interest under this section, the decision shall be assigned to the supervisor
of the staff person or such other staff person as may be designated by the
development regulation or other ordinance.
   (D)   No staff member shall be financially interested or employed by a
business that is financially interested in a development subject to regulation
under this chapter unless the staff member is the owner of the land or building
involved. No staff member or other individual or an employee of a company
contracting with a local government to provide staff support shall engage in
any work that is inconsistent with his or her duties or with the interest of
the local government, as determined by the local government.
   (E)   Quasi-judicial decisions. A member of any board exercising quasi-
judicial functions pursuant to this chapter shall not participate in or vote on
any quasi-judicial matter in a manner that would violate affected persons'
constitutional rights to an impartial decision maker. Impermissible violations
of due process include, but are not limited to, a member having a fixed opinion
prior to hearing the matter that is not susceptible to change, undisclosed ex
parte communications, a close familial, business, or other associational
relationship with an affected person, or a financial interest in the outcome of
the matter.
   (F)   Resolution of objection. If an objection is raised to a board member's
participation at or prior to the hearing or vote on a particular matter and
that member does not recuse himself or herself, the remaining members of the
board shall by majority vote rule on the objection.
   (G)   Familial relationship. For purposes of this section, a "close familial
relationship" means a spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, or
grandchild. The term includes the step, half, and in-law relationships.
(Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 153.025 EFFECT ON EVERY BUILDING AND LOT.
   No building or land shall hereafter be used, and no building or part thereof
shall be erected, moved, or altered except in conformity with the regulations
herein specified for the district in which it is located, except as provided in
this chapter.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)  Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.026 RELATIONSHIP OF BUILDING TO LOT.
   Every building hereafter erected, moved, or structurally altered shall be
located on a single lot and in no case shall there be more than one principal
building and its customary accessory building on the lot, except in the case of
a designed planned unit development.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed  6-8-2021)
§ 153.027 LOT FRONTAGE.
   All lots shall front on a public street. It is suggested, but not required,
that garage doors not face or be visible from the public street, that garage
doors not be more than ten feet wide, and if there are multiple garage doors,
that there be at least 18 inches of separation between them.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.028 REQUIRED YARDS AND OTHER SPACES.
   No part of a yard or open space, or off-street parking or loading space
required in §§
153.038 and
153.039, or required in connection with any building for the purpose of
complying with this chapter, shall be included as a part of a yard, open space,
or off-street parking, or loading space similarly required for any other
building.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed  6-8-2021)
§ 153.029 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES AND BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Accessory structures and/or necessary buildings shall not detract from
nor interfere with adjacent properties. No accessory structure or building
shall be constructed, erected, or located within any front yard or within any
side yard or rear yard setback.
   (B)   (1)   In addition, the following standards are established for
accessory structures and accessory buildings:
         (a)   The maximum number of accessory buildings permitted on a lot
shall be one;
         (b)   The maximum roof coverage area for accessory buildings shall be
750 square feet;
         (c)   The maximum height for accessory buildings shall be 25 feet;
         (d)   The accessory building must be screened by vegetation or other
buffer as set forth in §
153.008;
         (e)   The accessory building must be located behind a line parallel to
the rear of the principal structure on the lot;
         (f)   The accessory building must be designed in the same
architectural style as the principal structure;
         (g)   Any accessory structure and/or accessory building shall be
included in the calculation of allowable roof coverage and allowable impervious
surface coverage on the lot pursuant to §§
153.043 and
153.048; and
         (h)   Solar collectors shall be regulated in accordance with G.S. §
160D-914.
      (2)   For all satellite dishes less than 24 inches in diameter, an
application for a zoning compliance certificate shall be made directly to the
Zoning Administrator; the Zoning Administrator shall issue a zoning compliance
certificate.
      (3)   Fences, gates, and walls shall be regulated in accordance with §
153.049 of this Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
Editor’s note:
   This amendatory language was passed during a Board meeting, July 9, 2013
§ 153.030 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   Standards pertaining to home occupations are contained within the special
use standards, specifically §
153.008(C)(5).
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.031 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTION AND OBSTRUCTIONS WITHIN TOWN RIGHTS-OF-
WAY.
   Sight distances at intersections must meet the standards for secondary roads
established by the State Department of Transportation. On corner lots, no
planting, structure, sign, fence, wall, or other obstruction shall be erected
so as to interfere with the sight distance. In accordance with § 91.02(C)(2),
the construction of curbing or obstructions across the town right-of-way is
prohibited.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.032 VACANT STRUCTURES AND LOTS.
   Vacant structures, lots, and open spaces shall be maintained consistent with
the surrounding neighborhood. All structures shall remain structurally sound.
Vegetation shall be neatly trimmed and the accumulation of unsightly debris
shall be prohibited.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.033 SIGNS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS, R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, AND R-5.
   (A)   A small sign showing the name of the owner or occupant or the street
number of a lot shall be permitted on any lot. Additional sign requirements,
including real estate and construction company signs, are found in §
93.02.
   (B)   The design or layout of signs proposed for any special use shall be
presented along with the development plan as specified in §
153.008(B).
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.034 LANDSCAPING AND GRADING PLANS, LAND DISTURBANCE, AND SEDIMENTATION
CONTROL.
   (A)   Plans required. A landscaping and grading plan, as defined in the
town’s zoning application process, are required for any or all of the following
activities.
      (1)   Any land-disturbing activity, such as grading projects or removal
of natural vegetation, that involves the disturbance of 20% or more of the land
area of any lot. Prior to commencing such activity in a public service
district, any land-disturbing activity, such as grading projects or removal of
natural vegetation other than routine maintenance, shall be subject to approval
by the Town Board of Adjustment regardless of the area to be disturbed.
      (2)   Any residential construction activity that results in an addition
of greater than 500 square feet of roof coverage.
      (3)   Any non-residential construction activity as defined in §
153.061.
   (B)   All landscape and grading plans shall demonstrate compliance with the
town’s tree protection and preservation regulations as found in §§ 153.050
through 153.059 and §
153.061(C) for existing residential and non-residential tree maintenance and
new construction activities, respectively.
   (C)   Pre-construction conference and supervision.
      (1)   Prior to the commencement of any pre-construction land-clearing or
soil disturbance, a pre-construction conference will take place between a
representative of the town and the applicant to review procedures for
protection and management of protected trees and other landscape elements
identified in the approved landscape plan. The applicant will designate one or
more persons responsible for ensuring the protection of new or existing
landscaping elements to be preserved. The responsible person shall be present
on site whenever activity is taking place that could damage or disturb such
landscape elements, and will notify the Ordinance Administrator that such
activity is taking place.
      (2)   The applicant shall provide the following at least seven days prior
to the pre-construction conference.
         (a)   Approved landscaping plan, showing all protected and unprotected
trees to be removed, and all replacement trees to be planted.
         (b)   Chart showing the quantity of trees, scientific species name,
and tree designation (protected, unprotected, or tree of preference) and
replacement quantities required.
         (c)   Final grading plan showing tree preservation limits and limits
of disturbance.
   (D)   Construction supervision and additional compliance requirements.
      (1)   The town shall have developed sites inspected periodically to
ensure work is conforming to the approved landscape plan and the applicable
sections of this subchapter. Prior to the commencement of any pre-construction
land-clearing or soil disturbance, the developer/contractor shall be required
to sign a document agreeing to abide by the conditions stipulated in this
subchapter. At the option of the town, a compliance bond may be required.
      (2)   Compliance with G.S. § 113A-54. Where applicable, all proposed
development projects or land-disturbing activities shall comply with G.S. §
113A-54, and Rules and Regulations for Erosion and Sediment Control as
established by the State Sedimentation Control Commission, State Department of
Natural Resources and Community Development.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021; Ord. 2023-05, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.035 BUFFER STRIP REQUIRED.
   From the time of the adoption of this chapter, all special use development
projects in the R-4 District that abut a residential lot or the other
residential districts, shall provide a buffer strip that meets the requirements
as outlined in §
153.063, “Buffer Strip and Screen Requirements."
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.036 NONCONFORMING LAND USES OR STRUCTURES.
   Any parcel of land, use of land, building, or structure existing at the time
of the adoption of this chapter, or any amendment thereto, that does not
conform to the use or dimensional requirements of the district in which it is
located, may be continued and maintained subject to the following provisions.
   (A)   Nonconforming vacant lots.
      (1)   This category of nonconformance consists of vacant lots for which
plats or deeds have been recorded in the County Register of Deeds office, which
at the time of adoption of this chapter or any amendment thereto fail to comply
with the minimum area and width requirements of the districts in which they are
located.
      (2)   Any such nonconforming lot may be used for any of the uses
permitted in the district in which it is located; provided, that:
         (a)   Where the lot area is not more than 20% below the minimum
specified in this chapter, and other dimensional requirements are otherwise
complied with, the Zoning Administrator is authorized to issue a zoning
compliance permit; and
         (b)   Where the lot area is more than 20% below the minimum specified
in this chapter or other dimensional requirements cannot be met, the Board of
Adjustment is authorized to approve as a variance such dimensions as shall
conform as closely as possible to the required dimensions.
   (B)   Nonconforming occupied lots. This category of nonconformance consists
of lots, occupied by buildings or structures at the time of the adoption of
this chapter or any amendment thereto, that fail to comply with the minimum
requirements for area, width, yard, and setbacks for the district in which they
are located. These lots may continue to be used.
   (C)   Nonconforming uses or structures.
      (1)   This category of nonconformance consists of buildings or structures
used at the time of enactment of this chapter or any amendment thereto for
purposes of use not permitted in the district in which they are located, or
structures on conforming lots which do not comply with the dimensional
requirements of this chapter such as size and height restrictions.
      (2)   Such uses except as provided in division (E) below may be continued
as follows:
         (a)   1.   An existing nonconforming use may be changed to another
nonconforming use of the same or higher use; provided, that the other
conditions in this section are complied with.
            2.   For the purpose of this chapter, the rank order of uses from
higher to lower shall be:
               a.   Residential;
               b.   Public; and
               c.   Commercial services.
         (b)   When a nonconforming use has been changed to a conforming use,
it shall not thereafter be used for any nonconforming use.
         (c)   A nonconforming use may not be extended or enlarged, nor shall a
nonconforming structure be altered except as follows:
            1.   Structural alterations as required by law or ordinance to
secure the safety of the structure are permissible;
            2.   Maintenance and repair necessary to keep a nonconforming
structure in sound condition are permissible;
            3.   At the time of adoption of this chapter, if an expansion of a
nonconforming use is in progress, that is, if at least a building permit for
the expansion has been issued, then such expansion may be completed as
specified in the building permit; and
            4.   When any nonconforming use of a building or structure is
discontinued for a period in excess of 60 days, the building or structure shall
not thereafter be used except in conformance with the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
   (D)   Reconstruction of damaged buildings or structures. Any nonconforming
use of a structure or nonconforming structure which has been damaged by fire,
wind, flood, or other causes, may be repaired and used as before provided:
      (1)   Repairs are initiated within 12 months and completed within two
years of such damage;
      (2)   The total amount of space devoted to a nonconforming use may not be
increased; and
      (3)   Reconstructed buildings may not be more nonconforming with respect
to dimensional restrictions.
   (E)   Nonconforming home occupation. Any property owner whose home
occupation was made nonconforming by the ordinance amendment adopted on July 9,
2002, shall have until July 8, 2005 to conform to the current terms of the
ordinance.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed  6-8-2021)
§ 153.037 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES OR BUILDINGS UTILIZED AS DWELLINGS.
   (A)   Upon adoption of this chapter, accessory buildings used as dwelling
units and occupied by a “family” (see definition in §
153.004) member shall be a conforming use. Such units occupied by a non-family
member shall be nonconforming uses.
   (B)   (1)   The definitions and provisions of this chapter provide for this
situation.
      (2)   Therefore, the following shall apply:
         (a)   An existing accessory structure occupied at the time of adoption
of this chapter by a non-family member can continue to be used for such
purpose. If the unit occupied by a non-family member becomes vacant for more
than 60 days (see §
153.036(C)(2)(c)4.), then such unit could only be reoccupied by a family
member.
         (b)   New accessory structures intended for use as dwellings shall
only be occupied by a family member.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.038 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   (A)   Off-street automobile storage or parking space shall be provided on
every lot on which any of the following uses are hereafter established in all
districts. The number of parking spaces provided shall be at least as great as
the number specified below for various uses. When application of said provision
results in a fractional space requirement, the next larger requirement shall
prevail.
   (B)   Each lot abutting a major thoroughfare shall be provided with
vehicular access thereto and shall be provided with adequate space for turning
so that no vehicle shall be required to back into the street. A parking space
shall consist of an area not less than ten feet by 20 feet, plus the necessary
access space unless otherwise authorized by the Board of Adjustment.
      (1)   Minimum parking requirements. The required number of off-street
parking spaces specified below for each use shall be provided.
Residential Uses Required Parking
Residential  Required Parking
Uses
Business and Consumer Services of All Kinds
Business and
special      1 space for each students
schools
Clubs and    1 space for each 3 members
lodges
Day nursery
and private
space for    1 space for each staff member, plus 1 space for each 5 students
each
kindergarten
Business Uses
Commercial
services;    1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor
retail space
Medical and
dental       5 spaces per doctor or dentist
offices
Professional
and business 1 space for each 300 square feet of gross floor space
offices
Public and Semi-Public Uses
Churches     1 space for each 4 seats in the principal assembly room
Public
building     1 space for each 200 square feet of gross floor space
space
             2 spaces for every tennis, squash, or racquetball court; health exercise
Recreational facility—1 space per 50 square feet; golf or country clubs— 2 spaces per tee;
facilities   places of recreation and assembly shall have 1 space for each 200 square feet of
             gross floor space
Schools;     1 space for each classroom and administrative office, plus 1 space for each 20
public/      seats or 1 space for each 400 square feet of area used primarily for public
private      assembly
Residential Uses
Residential
dwellings in
a            2 spaces for each dwelling unit
residential
planned unit
development
Residential
dwellings,   2 spaces for each dwelling unit
single-
family
 
      (2)   On-site parking of vehicles.
         (a)   All motorized vehicles (including, but not limited to, cars,
trucks, motorcycles, mopeds/scooters, golf carts) must be parked entirely upon
a prepared driveway/parking surface (asphalt/pavement, concrete, pavers,
gravel, pebbles) located on the lot or tract, or located on any adjoining lots
or tracts, of the principal residence or structure. Parking on grassed areas,
dirt/soil areas, mulched areas, landscaped areas, or any other natural areas of
a lot or tract is expressly prohibited. This provision is applicable to all
zoning districts within the town.
         (b)   Temporary parking (less than five hours per day) is excepted
from the requirements of this section for vehicles operated by persons who are
visiting the owners or occupiers of the residence.
         (c)   Nothing herein shall be deemed to modify or impact, in any way,
the requirements found under §
153.071, “Recreational and Commercial Vehicle Storage."
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.039 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE.
   Every lot, on which a business is hereafter established, shall provide space
as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street.
For the purpose of this section, an off-street loading space shall have the
minimum dimensions of 12 feet by 40 feet, and an overhead clearance of 14 feet
in height. All businesses shall have at least one such space.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.040 NO LOT SUBDIVISION OF PLATTED AND RECORDED LOTS.
   (A)   It is the express intention and purpose of this chapter to preserve
the town as primarily a low- density residential area. To this end, subject to
§
153.042, the number of lots within the town shall be limited to those lots as
shown on plats recorded in the County Register of Deeds. Therefore, upon
adoption of this chapter, all lots in the town that have been previously
platted and recorded with the County Register of Deeds shall be deemed and
established as individual lots, and shall remain individual lots, and shall not
be subdivided.
   (B)   If an owner has acquired contiguous or adjoining lots, and the
terminology of the deeds or other instruments of conveyance expresses intent
that the lots shall be joined together as one residential lot, the lots shall
thereafter be considered as one residential lot and shall not be subdivided
into individual lots. If an owner of contiguous or adjoining lots develops the
lots together, locating a residence on such lot or lots, and has landscaped the
same or located other improvements, structures, or amenities on the lots so
that from the standpoint of utility or appearance the lots seem to constitute
one residential site, then the property shall not thereafter be subdivided, nor
revert back to individual, separate lots.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall preclude property owners from subdividing
unimproved previously platted and recorded lots, so as to enlarge existing
residential lots or building sites. This subdivided lot shall not thereafter be
reestablished as a separate residential lot.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.041 MINIMUM DWELLING UNIT SIZE.
   (A)   Each dwelling unit hereafter erected on any lot shall contain the
following specified minimum living area floor space.
   (B)   Basement areas shall not be counted as a story and floor space
contained in basement areas shall not be included in the minimum required
living area floor space.
      (1)   Dwelling units consisting of a single or one primary story with
living area as defined in this chapter shall contain a minimum of 2,250 square
feet of living area.
      (2)   Dwelling units consisting of two or more primary stories with
living area as defined in this chapter shall contain a minimum of 1,500 square
feet of living area on the first story, and a minimum of 750 square feet of
living area on the second story.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed  6-8-2021)
§ 153.042 SUBDIVISION OF TRACTS OF LAND.
   (A)   An owner of a tract of land which has not been subdivided and platted
into residential lots, but desiring such subdivision and platting, shall
prepare a plat and submit same for approval to the Planning Commission.
   (B)   Provisions shall be made for all utilities and access necessary to
properly service said subdivision, subject to the provisions of Ch. 152. All
other requirements of this chapter shall likewise be applicable to said
subdivision before said owner shall be allowed to subdivide the tract of land.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed  6-8-2021)
§ 153.043 MAXIMUM ROOF COVERAGE.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   The MAXIMUM ROOF COVERAGE is defined as the total area
under roof, of all primary and accessory structures and buildings, on the lot.
This is measured from the outside edge of the gutter, if any, vertically to the
ground.
         (b)   The maximum roof coverage assures the total size of buildings
and structures is proportional to the size of the lot.
      (2)   The maximum roof coverage permitted is as follows:
The below table can also be used by simply rounding up or down to the nearest
lot acreage. For lots larger than five and one-half acres or for exact MRC
allowances for lots falling between points in the below table, the below
equation shall be used as the definitive allowance.
Lot Size Max. Roof Lot Size Max. Roof Coverage Lot Size Max. Roof Coverage
(Acres)  Coverage  (Acres)  (Ft.2)             (Acres)  (Ft.2)
         (Ft.2)
Lot Size Max. Roof Lot Size Max. Roof Coverage Lot Size Max. Roof Coverage
(Acres)  Coverage  (Acres)  (Ft.2)             (Acres)  (Ft.2)
         (Ft.2)
0.50     2,552     1.60     5,836              3.25     7,837
0.60     3,067     1.70     6,008              3.50     8,047
0.70     3,502     1.80     6,169              3.75     8,241
0.80     3,879     1.90     6,322              4.00     8,424
0.90     4,212     2.00     6.467              4.25     8,595
1.00     4,509     2.20     6,736              4.50     8,756
1.10     4,779     2.40     6,981              4.75     8,921
1.20     5,024     2.60     7,207              5.00     9,054
1.30     5,250     2.80     7,417              5.25     9,191
1.40     5,459     3.00     7,611              5.50     9,325
1.50     5,654                                        
 
   (B)   (1)   Lots exceeding six acres in size. Multiply the lot size by
43,560; multiply this number by 3.25% (0.0325); provided, that the result is
less than 9,647, structures on the lot may have maximum roof coverage of 9,647
square feet.
      (2)   If the result is greater than 9,647, structures on the lot may have
maximum roof coverage equal to the result produced by the multiplication.
   (C)   All structures exceeding the maximum roof coverage for the lot on
which they are located shall require approval of a variance by the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in §
153.110(D).
   (D)   The equation which may also be used to calculate MRC is: MRC = 2823.5
LN (Acreage), where ‘LN’ is the natural logarithm mathematical function. This
may be calculated using Excel, if needed.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 7-1-2023)
§ 153.044 MATERIAL AND COLOR REQUIREMENTS FOR RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   The town is a unique community concerned with historic continuity. The
town and its citizens are interested in the exterior appearance of residential
structures, including the materials and color used in constructing and
reconstructing such structures. To that end, those persons constructing new
residences or renovating or expanding existing residences are encouraged to
consider the provisions of this section regarding building materials
   (B)   Regulation of exterior materials and colors of these structures will
provide protection of the aesthetic and historic character and preserve the
economic stability of the town.
      (1)   Materials.
         (a)   The intent of these provisions is to promote the exterior
building materials which will blend with the majority of the existing
residential structures and natural features of the town.
         (b)   As required in §
153.087, the application for the zoning compliance certificate shall be
accompanied by the description of the materials to be used for the exterior
siding and roofing materials.
            1.   Siding.
               a.   Suggested exterior siding materials. Painted or stained
wood shingles or clapboards, stone and/or brick masonry, stucco, exterior
insulation and finish system (EIFS), pre-painted aluminum, or heavy gauge vinyl
to resemble clapboards, pre-cast concrete panels, fiber cement siding,
cultured/cast stone, or as approved by the Design Review Board; and
               b.    The following exterior siding materials are discouraged.
Exposed or painted concrete masonry units, light gauge vinyl siding, unpainted
aluminum siding, exposed or painted concrete, paper or wood composition board,
permastone or faux stone masonry, plywood (unless board and batten), asphalt
shingles, ceramic tile (glazed wall tile, ceramic mosaic tile, natural clay
tile, and the like), sheet glass, or glass block (not to include glass used for
windows, sunrooms or conservatories), glazed brick.
            2.   Roofing visible from adjacent property.
               a.   Suggested roofing materials. Asphalt/fiberglass shingles,
cedar shakes or shingles, clay or concrete tile, slate, copper, factory painted
metal shingles or standing seam with concealed fasteners, or as approved by the
Design Review Board; and
               b.   The following roofing materials are discouraged. Tin,
unpainted aluminum, galvanized steel, asphaltic roll roofing, composition
rubber, EPDM or PVC single ply roofing fabric, tar and gravel, asphalt and
gravel.
      (2)   Color. The intent of these provisions is to promote colors which
blend with the existing structures and preserve the existing visual
environment. It is further the intent of these regulations to prevent exterior
paints or stains which are distracting and present inappropriate color contrast
to the surrounding natural and built environment.
         (a)   Suggested exterior colors. Natural and weathered stone and wood,
earth tones (subdued colors and stains), including bleached tones and stains,
or other colors which conform to the intent expressed in this division (B)(2).
Dwellings which are painted in colors that are considered to be nonconforming
at the time of the adoption of this chapter may not be repainted the same
color; and
         (b)   The following exterior colors are discouraged. The use of day-
glow or fluorescent colors is discouraged.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.045 SITE DESIGN AND BUILDING FORM AND MASS FOR RESIDENTIAL DWELLING
UNITS.
   (A)   (1)   The town is a unique community and it is within the public
interest and general welfare of the town to regulate the site design and
building form and mass encompassing all residential structures.
      (2)   Site design shall include grading, surface water drainage,
preservation and restoration of existing flora, all landscape features,
including drives, walks, patios, freestanding walls, fencing, and plantings.
   (B)   Of particular concern is preservation of the streetscape, signs,
lighting, trees, and bushes alongside the public thoroughfare. Form and mass
shall refer to size and shape of the residential structures.
      (1)   Site materials and features. The intent of these provisions is to
encourage site materials and features which blend with the existing visual
environment, e.g., native flora and curvilinear roadways.
         (a)   Built of planted landscape elements.
            1.   Permitted. All native flora and materials, (e.g., trees,
bushes, flowers, stone, asphalt or concrete pavement, concrete masonry paving
units); and
            2.   Prohibited. Abrupt physical configurations, (e.g., site
revisions causing excessive tree removal, land slope revisions greater than
natural repose).
         (b)   Site lighting. Permitted; low-intensity security or decorative
lighting, up to two street lamps in front yards not to exceed eight-feet in
height and located a minimum of ten feet from the edge of the road.
      (2)   Prohibited.
         (a)   High-intensity flood or spot lighting of either the buildings or
landscape features, neon. No flickering or flashing lights and all lighting
shall be shielded such that light is not directed toward adjacent residential
properties; and
         (b)   Examples of shielding should be as follows.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/151beccd4b4926efba74f8e2464a97bec552a777/
IMAGES/0-0-0-847.jpg]
 
      (3)   Building forms and mass.
         (a)   Intent. The intent of these provisions is to encourage exterior
building forms which blend with the majority of existing residential structures
and natural features of the town.
         (b)   Roof form.
            1.   The following roof forms are encouraged. Gable, mansard, hip,
gambrel, shed, pyramidal, salt box, barrel, vault, and arch; and
            2.   The following roof forms are discouraged as inconsistent with
existing structures in the town. Trapezoidal, butterfly, complex curvilinear
(screw, bullet, mushroom shape), conical, polygonal (except as roof of minor
tower), A-frame, Quonset huts, geodesic domes, and roundettes.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.046 MATERIAL AND COLOR REQUIREMENTS FOR COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS.
   (A)   The town is a unique community which is dependent on historic
continuity with its past. It is within the public interest and general welfare
of the town to regulate the exterior appearance of commercial structures,
including the exterior materials and color used in constructing and
reconstructing and painting buildings.
   (B)   Regulation of exterior materials and colors of these structures will
provide protection of the aesthetic and historic character and preserve the
economic stability of the town.
      (1)   Materials. The intent of these provisions is to promote the use of
exterior building materials that will blend with the existing commercial
structures and natural features of the town. As required in § 153.087(B)(1),
the application for the zoning compliance certificate shall be accompanied by
the description of the materials to be used for the exterior siding and roofing
materials.
         (a)   Siding.
            1.   Permitted exterior materials. Painted or stained wood shingles
or clapboards, stone and/or brick masonry, stucco, exterior insulation and
finish system (EIFS), pre-painted aluminum, or heavy gauge vinyl to resemble
clapboards, precast concrete panels or siding, cultured/cast stone, or as
approved by the Design Review Board; and
            2.   Prohibited exterior materials. Exposed or painted concrete
masonry units, light gauge vinyl siding, unpainted aluminum siding, exposed or
painted cast-in-place concrete, paper or wood composition board, permastone or
faux stone masonry, plywood, (unless board and batten), asphalt shingles,
ceramic tile, (glazed wall tile, ceramic mosaic tile, natural clay tile, and
the like), glazed brick, unpainted, or pre-painted ferrous or aluminum metal
siding.
         (b)   Roofing visible from on-site location or adjacent property.
            1.   Permitted roofing materials. Asphalt/fiberglass shingles,
cedar shakes or shingles, clay or concrete tile, slate, copper, factory painted
metal shingles or standing seam with concealed fasteners or roofing as approved
by the Design Review Board; and
            2.   Prohibited roofing materials. Tin, unpainted aluminum,
galvanized steel, asphaltic roll roofing, composition rubber, EPDM or PVC
single ply roofing fabric, tar and gravel, asphalt and gravel, solar panels
(unless integrated into new construction). Note that for commercial buildings,
flat roofs not visible from residential dwellings may use the above-mentioned
roofing materials.
      (2)   Color. The intent of these provisions is to promote colors that
blend with the existing structures and preserve the existing visual
environment. It is further the intent of these regulations to prevent exterior
paints or stains that are distracting and present inappropriate color contrast
to the surrounding natural and built environment.
         (a)   Permitted exterior colors. Natural and weathered stone and wood,
earth tones (subdued colors and stains), including bleached tones and stains or
other colors which conform to the intent expressed in this division (B)(2).
         (b)   Prohibited exterior colors. Day-glow or fluorescent.
      (3)   Mechanical/electrical equipment.
         (a)   All electric service equipment and sub-panels and all mechanical
equipment, including, but not limited to, air-conditioning, pool equipment,
fans and vents, utility transformers (except those owned and maintained by
public utility companies), and solar panels, shall be painted to match the
surrounding wall or roof color or painted or screened to blend with the
surrounding natural terrain. Roof-mounted equipment and vents shall be painted
to match the roof and/or adjacent wall color and shall be screened or
integrated into the design of the structure.
         (b)   Roof-mounted equipment, including ventilators and satellite
dishes, shall be completely screened from view (100% opacity) or isolated so as
not to be visible from any public right-of-way or residential zoning district.
Roof screens when used shall be coordinated with the building to maintain a
unified appearance.
         (c)   1.   All electrical and mechanical equipment located at ground
level shall be screened from view (100% opacity) or isolated so as not to be
visible from the right-of-way of an arterial street or residential zoning
district. Such screens and enclosures, when used, shall be coordinated with the
buildings to maintain a unified appearance.
            2.   Acoustical buffering is required for all emergency generators
to reduce the noise level as audible from the nearest residential dwelling to
that of the standard commercial air conditioning compressor.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.047 SITE DESIGN AND BUILDING FORM AND MASS COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS.
   (A)   The town is a unique community and it is within the public interest
and general welfare of the town to regulate the site design and building form
and mass encompassing all commercial structures.
   (B)   Site design shall include grading, surface water drainage,
preservation and restoration of existing flora, all landscape features,
including drives, walks, patios, freestanding walls, fencing, and plantings. Of
particular concern is preservation of the streetscape; signs, lighting, trees
and bushes alongside the public thoroughfare. Form and mass shall refer to size
and shape of the commercial structures.
      (1)   Site materials and features. The intent of these provisions is to
encourage site materials and features which blend with the existing visual
environment, (e.g., native flora and curvilinear roadways).
         (a)   Built or planted landscape elements.
            1.   Permitted. All native flora and materials, (e.g., trees,
bushes, flowers, stone, asphalt or concrete pavement, concrete or brick masonry
paving units). Refer to §§
93.30 through
93.40 for tree removal regulations.
            2.   Prohibited. Final grades that result in slopes greater than 1:
1; retaining walls that exceed seven feet in height for property zoned (R-4)
and exceed 12 feet in height for property zoned (R-5).
         (b)   Site lighting/exterior lighting. With the exception of Americans
with Disabilities Act, being 42 U.S.C. § 12101, lighting requirements and
street lighting, the following design standards shall apply when exterior
lighting is proposed and/or required:
            1.   Shielding.
               a.   Exterior lighting shall be shielded and directed downward
so that the light source (the actual bulb) is not visible from beyond the
property line on which the structure is located.
               b.   Exterior lighting shall not project above the horizontal
plane of the building.
            2.   Color. Warm lighting colors are required.
               a.   The blue-white colors of florescent and mercury vapor lamps
are prohibited.
               b.   Lamps emitting a color temperature in excess of 5,000
degrees Kelvin are prohibited.
            3.   Parking area lighting. In parking lots, a foot candle as
approved by the town’s lighting consultant at the perimeter, and between light
sources, and a maximum of 5.0 foot candles under light fixtures as required.
            4.   Light fixtures.
               a.   The height of light fixtures shall be in proportion to the
building mass and no more than 14 feet high.
               b.   When all businesses are closed, only a minimum of security
lighting shall be maintained. Shielded spotlights may be used when highlighting
trees, artwork, or other special landscape features. Lighting fixtures affixed
to structures for the purposes of lighting parking areas shall be prohibited.
            5.   Advertising. The operation of searchlights or similar sources
for advertising, display or any other commercial purpose is prohibited.
      (2)   Building forms and mass.
         (a)   Intent. The intent of these provisions is to encourage exterior
building forms which blend with the majority of existing commercial structures
and natural features of the town.
         (b)   Roof form.
            1.   Permitted. Gable, mansard, hip, gambrel, shed, pyramidal, salt
box, barrel, vault, arch, and flat; and
            2.   Prohibited. Trapezoidal, butterfly, complex curvilinear
(screw, bullet, mushroom shape), conical, polygonal (except as roof of minor
tower), A-frame, Quonset huts, geodesic domes, and roundettes.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.048 IMPERVIOUS SURFACE COVERAGE.
   (A)   (1)   The maximum percentage of a residential lot that can be devoted
to impervious surfaces, as defined in §
153.004, is established to assure that the character of the town is preserved
and to control stormwater and runoff directed to the streets and adjacent
properties.
      (2)   The maximum impervious coverage is proportional to the lot size.
The maximum area permitted is as follows:
Lot Size Max. Impervious Lot Size Max. Impervious Lot Size Max. Impervious
(Acres)  Surface         (Acres)  Surface         (Acres)  Surface
         (Ft.2)                   (Ft.2)                   (Ft.2)
Lot Size Max. Impervious Lot Size Max. Impervious Lot Size Max. Impervious
(Acres)  Surface         (Acres)  Surface         (Acres)  Surface
         (Ft.2)                   (Ft.2)                   (Ft.2)
0.50     8,102           1.60     18,352          3.25     24,597
0.60     9,708           1.70     18,886          3.50     25,250
0.70     11,067          1.80     19,390          3.75     25,858
0.80     12,244          1.90     19,886          4.00     26,427
0.90     13,282          2.00     20,318          4.25     26,961
1.00     14,310          2.20     21,158          4.50     27,465
1.10     15,050          2.40     21,925          4.75     27,941
1.20     15,817          2.60     22,630          5.00     28,393
1.30     16,522          2.80     23,284          5.25     29,233
1.40     17,175          3.00     23,892          5.50     29,625
1.50     17,783                                          
 
   (B)   Lots on which new construction and/or development activity could cause
the amount of impervious surface on the lot to exceed the amounts set forth
above shall proceed with the proposed construction and/or development activity
only if a variance for the increased impervious surface coverage is granted by
the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
153.110(D).
   (C)   The Board of Adjustment reserves the right to limit impervious surface
coverage to prevent the unreasonable diversion of stormwater or surface water
onto another property or properties or to the town streets.
   (D)   The equation which may also be used to calculate maximum impervious
coverage (MIC) is: MIC= 8812.5 LN (Acreage), where ‘LN’ is the natural
logarithm mathematical function. This may be calculated using Excel, if
necessary.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 7-1-2023)
§ 153.049 FENCE, GATE AND WALL REGULATIONS.
   The Board of Commissioners for the Town of Biltmore Forest that the
following amendments to the Zoning Ordinance and subsequent regulations be
placed on fence, gate, and wall construction and replacement as of the
effective date of this section.
   (A)   New fences, gates or walls may be approved by the Board of Adjustment
as a special use, so long as the gate, fence or wall meets the following
requirements.
      (1)   The fence, gate, or wall is constructed entirely within the rear
yard, is not located in any side or rear yard setbacks, and is constructed of
materials deemed acceptable in § 153.049(D).
      (2)   Mature vegetation or other buffering sufficient to screen the
fence, gate, or wall from neighboring properties shall be required to the
extent necessary.
   (B)   A driveway gate and supporting columns may be approved by the Board of
Adjustment as a special use so long as it meets the following requirements:
      (1)   The driveway gate and columns shall not be located in the front or
side yard setback of a property.
      (2)   The driveway gate shall not be more than eight feet in height.
      (3)   The driveway gate must provide access for emergency services and
first responders. This may be done via a lockbox code, strobe or siren
activation switch, or other method with demonstrated reliability.
      (4)   The driveway gate must open wide enough to provide for ingress and
egress of emergency vehicles. The minimum acceptable standard is for the gate
access to be 14 feet wide with a 14 foot minimum height clearance.
   (C)   Replacement of existing fences, gates , and walls shall be approved by
the Board of Adjustment as a special use so long as the replacement fence is
constructed of materials deemed acceptable in §
153.049(D) and meets the requirements below. A special use permit application
to replace an existing fence, gate, or wall shall include a photograph of the
existing fence or wall, specify the type of fence, gate, or wall, include a map
or sketch depicting the height and length of the fence, gate, or wall and state
whether or not the fence, gate, or wall is located within any setbacks.
      (1)   Existing chain link fences or gates shall not be replaced with new
chain link fences or gates.
      (2)   Existing fences, gates, or walls in the front yard shall not be
replaced. No new fences, gates, or walls shall be allowed in the front yard.
      (3)   Repair of more than half of an existing fence, gate, or wall shall
be considered a replacement and shall be subject to this section.
   (D)   Acceptable materials and standards for fences and walls/maintenance.
The following materials and standards for fences and walls shall be deemed
acceptable.
      (1)   Wooden fencing or gates shall be of natural color or painted in a
manner compatible with the residence and the lot.
      (2)   Non-wooden fencing and gates shall be black, dark green or brown
and shall blend with surrounding trees or vegetation.
      (3)   No new chain link fencing or gates shall be allowed.
      (4)   Fences shall not exceed six feet in height except that fences
designed to prevent deer or other wildlife from entering the property shall not
exceed ten feet in height. Deer fences shall be constructed in accordance with
North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission standards for “Permanent Woven
Wire Fencing” and “Permanent Solid-Wire Fencing.” Copies of these standards are
available at the Town Hall or at the following web address (https://
www.nxwildlife.ord/Learning/Species/Mammals/Whitetail-Deer/Fencing-to-Exclude-
Deer#42041180-permanent-fencing).
      (5)   Wall s should be constructed of stone or similar material, and
shall be compatible with the construction materials of the house located on the
same property.
      (6)   When a fence, gate or wall is not properly maintained or fails to
comply with condition(s) imposed by the Board of Adjustment, the town shall
required the property owner to repair the fence, gate, or wall, or, remove the
fence, gate, or wall at the property owner’s expense. If the property owner
fails to repair or remove the fence, gate, or wall, the town may remove the
fence, gate, or wall and recover the cost of removal, including the cost of
disposal, if any, from the property owner.
(Ord. passed 2-11-2020; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
TREE PRESERVATION
§ 153.050 PURPOSE.
   (A)   In order to maintain the unique characteristics of the town as a
residential neighborhood with a history beginning as part of the Vanderbilt
Estate, it is necessary to preserve the traditional appearance of Biltmore
Forest as a true forest. This is particularly true of trees along the roads and
around the perimeter of lots. Trees provide buffer and a natural canopy, and
are a hallmark of the town requiring protection. The town is focused on
maintaining the current health of the forest and increasing species diversity,
with a primary goal to replace hardwood trees, other native trees, and trees of
preference more quickly. Trees provide shade, cooling, noise and wind
reduction, prevent soil erosion, produce oxygen, filter dust, and absorb carbon
dioxide. Trees also provide natural habitat and aesthetic enhancement in the
town.
   (B)   Preservation and appropriate replacement of trees is the intent of
this chapter. This chapter shall apply to all properties within the town except
as noted in division (C) below.
   (C)   This chapter does not apply to properties owned, leased, or controlled
by the town. This chapter does not apply to properties that perform forestry
activity on forestland taxed on the basis of its present-use value as
forestland under G.S. Article 12, Chapter 105. Once an active forestry
management plan is no longer in place, the exception for the property will be
removed. Property owners with an active forestry management plan shall provide
a current copy of this plan to the town each calendar year by January 31.
   (D)   This subchapter applies to residential and non-residential tree
removal that does not involve construction activity. Refer to §
153.034 for landscaping plan requirements and §
153.061 for tree removal and replacement guidelines related to all construction
activity.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.051 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NON-RESIDENTIAL USES. For the purposes of this chapter, non-residential uses
may include specific uses found throughout the town that do not encompass
single-family or multi-family residential dwellings. These uses may exist
within a residential zoning district, but by actual use, are not residential in
nature. Examples of these uses include, but are not limited to, public or
private schools; country, athletic, and social clubs; medical or dental offices
and campuses.
   ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATOR. For the purposes of this chapter, the ordinance
administrator charged with administration, inspection, review, and enforcement
is the Town Manager or his or her designee.
   OUTDOOR RECREATION ACTIVITIES. Leisure-time activities, usually of a formal
nature and often performed with others, requiring equipment, and taking place
at prescribed non-residential places, sites, or fields. Active recreational
uses and supporting services include swimming, tennis, golf, baseball and other
field sports, track, and playground activities.
   PROTECTED TREE. A protected tree is any tree six inches or more in diameter
at a height of four and one-half feet from the ground (DBH-diameter at breast
height) that is in sound, healthy condition.
   RECOMMENDED PLANTING LIST (RPL). A list developed and updated by the town
arborist that includes preferred species based on the tree being removed and
acceptable replacement locations. For all replanting requirements, a minimum of
50% of the total replacement trees must come from the RPL with 25% of the total
replacement trees being those species identified as trees of preference, as
defined below. A minimum of one tree scheduled for replacement shall come from
the tree of preference (TOP) list as defined below. The replanting list may be
updated periodically and is available on the town’s website.
   RESIDENTIAL USES. For the purposes of this chapter, residential uses include
single-family detached dwelling units found within the R-1, R-2, and R-3 zoning
districts and includes attached multi-family residential units found within the
R-1, R-2, and R-3 zoning districts.
   SETBACKS. The minimum yard setback requirement found in §
153.007. INSIDE SETBACK AREA is the length found from the street or property
line, and OUTSIDE SETBACK AREA is the remainder of the property area. An
example of setback locations are shown below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/151beccd4b4926efba74f8e2464a97bec552a777/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1017.jpg]
   TREES OF PREFERENCE (TOP ). Trees that warrant additional attention and
regulation due to being a preferred native species or having distinctive height
and/or diameter. TREES OF PREFERENCE include any healthy, living tree with the
following characteristics.
      (1)   Has a trunk diameter at breast height (DBH) of 36 inches or more;
      (2)   Any tree native to North Carolina per the United States Department
of Agriculture Natural Resource Conservation Service Plants Database with a
trunk DBH of 30 inches or more.
   UNPROTECTED TREE. A tree that is six inches or more in diameter at a height
of four and one-half feet from the ground, and is dead, produces no foliage
during normal growing seasons, or a tree that is diseased or damaged to the
extent that it is structurally compromised and poses a safety hazard, or a tree
that, for any other reason, poses a safety hazard. Safety hazard concerns are
evaluated by the town arborist in accordance with best management practices
developed by the International Society of Arboriculture (ISA).
   UNREGULATED TREE. A tree that is less than six inches in diameter,
regardless of height or species, is to be unregulated and not subject to the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.052 REMOVAL OF PROTECTED TREES.
   (A)   No person shall remove or in any way damage any protected tree on a
property without receiving approval from the appropriate regulatory review body
for the removal and paying any applicable fee. Any protected trees removed
shall be replaced as outlined in §
153.057 below.
   (B)   If the Ordinance Administrator concludes the removal of the number of
protected trees requested would be undesirable, and not within the letter or
intent of this chapter, he or she may refuse to approve such removal, or permit
the removal of a lesser number of protected trees. Further, in his or her
discretion, the Ordinance Administrator may require that the applicant provide
a tree survey showing the location, size, and type of protected trees on a
property, including common scientific names. The tree survey shall clearly
indicate which protected trees are indicated for removal and which will be left
undisturbed. In the case of new construction, the site plan must show the
location of building, driveways, terraces, and other structures on the
property. All protected trees must be clearly tagged as to retention or
removal. The Ordinance Administrator may also require an applicant to provide
documentary evidence, in the form of a survey or other documentation
sufficient, in the opinion of the Ordinance Administrator, to confirm that the
protected tree(s) are on the applicant’s property. An applicant has the right
to appeal a decision of the Ordinance Administrator to the Board of Adjustment
within five business days of the decision.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.053 APPLICATIONS FOR REMOVAL OF MORE THAN TEN PROTECTED TREES.
   An application to remove more than ten protected trees in 12 successive
months shall be made to the appropriate regulatory review authority as shown
below. A fee for this application shall be paid along with the application.
 
Table 1 - Regulatory Review Body Requirements
Protected Trees Requested for Removal Regulatory Review Body
1-10 trees                            Ordinance Administrator
11-30 trees                           Board of Adjustment
31+ trees                             Board of Commissioners
 
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.054 REMOVAL OF UNPROTECTED TREES.
   (A)   An unprotected tree may be removed by the property owner after
notifying the town of the plans to remove the tree(s) and receiving approval to
do so from the Ordinance Administrator.
   (B)   The Ordinance Administrator may require the property owner to retain a
certified arborist to render an opinion as to the health and structural
integrity of the tree(s) in question and report the findings, in writing, to
the town before final approval is given. The town reserves the right to consult
with its own tree specialist to confirm the health and condition of any tree(s)
prior to removal.
   (C)   Any unprotected trees removed shall be replaced as defined in §
153.057 below.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.055 ENFORCEMENT.
   Any unauthorized removal, cutting, or damage to protected or unprotected
tree(s) may result in the Ordinance Administrator placing a stop-work order on
any activity on the property. This order shall remain in effect until all
corrections are made to bring the property into compliance with this chapter,
up to and including a final landscaping plan showing the full tree replacement
as required by §
153.057 below.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.056 DRIP LINE PROTECTION.
   The health of protected trees requires the prevention of soil disturbance
within the drip line of the trees. Covering this area with pavement or other
materials, including excess soil, can affect the health of the tree. Final
landscape plans shall protect this area around the tree and denote tree save
areas on the plan.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.057 REPLACEMENT OF TREES.
   (A)   The replacement of protected and unprotected trees and trees of
preference shall be established in accordance with the following requirements.
Table 2 - Residential Tree Replacement Requirements
                           Inside setback area   Outside setback area
Size of tree removed (DBH) Protected Unprotected Protected Unprotected
                           Qty Size  Qty Size    Qty Size  Qty Size
Table 2 - Residential Tree Replacement Requirements
                           Inside setback area   Outside setback area
Size of tree removed (DBH) Protected Unprotected Protected Unprotected
                           Qty Size  Qty Size    Qty Size  Qty Size
6"-12"                     1   2"    x   x       x   x     x   x
13"-18"                    1   2"    1   2"      1   2"    x   x
19"-36"                    1*  3"    1   2"      1   2"    x   x
36"+T                      1** 3"    1*  3"      2   2"    1   2"
*   Must include a minimum of three screening/buffering trees as
defined in RPL
**   Must include a minimum of five screening/buffering trees as
defined in RPL
T   If removed trees include identified trees of preference (TOP)
species, replanting requirements will follow 36"+ DBH requirements
 
Table 3 - Non-Residential Tree Replacement Requirements
                           Inside setback area   Outside setback area
Size of tree removed (DBH) Protected Unprotected Protected Unprotected
                           Qty Size  Qty Size    Qty Size  Qty Size
6"-12"                     1   2"    x   x       x   x     x   x
13"-18"                    2   2"    x   x       1   2"    x   x
19"-36"                    2*  3"    1   2"      1   3"    x   x
36"+T                      2** 4"    1*  3"      1   4"    1   3"
*   Must include a minimum of three screening/buffering trees as
defined in RPL
**   Must include a minimum of five screening/buffering trees as
defined in RPL
T   If removed trees include identified trees of preference (TOP)
species, replanting requirements will follow 36"+ DBH requirements
 
   (B)   A replacement tree may be planted up to one year prior to the removal
of any tree in order to count toward replacement. Replacement trees planted
after existing tree removal shall be in the ground within six months of removal
of the original tree. The Ordinance Administrator may, for good cause shown,
and in his or her sole discretion, extend this period for an additional six
months.
   (C)   The town’s recommended planting list (RPL) shall be utilized by
applicants when determining what species of trees are to be replanted. A
minimum of 50% of the total replacement trees shall come from the RPL with a
minimum of 25% of total replacement trees coming from the trees of preference
(TOP) list. A minimum of one tree scheduled for replacement shall come from the
tree of preference (TOP) list. Variation from these requirements must be
granted by the Ordinance Administrator prior to approval and planting.
   (D)   See the above charts for the minimum replacement size for all
deciduous trees. Evergreen trees that are planted as replacement trees shall be
a minimum of six feet in height at the time of planting.
   (E)   (1)   Depending on the proximity of other trees and/or structures,
lesser quantities of replacement trees may be authorized by the Ordinance
Administrator or by the Board of Adjustment (in the case of an appeal to the
town) or the Ordinance Administrator may authorize the replanting or
replacement of trees in a location or locations where such replacement trees
are more likely to survive. For existing residential lots where mature canopies
remain after tree removal, replacement requirements may be amended regarding
location and species to provide the best opportunity for healthy growth. This
replacement requirement discretion is meant solely to allow for maintenance of
existing residential lots where the canopy is thick and growing new trees would
be impractical and/or difficult. This allowance is not intended for new
residential construction.
      (2)   For non-residential lots, if replanting inside the setback results
in an adverse condition to town roads, other public property, other private
property, or results in an undue hardship for an outdoor recreation activity, a
variance application may be filed with the Board of Adjustment to replant the
appropriate number of trees in a different location.
      (3)   Non-residential properties that include an outdoor recreation
activity as a primary purpose, as defined above, are provided a tree removal
allowance not to exceed net 50 trees outside the setback of the property in a
calendar year. Net removal is defined as the number of protected trees removed
minus the number of trees re-planted on the property where the outdoor
recreation activity occurs. Prior to removal of trees pursuant to this section,
the property owner should submit to the Ordinance Administrator notice of the
tree(s) to be removed. For purposes of this net removal allowance, a property
owner needs only to submit to the Ordinance Administrator documentation of any
protected trees removed and any trees replanted as a record of same for each
calendar year. Unprotected trees outside the setback of a non-residential
property with an outdoor recreation activity as a primary purpose may be
removed without replacement, provided that notice is given to the Ordinance
Administrator regarding the necessity for removal.
   (F)   The town encourages a diversity of species during replanting, with a
focus on replenishing hardwood trees within the forest. However, to provide
appropriate screening and buffering, particularly among non-residential uses,
trees that have a lower canopy (height) at maturity are also encouraged for
inclusion in a replanting plan. This combination will ensure the canopy is
varied in both height and species.
   (G)   Replacement trees shall not be planted within the town’s right-of-way
or in an area to obstruct the view of traffic.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.058 INSPECTIONS, APPEALS, BOND, AND PENALTY.
   (A)   All protected trees designated to remain, pursuant to a tree survey,
plus any replacement trees shall be inspected by the Ordinance Administrator
six months following any construction to ensure the trees are in a healthy
condition. The Ordinance Administrator may require replacement or replanting of
replacement trees if the appropriate replacement trees are not in place during
this review.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by a decision made under this subchapter by the
Ordinance Administrator may file, within five days after the date of such
decision, a petition to have such decision reviewed and acted upon by the Board
of Adjustment. The decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be subject to
review by the Board of Commissioners.
   (C)   At the option of the town, a bond or other type of guarantee can be
required of the property owner and/or applicant when submitting a tree removal
application to ensure all replanting requirements are met to the satisfaction
of the town.
   (D)   Any violation of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty
provisions found in §
153.999.
(Ord. 2023-06, passed 10-9-2023)
BUFFERS, SCREENING, AND LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.060 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The town has an abundant and diverse tree and vegetative cover that is
essential to the aesthetic value of the town and provides numerous ecological
and economic benefits.
   (B)   Landscape requirements for new construction and substantial additions
are set forth below, in order to:
      (1)   Encourage the preservation of existing trees and vegetation on
undeveloped residential lots and ensure the reforestation of the lot when tree
removal is required for any construction activities.
      (2)   Ensure landscape plans presented to the town include considerations
for native species, reforestation, environmental protection, and effective
stormwater management.
   (C)   The landscape and buffering standards set forth below require buffers
and landscaping between dissimilar land uses, along public rights-of-way, and
within parking lots, in order to:
      (1)   Encourage the preservation of existing trees and vegetation and
replenish removed vegetation;
      (2)   Protect and improve the visual quality of the town and minimize the
negative impacts of development such as noise, dust, litter, glare of lights,
traffic, heat, overcrowding, odor, and views of unsightly parking lots,
utilities, and mechanical systems and buildings;
      (3)   Provide environmental benefits such as climate modification,
decreased energy consumption, reduced stormwater runoff, decreased erosion,
improved water and air quality, and protection of wildlife habitat;
      (4)   Provide a transition between dissimilar land uses to protect
abutting properties from potential negative impacts of neighboring development
and to preserve the character and value of property and to provide a sense of
privacy; and
      (5)   Improve standards for quantity, location, size, spacing,
protection, and maintenance of plants and other screening materials to assure a
high level of quality in the appearance of the town while allowing flexibility
to promote well-designed and creative landscape plantings.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.061 GENERAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Applicability.
      (1)   Buffer strip plantings, street trees, and parking lot trees and
shrubs are required for developments within the town limits.
      (2)   (a)   The following developments are required to be in full
compliance with this section.
         (b)   New residential development, including additions, exceeding more
than 500 square feet of roof coverage, and all nonresidential development,
including special uses; and
      (3)   New parking spaces or lots shall comply with the provisions of §
153.064.
   (B)   Landscape and grading plan required. Applicants are advised to meet
with town staff in order to review all ordinance requirements and procedures
and receive a copy of the plan checklists. As required in §
153.034, a landscape and grading plan meeting town requirements shall be
reviewed and approved prior to any grading.
   (C)   Tree replacement requirements. The following tree replacement
requirements are in place for all developments as defined in division (A)(2).
Table 1 - New Construction Tree Replacement Requirements
                           Inside setback area   Outside setback area
Size of tree removed (DBH) Protected Unprotected Protected Unprotected
                           Qty Size  Qty Size    Qty Size  Qty Size
Table 1 - New Construction Tree Replacement Requirements
                           Inside setback area   Outside setback area
Size of tree removed (DBH) Protected Unprotected Protected Unprotected
                           Qty Size  Qty Size    Qty Size  Qty Size
6"-12"                     1   2"    1   2"      1   2"    x   x
13"-18"                    2   2"    1   2"      2   2"    1   2"
19"-36"                    2*  3"    2   2"      2   3"    2   2"
36"+T                      2** 4"    2*  3"      2   4"    2   3"
*   Must include a minimum of three screening/buffering trees as
defined in RPL
**   Must include a minimum of five screening/buffering trees as
defined in RPL
T   If removed trees include identified trees of preference (TOP)
species, replanting requirements will follow 36"+ DBH requirements
 
   (D)   Alternative compliance.
      (1)   The landscape requirements are intended to set minimum standards
for quality development and environmental protection and are not intended to be
arbitrary or inhibit creative solutions. Site conditions or other reasons may
justify the need to request an alternate method of compliance with the
landscape requirements. The Board of Adjustment, in consultation with the
Design Review Board, may alter the requirements of this section as long as the
existing or added landscape features of the development site comply with the
intent of this chapter.
      (2)   Requests for alternative compliance shall be accepted if one or
more of the following conditions are met.
         (a)   Topography, geologic features, drainage channels or streams,
existing natural vegetation, overhead or underground utilities, or other
conditions make it unreasonable or meaningless to plant a buffer or meet other
landscape requirements;
         (b)   Space limitations, unusually shaped lots, unique relationships
to other properties, and/or prevailing practices in the surrounding
neighborhood (such as use of a specific type of vegetation) may justify
alternative compliance when changing the use type of an existing building in an
established mature neighborhood; or
         (c)   An alternative compliance proposal is equal or better than
normal compliance in its ability to fulfill the intent of the ordinance, and
exhibits superior design quality.
      (3)   The property owner must submit a plan of the area for which
alternative compliance is requested to the Town Manager 14 days prior to the
meeting of the Design Review Board at which the request will be considered. The
site plan shall show existing site features and any additional material the
property owner will plant or construct to meet the intent of the buffer, street
tree, and parking lot tree requirements.
      (4)   In addition, the applicant must submit a written statement
explaining and justifying the need for alternative compliance. Upon
recommendation from the Design Review Board following their review, alternative
compliance plan shall then be considered by the Board of Adjustment.
Alternative compliance shall be limited to the specific project being reviewed
and shall not establish a precedent for acceptance in other cases.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.062 EXISTING VEGETATION IN R-4 OR R-5 ZONES.
   (A)   Preserving trees can improve the aesthetic quality of the site and
improve property values, provide environmental benefits, and mitigate the
impacts of development on the community. It is recommended that groups of trees
be preserved, as well as individual trees. Existing trees and shrubs designated
for preservation may be credited towards required buffer trees, street trees,
and parking lot trees at the discretion of the Ordinance Administrator as
described below.
   (B)   As required in §
153.052, no person shall remove or in any way damage any protected trees
without first filing an application for the removal and receiving approval from
the town. This requirement is applicable to both residential and non-
residential uses within the town.
   (C)   Special attention shall be given to protected trees located within 20
feet of the of the rear or side property line of property meeting the
definition of an incompatible land use.
      (1)   Credits and other incentives to preserve vegetation within non-
residential land use.
         (a)   Vegetation located in the buffer strip. One existing evergreen
shrub over four feet high located in the buffer strip may be credited for two
new shrubs, also on a case-by-case basis by the Board of Adjustment.
         (b)   Vegetation located elsewhere on the property.
            1.   Trees designated for preservation may be credited at the rate
of the following.
 
Two-inch to six-inch caliper tree = one tree
Seven-inch to 12-inch caliper tree = two trees
Thirteen-inch to 18-inch caliper tree = three trees
Nineteen-inch to 24-inch caliper tree= four trees
Twenty-five-inch and greater= five trees
 
            2.   One existing shrub over four feet high may be credited for two
new shrubs. In order to receive credit, vegetation designated for preservation
shall be in good health and condition. Trees and shrubs designated to be
preserved shall be indicated on the landscape and grading plan, as well as all
protective barriers. If a tree or shrub designated for preservation dies within
five years of the project’s completion, it must be replaced with the total
number of trees or shrubs which were credited to the existing tree or shrub
within six months from removal of the dead trees or shrubs.
      (2)   Protection of existing trees and shrubs during construction.
         (a)   1.   No grading or other land-disturbing activity shall occur on
a site with existing trees or shrubs which are designated to be preserved in
order to meet the landscaping requirements until the landscape and grading plan
has been approved by the Board of Adjustment and protective barriers are
installed by the developer and approved by the Zoning Administrator. Trees
designated for preservation which are counted toward the landscape and
buffering requirements shall be protected by barriers, while trees designated
for preservation which do not count toward the landscape and buffering
requirements are encouraged to be protected by barriers. The diameter of the
trees designated for preservation and the location of protective barriers shall
be shown on the landscape and grading and site plans with the dimensions
between the tree trunk and barrier indicated.
            2.   Protective barriers shall be placed around the root protection
zone of trees designated for preservation that are within 50 feet of any
grading or construction activity. Protected ground areas for shrubs shall
consist of an area twice the diameter of the shrub. All protective barriers
shall be maintained throughout the building construction process.
         (b)   1.   All contractors shall be made aware of the areas designated
for protection.
            2.   No disturbance shall occur within the protective barriers,
including:
               a.   Grading;
               b.   Filling, unless an aeration system which is certified by a
registered landscape architect, certified arborist, or state cooperative
extension specialist is installed to protect the tree from suffocation;
               c.   Temporary or permanent parking;
               d.   Storage of debris or materials, including topsoil;
               e.   Disposal of hazardous wastes or concrete washout; and
               f.   Attaching of nails, ropes, cables, signs, or fencing to any
tree designated for preservation.
            3.   If any area within the root protection zone will be disturbed
for any reason, a registered landscape architect, certified arborist, or state
cooperative extension specialist shall recommend measures to minimize any
potential impact and certify that the activity will not damage the tree under
normal circumstances.
            4.   The developer shall coordinate with the utility companies
early in the design process to resolve potential conflicts about the placement
of utilities and buffer and screening requirements in §
153.063(B)(5). The Zoning Administrator shall approve the placement of the
utilities either outside of the root protection zone or tunneled at least two
feet directly below the tree roots to minimize root damage.
            5.   If silt fencing is requited to control sedimentation, the
fencing must be placed along the uphill edge of a tree protection zone in order
to prevent sediment from accumulating in the drip line area.
         (c)   Tree protection zone signs shall be installed on the tree
protection barriers visible on all sides of the protection area (minimum one on
each side and/or every 300 linear feet). The size of each sign shall be a
minimum of two feet by two feet and shall contain the following language: “TREE
PROTECTION ZONE, KEEP OUT” or “TREE SAVE AREA, KEEP OUT”.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.063 BUFFER STRIP AND SCREEN REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Certain land uses are defined in this chapter as being an incompatible
land use when developed adjacent to other less intensive land uses. A buffer
strip can serve to lessen adverse impacts when development occurs.
   (B)   The installation of the applicable buffer strip shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the developing land use. Buffer strips shall be
located on the property of the developing land use between the property line
and any vehicular use areas, buildings, storage, service areas, or other area
of activity. The buffer strip shall extend along the entire rear and/or side
property line which abuts an incompatible land use, up to any required street
tree planting strip.
      (1)   Use of buffer strips. Required buffers shall not be disturbed for
any reason except for approved driveway openings and other passive or accessory
uses compatible with the general separation of land uses and; provided, that
the total number of required plantings are still met. Approval from the Town
Manager is required prior to initiating any disturbance of the buffer.
      (2)   Placement of buffer plantings. The exact placement of the required
plants shall be the decision of the developer or designer, but shall be
reviewed by the Town Manager and approved by the Board of Adjustment. Plants
shall be placed in a manner to serve as an effective screen year-round when
viewed from any area accessible to the public or from adjacent properties.
Trees or shrubs should be planted at least five feet away from the property
line to ensure maintenance access and to avoid encroaching upon neighboring
property.
      (3)   Composition of buffer plantings. A buffer consisting of two
staggered rows of evergreen shrubs or sheared evergreen trees, planted 48
inches apart (as measured from the central stem) in a 20-foot wide strip shall
be installed to screen the nonresidential use from neighboring residential
properties. The trees or shrubs shall be between four and five feet high at
time of planting. During times of extended dry weather, the applicant may
petition the Board of Adjustment to reduce the required size of vegetation to
be planted in order to better ensure its survival. It is suggested that a
mixture of two to three shrubs selected from the recommended species list be
planted to encourage healthier plants.
      (4)   Coordination with stormwater drainage provisions. If the buffer
strip is to be used as part of the area for required stormwater runoff
absorption as outlined in
Chapter 52 of this code, then the shrubs and trees within the buffer shall be
water tolerant.
      (5)   Coordination with utility easements. In circumstances when the
property to be developed is adjacent to a utility easement, the buffer
requirement of division (C) above maybe altered to be only ten feet wide at the
discretion of the Board of Adjustment, based on the factors of space,
feasibility, and other considerations which may make it difficult to provide a
20-foot buffer.
      (6)   Additional buffering. The Board of Adjustment has the authority to
require that a wall or fence be constructed next to property used for
residential purposes when the Board determines that the buffer strip alone does
not provide adequate buffering. The fence or wall shall be constructed in a
durable fashion of wood, stone, masonry materials, or other materials if deemed
appropriate and shall be built of material compatible with the principal
building. When concrete block is utilized, it shall be finished with stucco on
both sides. The materials and design shall be approved by the Board of
Adjustment on a case-by-case basis. The finished side of the fence or wall
shall face the abutting property. A chain link fence may not be used to satisfy
the requirements of this section. Shrubs shall be planted on the applicant’s
side of the property at the rate of 25 per 100 linear feet; their placing and
arrangement shall be the decision of the applicant.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.064 PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS.
   Trees and shrubs are required in and around parking lots with more than five
spaces to provide attractive views from roads and adjacent properties, provide
shade to reduce the heat generated by impervious surfaces, help absorb runoff,
reduce glare from parking lots, and to help filter exhaust from vehicles.
   (A)   There shall be a continuously-maintained growing strip planted with
grass or similar low-growing vegetation, measured from the back of the curb and
extending ten feet perpendicular to the road. The purpose of this growing strip
is to provide a clear line of sight for motorists, pedestrians, and cyclists
entering and leaving commercial properties.
   (B)   (1)   Where parking areas with more than five spaces adjoin a public
right-of-way, a landscaped planting strip ten feet wide shall be established
and continuously maintained between the growing strip and parking area(s).
      (2)   Street trees shall be planted within the landscaped planting strip
in accordance with §
153.066 and parking areas within 50 feet of the right-of-way shall have a
visually modifying screen or barrier that meets one of these standards.
         (a)   Evergreen shrubs shall be planted 36 inches apart as measured
from the center and attain a height of at least 48 inches within four years of
installation;
         (b)   There shall be a fence or wall three feet high constructed of
the same material as the principal building; or
         (c)   There is an earthen berm at least two feet high, with a minimum
crown width of two feet and a width to height ratio of no greater than 2:1;
shrubs shall be planted on top of the berm that will attain a height of at
least 36 inches within four years of installation and shall be planted 36
inches apart.
      (3)   No screen is required at parking lot entrances or exits, and no
screen shall obstruct vision within 50 feet of an entrance, exit, or
intersection. The landscaped planting strip shall be covered with living
material, including groundcover and/or shrubs, except for mulched areas
directly around the trees, so that no soil is exposed.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Parking areas with more than five spaces shall have at
least one large-maturing deciduous tree for every three parking spaces, with
some appropriate clustering of trees permitted, and six-foot by 18-foot
projecting landscaped islands generally between ten and 12 parking spaces.
         (b)   Whenever possible, interior parking spaces should have a
continuous planter strip six feet wide between rows of parking.
      (2)   Where appropriate, provisions shall be made to ensure that adequate
pedestrian paths are provided throughout the landscaped areas. In all cases, at
least one large maturing deciduous tree shall be provided for a parking lot
regardless of the number of spaces provided. No parking space shall be located
more than 50 feet from the trunk of a large-maturing deciduous tree. When
calculating the number of trees required, the applicant shall round up to the
nearest whole number.
   (D)   All landscaped areas shall be bordered by a concrete curb that is at
least six inches above the pavement and six inches wide or a granite curb that
is at least six inches above the pavement and four inches wide.
   (E)   To increase the parking lot landscaped area, a maximum of two feet of
the parking stall depth may be landscaped with low-growth, hearty materials in
lieu of asphalt, allowing a bumper overhang while maintaining the required
parking dimensions.
   (F)   When more than the required number of parking spaces is provided, the
applicant shall provide two times the required number of trees for the spaces
provided above the ordinance requirement.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.065 SCREENING OF DUMPSTERS, LOADING DOCKS, OUTDOOR STORAGE AREAS, AND
UTILITY STRUCTURES.
   (A)   All dumpsters, loading docks, outdoor storage areas, or utility
structures visible from a public street or adjacent property line shall be
screened unless already screened by an intervening building or buffer strip.
Landscaping shall not interfere with the access and operation of any such
structure or facility. Trash and storage areas shall be well-maintained,
including prompt repair and replacement of damaged gates, fences, and plants.
   (B)   Openings of trash enclosures shall be oriented away from public view
or screened with sturdy gates wide enough to allow easy access for trash
collection, where practical. The consolidation of trash areas between
businesses and the use of modern disposal techniques is encouraged. All
dumpsters shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from a residential dwelling.
All unenclosed outdoor storage areas greater than 25 square feet shall also be
screened from adjacent properties and streets.
   (C)   Screen types include:
      (1)   A continuous hedge of evergreen shrubs planted in a five-foot strip
spaced a maximum of 36 inches apart; and
      (2)   A wall or fence six feet high, with the finished side of the fence
or wall facing the abutting property or street. Fences longer than 25 linear
feet shall be landscaped with trees and/or shrubs planted in a minimum five-
foot planting area, except around access areas, spaced no farther than eight
feet apart in order to screen at least 50% of the fence or wall.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.066 STREET TREES.
   (A)   (1)   Street trees are required for all developments meeting the
applicability requirements of §
153.061(A). Street trees shall be required at the rate of one large-maturing
tree (over 35 feet in height) for every 40 linear feet of property abutting a
street.
      (2)   In the event that overhead utility lines are present, then one
small-maturing tree (less than 35 feet in height) may be planted for every 30
feet of property abutting a street.
      (3)   This does not imply that trees must be spaced exactly 30 or 40 feet
apart.
      (4)   The exact placement of the required tree or trees may be
established with input from the reviewing boards in order to fit in with sign
placement and other building issues.
   (B)   Trees shall be planted within a landscaped planting strip adjacent to
the growing strip as outlined in §
153.064(A) and also according to regulations from the State Department of
Transportation.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.067 CERTIFICATION OF COMPLETION.
   (A)   Landscaping shall be installed and inspected prior to receiving a
certificate of completion. Vegetation shall be planted to ensure the best
chance of survival and to reduce the potential expense of replacing damaged
plant materials. If the season or weather conditions prohibit planting the
materials, the developer may provide an irrevocable letter of credit, or other
financial surety in an amount equal to 110%of the cost of installing the
required landscaping to guarantee the completion of the required planting.
   (B)   Upon approval of the financial surety, the certificate of completion
shall be issued. The financial surety shall be canceled and/or returned upon
completion.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.068 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The owner or lessee of the property where landscaping is required
shall be responsible for the maintenance and protection of all plant and
screening material. Landscaped areas shall be maintained in good condition and
kept free of debris. Failure to maintain or replace dead, damaged, or diseased
material or to repair a broken fence or wall shall constitute a zoning
violation and shall be subject to the penalty provisions in §
153.999 if not replaced within 30 days of notification.
   (B)   If an act of God or other catastrophic event occurs which destroys a
large quantity of vegetation, the owner or lessee shall have 120 days to
replant. Replaced plant material shall be in compliance with the minimum size,
spacing, and quantity standards of the ordinance requirements in effect at the
time of project approval.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.069 RESIDENTIAL SCREENING OF UTILITY STRUCTURES.
   (A)   It is required that all new utility structures, whether they are part
of a new dwelling or are being added to an existing dwelling, located out of
doors, including, but not limited to, heat pumps, air conditioning units (with
the exception of window units), and generators shall be screened on all sides
except the side closest to the dwelling. The screening shall consist of
evergreen shrubs or trees planted a maximum of 36 inches apart, with a height
of 18 to 24 inches at time of planting. The shrubs may be planted three feet
away from the utility structures so they do not interfere with proper
functioning.
   (B)   Electric vehicle (EV) charging stations are hereby included as a
utility structure for the purposes of this chapter. The town recommends that EV
charging stations be installed inside a garage and out of the public view.
However, when this is not possible, the following requirements shall apply.
      (1)   The EV charging station shall not be located within a front, side,
or rear yard setback.
      (2)   (a)   The EV charging station shall be screened from the public
road and adjacent properties per requirements in division (A) above. The only
exception to this requirement is that screening is not required in a location
inhibiting the ability to charge the vehicle per the manufacturer’s
recommendation.
         (b)   A site plan shall be provided to the town prior to installation
indicating the location, species, and planting timeline for screening. This
site plan shall also include applicable setback lines for the appropriate
zoning district and the distance of the proposed EV charging station to each
property line.
      (3)   Upon approval from the town regarding the placement of the EV
charging station, the property owner must obtain building inspections approval
from Buncombe County for installation. The applicant shall provide all
appropriate documentation submitted to Buncombe County, and subsequent
approvals, to the town once permitted.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.070 PLANT SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Recommended plant species. Plants may be chosen from the recommended
plant list (RPL) available from the town. The list encourages the use of plant
materials which are indigenous to this region and are readily available from
local nurseries. Plant materials which are not on the list may be used
following approval from the Board of Adjustment.
   (B)   Minimum plant size requirements.
      (1)   Large-maturing deciduous tree. Greater than 35 feet at maturity.
Minimum size at planting shall be 12 to 14 feet in height and two inches
caliper (diameter);
      (2)   Small-maturing deciduous tree. Smaller than 35 feet at maturity.
The tree shall be at least one and one-half inch caliper and eight to ten feet
high at time of planting;
      (3)   Evergreen tree. Minimum height of eight feet at time of planting;
and
      (4)   Evergreen shrub. Minimum three gallon container or ten-inch root
ball with a height of 18 to 24 inches at time of planting.
   (C)   Plant standards.
      (1)   All plants shall meet the requirements of the most recent edition
of the American Standards for Nursery Stock, ANSI 260.1.
      (2)   Plants shall be healthy, well-branched, and free of disease and
insect infestation.
(Ord. 2023-07, passed 10-9-2023)
§ 153.071 COMMERCIAL AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   Commercial vehicles and recreational vehicles, including, but
not limited to, motor-powered recreational vehicles (motor homes and
unregistered all-terrain vehicles of any kind), recreational trailers, campers,
boats (including sailboats and motorboats) and other water craft, enclosed
utility trailers, and the trailers used to tow or transport any such boat or
vehicle, shall not be parked or stored outside on any lot or tract of land.
      (2)   Further, nor shall any such vehicle be parked or stored in or under
an open garage/carport or in or under any other type of open accessory
structure/building.
      (3)   However, such vehicles may be parked or stored in an enclosed
accessory structure/building (said accessory structure/building is to comply
with all size and height requirements of this chapter) or in an enclosed garage
such that the vehicle is not visible.
   (B)   Exceptions to this rule would be those residents who have already
received certificate of zoning compliance from the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. 2023-04, passed 7-1-2023)
ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, AND APPEALS
§ 153.085 GENERAL PROCESS; DUTIES OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR, BOARD OF
ADJUSTMENT, PLANNING COMMISSION, BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS, AND COURTS ON MATTERS
OF ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   All questions arising in connection with this chapter shall be
presented first to the Zoning Administrator, who shall be responsible for the
day-to-day administration of this chapter. The Board of Adjustment shall have
the authority to rule on matters of interpretation of this chapter, consider
appeals from decisions of the Zoning Administrator, issue special use permits,
and grant variances. Any appeal from a decision of the Board of Adjustment
shall be to the courts as provided by law. The duties of the Town Board of
Commissioners in connection with this chapter shall not include the hearing and
passing upon of disputed questions that may arise in connection with the
enforcement thereof, but the procedure for determining such questions shall be
as prescribed in this chapter.
   (B)   The duties of the Board of Commissioners in connection with this
chapter shall be the duty of considering and passing upon the initial ordinance
and any proposed amendments or repeal of this chapter as provided by law. The
Town Planning Commission shall serve in an advisory capacity to the Board of
Commissioners and shall provide recommendations to the Board, including
recommendations pertaining to zoning amendments and other matters as designated
by G.S. § 160A-361.
   (C)   Any board, including the Board of Commissioners, Board of Adjustment,
Planning Commission, and Design Review Board, shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, including the names of members present and absent, a record of the
vote on every question, or abstention from voting, if any, together with
records of its examinations and other official actions.
   (D)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160D-309, all members appointed to the Board of
Commissioners, Board of Adjustment, Planning Commission, and Design Review
Board shall, before entering their duties, qualify by taking an oath of office.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.086 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The town shall appoint a Zoning Administrator. It shall be the duty of
the duly appointed Zoning Administrator, or their designee, to administer and
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall issue certificates of zoning compliance
and certificates of occupancy as prescribed herein. The Zoning Administrator
shall serve as clerk to the Board of Adjustment, and all applications for
variances and special use permits shall first be presented to the Zoning
Administrator who in turn shall refer the applications to the Board of
Adjustment.
   (C)   (1)   If the Zoning Administrator finds that any of the provisions of
this chapter are being violated, the person responsible for such violation
shall be notified in writing for such violation, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it.
      (2)   The Zoning Administrator shall order discontinuance of the illegal
use of land, buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or
structures, or of additions, alterations, or structural changes thereto;
discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any action
authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of
its provisions. If a ruling of the Zoning Administrator is questioned, the
aggrieved party or parties may appeal such ruling to the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.087 CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   (1)   No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to
or structurally altered, nor shall any building permit be issued nor shall any
change in the use of any building or land be made until a certificate of zoning
compliance shall have been issued by the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   No certification of zoning compliance shall be issued except in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Upon approval of a special use permit or variance by the Board of
Adjustment, the Zoning Administrator shall issue a certificate of zoning
compliance.
      (1)   Applications for zoning compliance certificate.
         (a)   All applications for zoning compliance certificates shall be
accompanied by plans drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to
be built upon, accurate dimensions and the use of the proposed building, the
location on the lot of the building or structure proposed to be erected or
altered, required screening of residential utility structures as outlined in §
153.069 and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, including the architectural or
building plans of the structure proposed to be erected or altered, and the
description of the materials to be used for the exterior siding and roofing
materials, and the colors or stains that will be used on the residential or
commercial structure.
         (b)   Refer to §
153.130 for the complete submittal requirements. Prior to issuance of a
certificate of zoning compliance, the Zoning Administrator may consult with
qualified personnel for assistance to determine if the application meets the
requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Zoning compliance certificate fee.
         (a)   All applications for a certificate of zoning compliance shall be
accompanied with an application fee based upon construction cost.
         (b)   Additional fees for special use, variance, or other land
development applications may be authorized by the Board of Commissioners
annually within the Fee Schedule of the town.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.088 REQUIREMENTS PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF A BUILDING PERMIT.
   Upon approval of a certificate of zoning compliance and prior to the
issuance of a building permit, where applicable, the applicant shall obtain the
following approvals.
   (A)   If connection is to be made to the town water or sewer systems, the
applicant shall obtain approval for a tap from the town.
   (B)   If individual septic tanks and/or wells are to be used, the applicant
shall obtain preliminary approvals from the County Health Department.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed  6-8-2021)
§ 153.089 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Upon receiving a certificate of zoning compliance, a building permit shall
be obtained from the County Building Inspections office for the construction or
alteration of any building or structure pursuant to the procedures of the
County Building Inspections office.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed  6-8-2021)
§ 153.090 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.
   (A)   A certificate of occupancy issued by the Zoning Administrator is
required prior to:
      (1)   Occupancy or use of a building hereafter erected, altered, or
moved; and
      (2)   Change of use of any building or land.
   (B)   (1)   (a)   In conjunction with the final building inspection, the
Zoning Administrator shall certify that all requirements of this chapter have
been met.
         (b)   The applicant shall call for such certification coincident with
the final building inspection or within ten days following completion.
         (c)   A certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or part of a
building, shall be applied for coincident with the application for a
certificate of zoning compliance and shall be issued within ten days after the
erection or structural alterations or change in use of the building, or part,
shall have been completed in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   (a)   A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the
proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of
this chapter.
         (b)   If the certificate of occupancy is denied, the Zoning
Administrator shall state in writing the reasons for refusal and the applicant
shall be notified of the refusal.
         (c)   A record of all certificates shall be kept on file in the office
of the Zoning Administrator, and copies shall be furnished on request to any
person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land
involved.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.091 CONSTRUCTION OF PROGRESS.
   If no substantial construction progress has been made within six months of
the date of the issuance of the building permit, the town shall contact the
County Building Inspections and inquire as to whether the building permit is
still valid. If the building permit is no longer valid, then the certificate of
zoning compliance issued by the town will be considered expired.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.092 CONSTRUCTION COMPLETION.
   (A)   Following approval of plans for construction of a structure or major
remodeling of an existing structure and issuance of a building permit for the
construction or remodeling, work on the structure shall be initiated within 60
days of issuance of the building permit.
   (B)   The construction or remodeling shall be substantially complete within
two years of the date of issuance of the building permit for the construction.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021) Penalty, see §
153.999
§ 153.093 COMPLIANCE.
   In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building or land is used in
violation of this chapter, the Zoning Administrator or any other appropriate
town authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in
addition to other remedies, may institute an action for injunction, or
mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such violation.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.094 NOTICE OF VIOLATIONS AND INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   When staff determines work or activity has been undertaken in
violation of a development regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter or other
local development regulation or any state law delegated to the local government
for enforcement purposes in lieu of the state or in violation of the terms of a
development approval, a written notice of violation may be issued. The notice
of violation shall be delivered to the holder of the development approval and
to the landowner of the property involved, if the landowner is not the holder
of the development approval, by personal delivery, electronic delivery, or
first-class mail and may be provided by similar means to the occupant of the
property or the person undertaking the work or activity. The notice of
violation may be posted on the property. The person providing the notice of
violation shall certify to the local government that the notice was provided,
and the certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud. Except
as provided by G.S. § 160D-1123 or G.S. § 160D-1206 or otherwise provided by
law, a notice of violation may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment pursuant
to G.S. § 160D-405.
   (B)   Administrative staff may inspect work undertaken pursuant to a
development approval to assure that the work is being done in accordance with
applicable state and local laws and of the terms of the approval. In exercising
this power, staff are authorized to enter any premises within the jurisdiction
of the local government at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection
or other enforcement action, upon presentation of proper credentials; provided,
however, that the appropriate consent has been given for inspection of areas
not open to the public or that an appropriate inspection warrant has been
secured.
(Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.095 APPEAL FROM THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   All questions arising in connection with this chapter shall be
presented first to the Zoning Administrator, and such questions shall be
presented to the Board of Adjustment only on appeal from a ruling of the Zoning
Administrator.
   (B)   Any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Zoning
Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to the
procedure found in §
153.111.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.096 REVOCATION OF DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL.
   In addition to initiation of enforcement actions under G.S. § 160D-404,
development approvals may be revoked by the local government issuing the
development approval by notifying the holder in writing stating the reason for
the revocation. The local government shall follow the same development review
and approval process required for issuance of the development approval,
including any required notice or hearing, in the review and approval of any
revocation of that approval. Development approvals shall be revoked for any
substantial departure from the approved application, plans, or specifications;
for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of any applicable local
development regulation or any state law delegated to the local government for
enforcement purposes in lieu of the state; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the approval. Any development approval
mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may also be
revoked. The revocation of a development approval by a staff member may be
appealed pursuant to G.S. § 160D-405. If an appeal is filed regarding a
development regulation adopted by a local government pursuant to this chapter,
the provisions of G.S. § 160D-405(e) regarding stays apply.
(Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 153.105 ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   A Board of Adjustment is hereby established. The Board shall consist
of five members appointed by the Town Board of Commissioners. The members of
the Board of Adjustment who have served as members of the Board of Adjustment
under a zoning ordinance which was in effect prior to the adoption of this
chapter shall serve the balance of the term to which the members were
appointed.
   (B)   Upon completion of these terms of office, additional appointments
shall be made on a staggered- term basis with one member appointed for a term
of one year; two members appointed for a term of two years and two members
appointed for a term of three years. All additional appointments to the Board
shall be for three-year terms.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.106 SELECTION OF ALTERNATE MEMBERS.
   The Board of Commissioners shall also appoint one alternate member to serve
on the Board of Adjustment in the absence, for any cause, of any regular
member. Such alternate member shall be appointed for a three-year term. Such
alternate member, while attending any regular or special meeting of the Board
and serving in the absence of any regular member, shall have and exercise all
the powers and duties of such regular member so absent. The alternate member
shall be subject to the provisions of §
153.107.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.107 RULES OF CONDUCT FOR MEMBERS.
   (A)   Members of the Board may be removed by the Board of Commissioners for
cause, including violation of the rules stated below.
   (B)   Faithful attendance at meetings of the Board and conscientious
performance of the duties required of members of the Board shall be considered
a prerequisite to continuing membership on the Board.
   (C)   No Board member shall take part in the hearing, consideration, or
determination of any case in which he or she is personally or financially
interested.
   (D)   No Board member shall vote on any specific matter unless he or she
shall have attended a majority of the hearings on that matter.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed  6-8-2021)
§ 153.108 GENERAL PROCEEDINGS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   The Board shall annually elect a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson from
among its members. The Chairperson in turn will appoint a Secretary, which may
be an employee of the town, and such other subordinates as may be authorized by
the Town Board of Commissioners. The Chairperson, or in his or her absence the
Vice-Chairperson, may administer oaths and request the attendance of witnesses
in accordance with G.S. § 160D-406. The Board shall keep minutes of its
proceedings, including the names of members present and absent, a record of the
vote on every question, or abstention from voting, if any, together with
records of its examinations and other official actions.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.109 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Board meetings. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such other times as the Board may determine. All Board
meetings are to be held in accordance with G.S. Ch. 143, Art. 33C, commonly
referred to as the Open Meeting Law.
   (B)   Quorum. A quorum shall consist of three members of the Board, but the
Board shall not pass upon any questions relating to an appeal from a decision
or determination of the Zoning Administrator, or an application for a variance
or special use permit when there are less than four members present.
   (C)   Voting. All regular members may vote on any issue unless they have
disqualified themselves for one or more of the reasons listed in §
153.107. The required vote to decide appeals and applications shall be as
provided in §
153.111(D), and shall not be reduced by any disqualification. In all other
matters, the vote of a majority of the members present and voting shall decide
issues before the Board.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.110 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   The powers and duties of the Board of Adjustment shall be as follows:
   (A)   Interpretation. To interpret zoning maps and pass upon disputed
questions of lot lines or district boundary lines and any other questions of
interpretation that may arise in the administration of this chapter;
   (B)   Administrative review.
      (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide requests for special
use permits, variances, and appeal of decisions of the Town Manager. The term
DECISION includes any final and binding order, requirement, or determination.
The Board of Adjustment shall follow quasi-judicial procedures when deciding
appeals and requests for special uses and variances. The Board of Adjustment
may hear and decide all matters upon which it is required to pass under any
statute or ordinance that regulates land use or development in the town.
      (2)   Notice of hearings conducted pursuant to this division (B) shall be
mailed to the person or entity whose appeal, application, or request is the
subject of the hearing; to the owner of the property that is the subject of the
hearing if the owner did not initiate the hearing; to the owners of all parcels
of land abutting the parcel of land that is the subject of the hearing; and to
any other persons entitled to receive notice as provided by the zoning or
unified development ordinance. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the
town may rely on the county tax listings to determine owners of property
entitled to mailed notice. The notice must be deposited in the mail at least
ten days, but not more than 25 days, prior to the date of hearing. Within that
same time period, the town shall also prominently post a notice of the hearing
on the site that is the subject of the hearing or on an adjacent street or
highway right-of-way. If an evidentiary hearing is set for a given date and a
quorum of the Board is not then present, the hearing shall be continued until
the next regular Board meeting without further advertisement.
      (3)   The Board of Adjustment shall determine contested facts and make
its decision within a reasonable time. Every quasi-judicial decision shall be
based upon competent, material, and substantial evidence in the record. The
Board of Adjustment must allow parties with standing to participate fully in
the evidentiary hearing, including presenting evidence, cross-examining
witnesses, objecting to evidence, and making legal arguments. The Board may
allow parties without standing to present competent, material, and substantial
evidence that is not repetitive. If an objection arises at the hearing as to
the inclusion or exclusion of administrative materials, the Board Chair must
rule on this objection at the hearing. An appeal of this ruling may be
considered by the full Board pursuant to G.S. § 160D-406(d). Each quasi-
judicial decision shall be reduced to writing and reflect the Board's
determination of contested facts and their application to the applicable
standards. The written decision shall be signed by the Chair or other duly
authorized member of the Board. A quasi-judicial decision is effective upon
filing the written decision with the Town Manager. The decision shall be
delivered by personal delivery, electronic mail, or by first class mail to the
applicant or property owner as may be applicable, and to any person who has
submitted a written request for a copy, prior to the date the decision becomes
effective. The Town Manager shall certify that proper notice has been made.
      (4)   Every quasi-judicial decision shall be subject to review by the
Superior Court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari (G.S. § 160D-406(k)).
A petition for review shall be filed with the Clerk of Superior Court within
the period specified by G.S. § 160D-1405(d).
      (5)   Members of the Board of Adjustment exercising quasi-judicial
functions shall not have a fixed opinion on a matter prior to hearing; shall
not have undisclosed ex-parte communication with an applicant, a close
familial, business, or other associational relationship with an applicant or a
financial interest in the outcome. If an objection is raised to a member's
participation and that member does not recuse himself or herself, the remaining
members shall by majority vote rule on the objection.
      (6)   The Chair of the Board of Adjustment or any member acting as Chair
and the Town Manager are authorized to administer oaths to witnesses in any
matter coming before the Board. Any person who, while under oath during a
proceeding before the Board of Adjustment, willfully swears falsely is guilty
of a Class I misdemeanor.
      (7)   The Chair of the Board of Adjustment or anyone acting as Chair, may
subpoena witnesses and compel the production of evidence. Any person with
standing under G.S. § 160D-406(g) may make a written request to the Chair
explaining why it is necessary for certain witnesses or evidence to be
compelled. The Chair or person acting as the Chair shall issue requested
subpoenas he or she determines to be relevant, reasonable in nature and scope
and not oppressive. The Chair shall rule on any motion to quash or modify a
subpoena. Decisions regarding subpoenas made by the Chair may be appealed to
the full Board of Adjustment. If a person subpoenaed fails to obey the
subpoena, the Board of Adjustment or the party that requested the subpoena may
apply to the General Court of Justice for an order requiring that its subpoena
be obeyed.
   (C)   Special uses.
      (1)   Upon application, the Board of Adjustment may grant in particular
cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, permits for special
uses as authorized by this chapter, and set forth as special uses under the
various use districts.
      (2)   A special use permit may be granted by the Board of Adjustment only
after making the following findings:
         (a)   An application for the special use has been submitted as
prescribed by this chapter;
         (b)   1.   If the Board of Adjustment finds, in the particular case in
question, that the use, including any proposed structures:
               a.   Will not materially endanger the public health or safety if
located where proposed and developed according to the plan as submitted and
approved;
               b.   Meets all required conditions and specifications of this
chapter and other applicable rules, regulations, and standards;
               c.   Will not substantially injure the value of adjoining or
abutting property;
               d.   Will be in general conformity with the plan of development
of the town and its environs;
               e.   Will be reasonably compatible with significant natural and
topographic features on the site and within the immediate vicinity of the site
given the proposed site design and structure design;
               f.   Will be in harmony with scale, bulk, height, coverage,
density, and character of the area or neighborhood in which it is located; or
               g.   Is appropriately located with respect to transportation
facilities, water supply, fire and police protection, waste disposal, and
similar facilities, and will not cause undue traffic congestion or create a
traffic hazard.
            2.   In granting such a permit, the Board of Adjustment may
designate such conditions in connection therewith that will, in its opinion,
assure that the proposed use will conform to the requirements and spirit of
this chapter. However, the Board of Adjustment shall not impose conditions on
special use permits that the town is not statutorily allowed to impose.
         (c)   Before any special use permit is issued, the Board shall make
written findings certifying compliance with the specific rules governing the
individual special use (see §
153.008), and that satisfactory provision and arrangement has been made for at
least the following, where applicable:
            1.   Satisfactory ingress and egress to property and proposed
structures thereon, with particular reference to automotive and pedestrian
safety and convenience, traffic flow, and control;
            2.   Provision of off-street parking and loading areas where
required, with particular attention to the items in division (C)(2)(c)1. above,
and the economic, noise, and odor effects of the special use on adjoining
properties in the area;
            3.   Adequate and proper utilities, with reference to locations,
availability, and compatibility;
            4.   Buffering, with reference to type, location, and dimensions;
            5.   Signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting, with reference
to glare, traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with
properties in the district;
            6.   Playgrounds, open spaces, yards, landscaping, access ways,
pedestrian ways, with reference to location, size, and suitability;
            7.   Buildings and structures, with reference to location, size,
and use;
            8.   Hours of operation, with particular reference to protecting
and maintaining the character of the neighborhood;
            9.    With the exception of Americans with Disabilities Act, being
42 U.S.C. § 12101, lighting requirements and street lighting, the design
standards as outlined in §
153.047,"Site Design and Form and Mass Commercial Buildings," shall apply when
exterior lighting is proposed and/or required;
            10.   A site plan has been submitted as required in §
153.008; and
            11.   The applicant/landowner must provide written consent to
conditions placed on a special use permit by the Board of Adjustment.
         (d)   1.   The Zoning Administrator shall make periodic inspections
during construction as well as a final inspection after construction is
complete to determine whether the conditions imposed and agreements made in the
issuance of the permit have been met as well as whether all other requirements
of this chapter have been met. The Zoning Administrator shall report his or her
findings to the Board of Adjustment.
            2.   If at any time after a special use permit has been issued, the
Board of Adjustment determines that the conditions imposed and agreements made
have not been or are not being fulfilled by the holder of a special use permit,
the permit shall be terminated and the operation of such use discontinued.
            3.   If a special use permit is terminated for any reason, it may
be reinstated only after reapplying for a special use permit.
   (D)   Variances. Upon application, when unnecessary hardships would result
from carrying out the strict letter of a zoning ordinance, the Board of
Adjustment shall vary any of the provisions of the ordinance upon a showing of
all of the following:
      (1)   Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of
the ordinance. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of
the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property;
      (2)   The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from
conditions that are common to the neighborhood or the public may not be the
basis for granting a variance;
      (3)   The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or
the property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that
circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be
regarded as a self-created hardship; and
      (4)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and
intent of the ordinance, such that public safety is secured, and substantial
justice is achieved.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
Editor’s note:
   This amendatory language was passed during a Board meeting, May 14, 2014
§ 153.111 APPEALS AND APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Types of appeals and applications.
      (1)   Appeals. The Board shall hear and decide all appeals from any
decision or determination made by the Zoning Administrator.
      (2)   Applications. All applications for variances and special use
permits shall first be presented to the Zoning Administrator, who in turn shall
refer the application to the Board of Adjustment. Applications for variances
and special use permits must be made by a person with a property interest in
the property or a contract to purchase the property.
   (B)   Appeals.
      (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from
decisions of the Town Manager.
      (2)   The following apply to all appeals heard by the Board of
Adjustment:
         (a)   Any person who has standing under G.S. § 160D-406(d) or the town
may appeal a decision to the Board of Adjustment. An appeal is taken by filing
a notice of appeal with the Town Manager. The notice of appeal shall state the
grounds for the appeal.
         (b)   The Town Manager shall give written notice to the owner of the
property that is the subject of the decision and to the party who sought the
decision, if different from the owners. The written notice shall be delivered
by personal delivery, first-class mail, or other electronic forms. If provided
via electronic form, the file must be protected from further editing.
         (c)   The owner or other party shall have 30 days from receipt of the
written notice within which to file an appeal. Any other person with standing
to appeal shall have 30 days from the receipt from any source of actual or
constructive notice of the decision within which to file an appeal.
         (d)   It shall be conclusively presumed that all persons with standing
to appeal have constructive notice of the decision from the date a sign
containing the words “zoning decision” or “subdivision decision” in letters at
least six inches high and identifying the means to contact an official for
information about the decision is prominently posted on the property that is
the subject of the decision, provided, the sign remains on the property for at
least ten days. Posting of signs is not the only form of constructive notice.
Any such posting shall be the responsibility of the landowner or applicant.
Verification of the posting shall be provided to the official who made the
decision. Absent an ordinance provision to the contrary, posting of signs shall
not be required.
         (e)   The Town Manager shall transmit to the Board all documents and
exhibits constituting the record upon which the action appealed from are taken.
The Town Manager shall also provide a copy of the record to the appellant and
to the owner of the property that is the subject of the appeal if the appellant
is not the owner.
         (f)   1.   An appeal of a notice of violation or other enforcement
order stays enforcement of the action appealed from unless the Town Manager
certifies to the Board of Adjustment after notice of appeal has been filed that
because of the facts stated in an affidavit, a stay would cause imminent peril
to life or property or because the violation is transitory in nature, a stay
would seriously interfere with enforcement of the ordinance.
            2.   In that case, enforcement proceedings shall not be stayed
except by a restraining order, which may be granted by a court. If enforcement
proceedings are not stayed, the appellant may file with the Town Manager a
request for an expedited hearing of the appeal, and the Board of Adjustment
shall meet to hear the appeal within 15 days after such a request is filed.
            3.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, appeals of decisions granting a
permit or otherwise affirming that a proposed use of property is consistent
with the ordinance shall not stay the further review of an application for
permits or permissions to use such property; in these situations the appellant
may request and the Board may grant a stay of a final decision of permit
applications or building permits affected by the issue being appealed.
         (g)   Subject to the provisions of division (B)(2)(f) above, the Board
of Adjustment shall hear and decide the appeal within a reasonable time.
         (h)   1.   During the conduct of a hearing, any party may appear in
person or by agent or by attorney at the hearing.
            2.   The order of business for the hearing shall be as follows:
               a.   The Chair, or such person as he or she shall direct, shall
give a preliminary statement of the case;
               b.   The applicant shall present the argument in support of the
appeal or application;
               c.   Persons opposed to granting the appeal or the application
shall present their argument against the application;
               d.   Both sides will be permitted to present rebuttals to
opposing testimony; and
               e.   The Chair or such person as he or she shall direct shall
summarize the evidence which has been presented, giving the parties the
opportunity to make objections or corrections. Witnesses may be called and
factual evidence may be submitted, but the Board shall not be limited to only
consideration of only such evidence as would be admissible in a court of law.
The Board may place parties and witnesses under oath and the opposing party may
cross-examine them. The Town Manager, or other town official who filed the
notice of violation, shall be present at the hearing as a witness. The
appellant shall not be limited at the hearing to matters stated in the notice
of appeal. If any party or the town would be unduly prejudiced by the
presentation of matters not presented in the notice of appeal, the Board shall
continue the hearing. The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or
partly, or may modify the decision appealed from and shall make any order,
requirement, decision, or determination that ought to be made. The Board shall
have all the powers of the Town Manager.
         (i)   When hearing an appeal pursuant to G.S. § 160A-400.9(e) or any
other appeal in the nature of certiorari, the hearing shall be based on the
record below and the scope of review shall be as provided in G.S. § 160A-393
(k).
         (j)   The parties to an appeal that has been made under this division
(B) may agree to mediation or other forms of alternative dispute resolution.
The ordinance may set standards and procedures to facilitate and manage such
voluntary alternative dispute resolution.
   (C)   Hearings.
      (1)   Time. After receipt of notice of an appeal or an application, the
Board Chairperson shall schedule a time for a hearing which shall be within 36
days from the filing of such notice of appeal or application. Any additional
appeal or application shall be received not less than two weeks prior to a
scheduled meeting.
      (2)   Notice. In any application for projects involving planned unit
developments, the Board shall give notice of the hearing in a newspaper having
general circulation in the county five days prior to the date of the hearing.
For all other applications and appeals, the Board shall send by first class
mail notices of the hearing to the affected parties and to such other persons
as the Zoning Administrator shall direct, at least ten days prior to the
hearing. Such notice shall state the location of the building or lot, the
general nature of the question involved in the appeal or application, and the
time and place of the hearing.
      (3)   Re-hearings. An application for a rehearing may be made in the same
manner as provided for an original hearing. Evidence in support of the
application shall initially be limited to that which is necessary to enable the
Board to determine whether there has been a substantial change in the facts,
evidence, or conditions of the case. The application for rehearing shall be
denied by the Board if from the record it finds that there has been no
substantial change in facts, evidence, or conditions. If the Board finds that
there has been a change, it shall thereupon treat the request in the same
manner as any other appeal or application.
   (D)   Decisions.
      (1)   Time. A decision by the Board shall be made within 30 days from the
time of hearing.
      (2)   Form.
         (a)   Written notice by certified or registered mail of the decision
in a case shall be given to the applicant or appellant by the Secretary as soon
as practical after the case is decided. In addition, written notice shall be
given to owners of the subject property and to other persons who have made
written request for such notice. The final decision of the Board shall be shown
in the record of the case as entered in the minutes of the Board and signed by
the Secretary and the Chairperson upon approval of the minutes by the Board.
         (b)   1.   Such record shall show the reasons for the determination,
with a summary of the evidence introduced and the findings of fact made by the
Board. The decision on an appeal may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
modify the decision or determination of the Zoning Administrator. Where a
variance is granted, the record shall state in detail any exceptional
difficulty or unnecessary hardship upon which the application for the variance
was based and which the Board finds to exist.
            2.   The record shall state in detail what, if any, conditions and
safeguards are imposed by the Board in connection with the granting of a
variance.
            3.   Where a special use permit is granted, the record shall
indicate, by reference to the appropriate sections of the ordinance, that all
requirements and standards for the particular special use have been met.
      (3)   Expiration of permits. Unless otherwise specified, any order or
decision of the Board in granting a variance or a special use permit shall
expire if a building permit for such use is not obtained by the applicant
within six months from the date of the decision.
      (4)   Voting. The concurring vote of four-fifths of the members of the
Board shall be necessary to reverse any decision or determination of the Zoning
Administrator, or to grant a variance or to approve a special use permit.
      (5)   Public record of decisions. The decisions of the Board, as filed in
its minutes, shall be a public record, available for inspection at all
reasonable times.
      (6)   Variance and special use approvals run with the land.
      (7)   Revocations of previously approved variance and special use
approvals must follow the same process as used for the approval.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
Editor’s note:
   This amendatory language was passed during a Board meeting, May 14, 2014
§ 153.112 APPEALS FROM THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   Appeals from the Board of Adjustment may be taken to the courts pursuant to
G.S. § 160D-406(k).
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
DESIGN REVIEW BOARD
§ 153.125 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The Town Board of Commissioners finds that new development has a
substantial impact on the character of the area in which it is located. Some
harmful effects of one land use upon another can be prevented through zoning,
subdivision controls, and building codes. Other aspects of development are more
subtle. Among these are the general form of the land before and after
development and the spatial relationships of the structures and open spaces as
they contribute to an area as it is being developed. Such matters require the
timely exercise of judgment in the public interest by people qualified to
evaluate the design of new development.
   (B)   The design review process is intended to encourage residential and
commercial developments which exemplify the best professional design practices
and to promote the historic character of the town. The procedure is established
to encourage individual identity for specific uses and structures; to enhance
property values in the town and adjoining neighborhoods; to respect each
individual site and its environmental qualities; and to minimize visual
disharmony resulting from unrelated and poorly designed development.
   (C)   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish minimum standards for
the exterior design of commercial, office, and residential structures, and to
ensure high quality of development, redevelopment, and compatibility with
evolving architecture or planning themes that contribute to a community image
of quality, visual aesthetics, permanence, and stability which are in the best
interest of the citizens of the town. These standards are intended to prevent
use of materials that are unsightly, rapidly deteriorate, contribute to
depreciation of area property values, or cause urban blight.
   (D)   These standards are further intended to ensure coordinated design of
building exteriors, additions and accessory structures’ exteriors in order to
prevent visual disharmony; minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties from
buildings which are or may become unsightly, and buildings that detract from
the character and appearance of the area. It is not the intent of this
subchapter to unduly restrict design freedom when reviewing and approving
project architecture in relationship to the proposed land use, site
characteristics, and interior building layout.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed  6-8-2021)
§ 153.126 COMPOSITION OF DESIGN REVIEW BOARD AND MEETING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The Town Board of Commissioners hereby establishes a Design Review
Board.
   (B)   The Town Board of Commissioners shall appoint five resident members. A
minimum of two members shall come from the disciplines of architecture,
landscape architecture, landscape contractor, licensed general contractor, or
like disciplines.
   (C)   Members of the Design Review Board shall serve for terms of three
years, and may be reappointed. The terms of the original members may be
staggered so that not all terms expire simultaneously. Vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired term only.
   (D)   The Board shall meet when it has business to discuss, and otherwise
has no set meeting schedule.
   (E)   The Board of Commissioners shall also appoint one alternate member to
serve on the Design Review Board in the absence, for any cause, of any regular
member. Such alternate member, while attending any regular and or special
meeting of the Board and serving in the absence of any regular member, shall
have and exercise all powers and duties of such regular member so absent.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.127 DEVELOPMENT SUBJECT TO DESIGN REVIEW.
   The following types of development shall be subject to review by the Design
Review Board:
   (A)   All new commercial buildings and new accessory and/or appurtenant
buildings;
   (B)   All exterior expansions, additions, alterations, and modifications of
existing commercial buildings and their accessory and/or appurtenant buildings;
   (C)   All new single- and multi-family dwellings and new accessory and/or
appurtenant buildings;
   (D)   All exterior additions, alterations, and modifications to existing
single- or multi-family dwellings and accessory and/or appurtenant buildings;
   (E)   All new accessory and appurtenant buildings on the premises of
existing dwellings;
   (F)   Driveway redesign or realignment for new and existing residential and
commercial buildings; and
   (G)   Any mechanical equipment when it is installed as part of a new
commercial building.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.128 APPLICATION REQUIRED TO BE FILED.
   (A)   The property owner or authorized agent shall supply all required
information and fill out an application form available in the Town Hall.
Completed applications shall be considered by the Design Review Board within 30
days and sooner if possible.
   (B)   Applications shall be submitted at least two weeks prior to the
meeting in order to give the Board members adequate time for study.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed  6-8-2021)
§ 153.129 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE DESIGN REVIEW BOARD.
   (A)   The Design Review Board shall review all applications for the
following elements: harmony of proposed building with adjacent buildings and
overall town historic character, site design, building form and mass, building
materials, and color as set forth in §§
153.044 through
153.047.
   (B)   (1)   The Design Review Board has the authority to review plans and
recommend redesign of a building or driveway.
      (2)   The Board’s comments on an application are intended to assist
property owners and developers in building structures that are in harmony with
the town’s aesthetic and historic character, which will lead to increased
property values and aesthetically pleasing structures and environments.
   (C)   Review shall take into account compliance with other town ordinances
that effect design, such as this chapter and §§
93.30 through
93.40.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed  6-8-2021)
§ 153.130 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The applicant shall submit the following information for all
residential structures:
      (1)   Site plan;
      (2)   Floor plans; and
      (3)   Exterior elevations, including type and color of all exterior
building materials, awnings, exterior lighting, and fencing.
   (B)   In addition to division (A) above, applicants for commercial
structures shall submit the following information:
      (1)   Elevations and dimensions of all sides of existing and proposed
buildings, including roof mechanical equipment, vents, chimneys, or other
projecting items above the roof line;
      (2)   Elevations and dimensions of all existing or proposed solid waste
and recycling containment areas;
      (3)   Type and color of all mechanical screening material, metal
flashing, and the like;
      (4)   In order to aid in evaluating the exterior design, the applicant
shall submit schematic floor plans showing, if applicable, window locations,
doors, loading docks, projected interior layouts, seating, bar areas, waiting
areas, vestibules, storage areas, food preparation areas, interior trash, or
recycling space and the like;
      (5)   The height, location, and screening materials for heating, air
conditioning, and ventilating and electrical equipment;
      (6)   Colored exterior building elevations, exterior building, and finish
material samples and color pallets; and
      (7)   Other information as required.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed  6-8-2021)
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
§ 153.145 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS.
   Pursuant to G.S. Chapter 160D, Art. 12, the Town of Biltmore Forest may
enter into a development agreement with developers, subject to the procedures
outlined below.
   (A)   Before entering into a development agreement, a local government shall
conduct a legislative hearing on the proposed agreement. The notice provisions
of G.S. § 160D-602 applicable to zoning map amendments shall be followed for
this hearing. The notice for the hearing must specify the location of the
property subject to the development agreement, the development uses proposed on
the property, and must specify a place where a copy of the proposed development
agreement can be obtained. (2019-111, s. 2.4; 2020-3, s. 4.33(a); 2020-25, ss.
25, 51(a), (b), (d).)
   (B)   Content and modification. A development agreement shall, at a minimum,
include all of the following:
      (1)   A description of the property subject to the agreement and the
names of its legal and equitable property owners.
      (2)   The duration of the agreement. However, the parties are not
precluded from entering into subsequent development agreements that may extend
the original duration period.
      (3)   The development uses permitted on the property, including
population densities and building types, intensities, placement on the site,
and design.
      (4)   A description of public facilities that will serve the development,
including who provides the facilities, the date any new public facilities, if
needed, will be constructed, and a schedule to assure public facilities are
available concurrent with the impacts of the development. In the event that the
development agreement provides that the local government shall provide certain
public facilities, the development agreement shall provide that the delivery
date of such public facilities will be tied to successful performance by the
developer in implementing the proposed development, such as meeting defined
completion percentages or other performance standards.
      (5)   A description, where appropriate, of any reservation or dedication
of land for public purposes and any provisions agreed to by the developer that
exceed existing laws related to protection of environmentally sensitive
property.
      (6)   A description, where appropriate, of any conditions, terms,
restrictions, or other requirements for the protection of public health,
safety, or welfare.
      (7)   A description, where appropriate, of any provisions for the
preservation and restoration of historic structures.
   (C)   A development agreement may also provide that the entire development
or any phase of it be commenced or completed within a specified period. If
required by ordinance or in the agreement, the development agreement shall
provide a development schedule, including commencement dates and interim
completion dates at no greater than five-year intervals; provided, however, the
failure to meet a commencement or completion date does not, in and of itself,
constitute a material breach of the development agreement pursuant to G.S. §
160D-1008 but must be judged based upon the totality of the circumstances. The
developer may request a modification in the dates as set forth in the
agreement.
   (D)   If more than one local government is made party to an agreement, the
agreement must specify which local government is responsible for the overall
administration of the development agreement. A local or regional utility
authority may also be made a party to the development agreement.
   (E)   The development agreement also may cover any other matter, including
defined performance standards, not inconsistent with this chapter. The
development agreement may include mutually acceptable terms regarding provision
of public facilities and other amenities and the allocation of financial
responsibility for their provision, provided any impact mitigation measures
offered by the developer beyond those that could be required by the local
government shall be expressly enumerated within the agreement, and provided the
agreement may not include a tax or impact fee not otherwise authorized by law.
   (F)   Consideration of a proposed major modification of the agreement shall
follow the same procedures as required for initial approval of a development
agreement. What changes constitute a major modification may be determined by
ordinance adopted pursuant to G.S. § 160D-1003 or as provided for in the
development agreement.
   (G)   Any performance guarantees under the development agreement shall
comply with G.S. § 160D-804.1. (2019-111, s. 2.4; 2020-3, s. 4.33(a); 2020-25,
ss. 26, 51(a), (b), (d).)
(Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.146 VESTING.
   (A)   Unless the development agreement specifically provides for the
application of subsequently enacted laws, the laws applicable to development of
the property subject to a development agreement are those in force at the time
of execution of the agreement.
   (B)   Except for grounds specified in G.S. § 160D-108(c) or G.S. § 160D-
108.1(f), a local government may not apply subsequently adopted ordinances or
development policies to a development that is subject to a development
agreement.
   (C)   In the event state or federal law is changed after a development
agreement has been entered into and the change prevents or precludes compliance
with one or more provisions of the development agreement, the local government
may modify the affected provisions, upon a finding that the change in state or
federal law has a fundamental effect on the development agreement.
   (D)   This section does not abrogate any vested rights otherwise preserved
by law. (2019-111, s. 2.4; 2020-3, s. 4.33(a); 2020-25, ss. 27, 51(a), (b),
(d).)
(Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.147 BREACH AND CURE.
   (A)   Procedures established pursuant to G.S. § 160D-1003 may include a
provision requiring periodic review by the Zoning Administrator or other
appropriate officer of the local government, at which time the developer shall
demonstrate good-faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement.
   (B)   If the local government finds and determines that the developer has
committed a material breach of the agreement, the local government shall notify
the developer in writing setting forth with reasonable particularity the nature
of the breach and the evidence supporting the finding and determination and
providing the developer a reasonable time in which to cure the material breach.
   (C)   If the developer fails to cure the material breach within the time
given, then the local government unilaterally may terminate or modify the
development agreement, provided the notice of termination or modification may
be appealed to the Board of Adjustment in the manner provided by G.S. § 160D-
405.
   (D)   An ordinance adopted pursuant to G.S. § 160D-1003 or the development
agreement may specify other penalties for breach in lieu of termination,
including, but not limited to, penalties allowed for violation of a development
regulation. Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed to abrogate or impair
the power of the local government to enforce applicable law.
   (E)   A development agreement shall be enforceable by any party to the
agreement notwithstanding any changes in the development regulations made
subsequent to the effective date of the development agreement. Any party to the
agreement may file an action for injunctive relief to enforce the terms of a
development agreement. (2019-111, s. 2.4; 2020-3, s. 4.33(a); 2020-25, s. 51
(a), (b), (d).)
(Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.148 AMENDMENTS.
   Subject to the provisions of G.S. § 160D-1006(e), a development agreement
may be amended or terminated by mutual consent of the parties. (2019-111, s.
2.4; 2020-3, s. 4.33(a); 2020-25, s. 51(a), (b), (d).)
(Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.149 CHANGE OF JURISDICTION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by this subchapter, any development
agreement entered into by a local government before the effective date of a
change of jurisdiction shall be valid for the duration of the agreement or
eight years from the effective date of the change in jurisdiction, whichever is
earlier. The parties to the development agreement and the local government
assuming jurisdiction have the same rights and obligations with respect to each
other regarding matters addressed in the development agreement as if the
property had remained in the previous jurisdiction.
   (B)   A local government assuming jurisdiction may modify or suspend the
provisions of the development agreement if the local government determines that
the failure of the local government to do so would place the residents of the
territory subject to the development agreement or the residents of the local
government, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or
both. (2019-111, s. 2.4; 2020-3, s. 4.33(a); 2020-25, s. 51(a), (b), (d).)
(Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.150 RECORDATION.
   The developer shall record the agreement with the Register of Deeds in the
county where the property is located within 14 days after the local government
and developer execute an approved development agreement. No development
approvals may be issued until the development agreement has been recorded. The
burdens of the development agreement are binding upon, and the benefits of the
agreement shall inure to, all successors in interest to the parties to the
agreement.
(Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 153.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter, for which no other
penalty is provided, shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
10.99.
   (B)   Unless extraordinary and reasonably unforeseeable delaying factors not
resulting from the owner’s action or inaction can be clearly demonstrated and
proven, failure to have the construction or remodeling substantially complete
at the end of the two-year time period shall subject the property owner to a
fine of $250 per day.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1983; Ord. passed 6-8-2021; Ord. 2022-04, passed 10-11-2022)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
[Reserved]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to 2013 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
G.S. References Code Section
G.S. References      Code Section
1-593                10.05
4-32                 90.02
7A                   151.44
                     34.06,
                     50.01,
                     50.02,
                     50.10,
                     50.33,
                     51.02,
                     90.01,
14-4                 90.21,
                     90.39,
                     91.01,
                     130.01,
                     130.03,
                     130.05,
                     130.08,
                     152.99
14-4(a)              10.99
14-4(b)              70.99
14-41                152.99
14-132               130.03
14-159.1             50.10
14-286               92.22
14-360               90.01
18B-1 et seq.        110.01
18B-1001             110.02
18B-1004(c)          110.02
20                   Ch. 71
20, Art. 3           71.20
20, Art. 7A          94.10
20-141               Ch. 73, Schd. I
20-145               Ch. 73, Schd. I
20-153               71.37
20-157.1             71.38
20-158               Ch. 72
20-169               Ch. 71
20-171               71.10
44A, Art. 1          94.12
47-30                152.07,
                     152.32
47-30.2              152.25
47-301               152.25
47A                  153.008
58-82-1              Ch. 92
60A-174              91.02
67-4.1—67-4.5      Ch. 90
67-12                Ch. 90
68-17—38.25        90.03
71-38                72.04
74-46 et seq.        52.03
89C                  152.06,
                     152.07
105-271              33.15
106-403              92.05
113A-54              153.034
130, Art. 9          151.05
130A-290(a)(6)       151.05
130A-290(a)(35)      151.05
130A-290(a)(36)      151.05
132-1 et seq.        39.01
136-143 et seq.      94.15
143, Art. 21, pt. 6  151.01
143, Art. 33C        Charter,
                     153.109
143-136 et seq.      150.20
143-143.15           151.26
150, Art. 12         153.050
160A, Art. 7, pt. 2  Charter
160A-11              10.18,
                     91.02
160A-70              31.02
160A-71              30.15
160A-101             Charter
160A-102             Charter
160A-103             Charter
160A-162             32.01
160A-174             91.02
160A-175             10.99
160A-178             130.04
160A-182             90.01
160A-184             130.03
160A-186             Ch. 90
160A-193             92.01
160A-205.3           110.02
160A-206             Ch. 33
160A-209             33.16
160A-212             Ch. 90
160A-216—160A-236  Ch. 33
160A-266(c)          33.01
160A-270             Ch. 33
160A-281             31.15
160A-282(a) and (b)  31.15
160A-288             Ch. 34
160A-296             Ch. 91,
                     91.02
160A-300             Ch. 71,
                     91.02
160A-301             Ch. 72
160A-303             94.02
160A-303.1           94.15
160A-303.2           94.02,
                     94.15
160A-307             91.02
160A-312             Ch. 51
160A-361             153.085
160A-367             91.02
160A-371—160A- 376 152.02
160A-372             91.02
160A-388             151.45
160A-393(k)          153.111
160A-400.9(e)        153.111
160A, Art. 8         151.01
160A, Art. 12        33.01
160A, Art. 19, pt. 3 151.01
160A, Art. 19, pt. 5 151.01
160A, Art. 19, pt. 8 151.01
160D                 153.002
160D, Art. 10        153.004
160D, Art. 12        153.004,
                     153.145
160D-108(c)          153.146
160D-108.1(f)        153.146
160D-109             153.013
160D-309             153.085
160D-404             153.096
                     153.094,
160D-405             153.096,
                     153.147
160D-405(e)          153.096
160D-406             153.108
160D-406(d)          153.110,
                     153.111
160D-406(g)          153.110
160D-406(k)          153.110,
                     153.112
160D-602             153.145
160D-705(d)          153.004
160D-804.1           153.145
160D-914             153.029
160D-1003            153.145,
                     153.147
160D-1006(e)         153.148
160D-1008            153.145
160D-1123            153.094
160D-1206            153.094
160D-1405(d)         153.110
162A-1—162A-58     Ch. 50
162B-1 et seq.       Ch. 34
163-279              30.01
163-284              30.01
163, Art. 23         30.01
164-7                10.14
166A-19.31           Ch. 34
                     
 
REFERENCES TO 2013 CODE
2013 Code Section 2016 Code Section
2013 Code Section 2016 Code Section
1-2               10.05
1-5               10.19
1-6               10.20
2-1               31.01
2-2               31.02
2-3               31.03
2-4               31.03
2-5               30.15
2-6               30.16
2-7               30.17
2-8               30.18
2-9               30.02
2-10              31.04
2-11              33.01
2-21              32.01
2-22              32.02
2-23              32.03
2-24              32.03
2-25              32.04
2-26              32.05
3-1               110.01
4-1               90.01
4-2               90.02,
                  90.99
4-3               90.03
4-4               90.04
4-5               90.05
4-6a              90.06
4-7               90.07,
                  90.08
4-19              90.20
4-20              90.21
4-21              90.22
4-32              90.35
4-33              90.36
4-34              90.37
4-35              90.38
4-40              90.09
5-1               150.01
5-2               150.02
5-3               150.03
5-4               150.04
5-5               150.05
5-6               150.06
5-7               150.07
5-18              150.20
5-29              150.21
6-1               34.01
6-2               34.02
6-4               34.04
6-5               34.05
6-6               34.06
6-7               34.07
6-8               34.08,
                  34.99
7-1               30.01
7-2               30.01
7-3               30.01
8-1               92.20
8-2               92.21
8-3               92.22
9-1               51.01
9-3               51.03
9-4               51.04
9-5               51.05
9-6               51.06
9-7               51.07
9-8               51.08
9-9               51.09
9-10              51.10
9-11              51.11
9-12              51.12
9-13              51.13
9-15              51.14,
                  51.99
10-1              92.01
10-2              92.02
10-3              92.03
10-4              92.04
10-5              92.05
11-1              70.01
11-2              70.02
11-3              70.03
11-4              70.04
12-1              130.01
12-2              130.02
12-3              130.03
12-4              130.04
12-5              130.05
12-6              130.06
12-7              130.07
12-8              130.99
14-1              31.15
14-2              31.15
14-3              31.15
14-4              31.15
14-5              31.15
15-1              93.01
15-2              93.02
15-4              91.02,
                  91.99
15-5              91.03
15-6              91.04
16-1              33.15
16-2              33.16
17-1              71.01
17-2              71.02
17-3              71.03
17-4              71.04
17-5              71.05
17-6              71.06
17-7              71.07
17-8              71.08
17-9              71.09
17-10             71.10
17-11             71.10
17-12             71.12
17-13             71.13
17-14             71.14
17-15             71.15
17-16             71.16
17-17             71.17
17-18             71.18
17-19             71.19
17-20             71.20
17-30             71.35
17-31             71.36
17-32             71.37
17-33             71.38
17-34             71.39
17-35             71.40
17-35.1           72.05
17-35.2           72.05
17-36             71.41
17-47             72.01
17-48             72.02
17-49             72.03
17-50             72.04
17-51             72.05
17-62             70.15
17-63             70.16
17-64             70.17
17-65             70.18
17-67             70.19
18-3              50.03
18-4              50.04
18-41             50.04
18-42             50.04
18-50             50.05
18-51             50.05
18-52             50.05
18-53             50.06
18-54             50.07
18-55             50.07
18.56             50.08
18-57             50.07
18.58             50.09
18.59             50.99
18.60             50.11
18.61             50.12
18.62             50.13
18.63             50.14
18.64             50.15
18.65             50.30—
                  50.32
18.66             50.16
18-67             50.45
18-67.1           50.46
18-67.2           50.47
18-67.3           50.48
18-67.4           50.49
18-67.5           50.50
18-67.6           50.51
19-10             93.99
20-1              52.01
20-2              52.02
20-3              52.03
20-4              52.04
20-5              52.05
20-6              52.06
20-7              52.99
20-8              52.07
20-9              52.08
20-10             52.09
20-11             52.10
20-12             52.11
20-13             52.12
20-14             52.13
20-15             52.14
20-16             52.15
20-17             52.16
20-18             52.17
                  151.01—
                  151.13,
21                151.25—
                  151.29,
                  151.41,
                  151.99
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.042,
                     153.045—
                     153.047,
-        10-19-1983  153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     152.01—
                     152.10,
                     152.25—
-        7-17-1984   152.35,
                     152.50—
                     152.61,
                     152.99
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        2-25-1986   153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
-        9-15-1987   93.03
-        11-15-1988  33.01
-        12-8-1990   93.03
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        11-29-1994  153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        12-14-1999  153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
-        1-9-2001    153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
                     153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                   153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        10-9-2001   153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        7-9-2002    153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
-        9- -2002    93.03
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        3-7-2003    153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        11-9-2004   153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        12-14-2004  153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
-        5-11-2005   90.36
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        7-12-2005   153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        9-12-2006   153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
-        11-12-2006  130.02
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        1-9-2007    153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        12-11-2007  153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        6-10-2008   153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        9-16-2008   153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        2-8-2011    153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        9-13-2011   153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        12-13-2011  153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        4-17-2012   153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        4-9-2013    153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        7-9-2013    153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.001—
                     153.012,
                     153.025—
                     153.048,
                     153.060—
                     153.071,
-        8-12-2013   153.085—
                     153.091,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.999
                     153.004,
2015-01  8-11-2015   153.005,
                     153.006
-        -           93.99
-        -           153.029
                     90.04,
-        4-11-2017   90.05,
                     90.06,
                     90.10
-        6-20-2017   Charter
2018-01  1-9-2018    110.02
2019-01  8-13-2019   130.01
2019-02  9-17-2019   93.99
-        2-11-2020   153.029,
                     153.049
2021-01  1-12-2021   93.99
2021-02  2-9-2021    93.02—
                     93.05
                     153.001—
                     153.013,
                     153.025—
                     153.042,
                     153.044—
                     153.047,
                     153.049,
-        6-8-2021    153.085—
                     153.096,
                     153.105—
                     153.112,
                     153.125—
                     153.130,
                     153.145—
                     153.150,
                     153.999
2022-01  1-11-2022   130.08
2022-01  2-24-2023   31.15
2022-02  1-11-2022   130.09
2022-03  3-8-2022    93.02—
                     93.05
                     10.99,
                     34.06,
                     34.99,
                     50.01,
                     50.02,
                     50.10,
                     50.33,
                     50.99,
                     51.02,
                     51.99,
                     90.01,
2022-04  10-11-2022  90.21,
                     90.39,
                     90.99,
                     91.01,
                     91.99,
                     93.99,
                     130.01,
                     130.03,
                     130.05,
                     130.09,
                     130.99,
                     151.99,
                     153.999
2023-02  3-14-2023   94.01—
                     94.16
                     153.043,
2023–047-1-2023    153.048,
                     153.071
2023-05  10-9-2023   153.034
2023-06  10-9-2023   153.050—
                     153.058
2023-07  10-9-2023   153.060—
                     153.070
2023-08  11-14-2023  93.15—
                     93.23
2025-02  3-12-2025   130.04
2025-04  9-9-2025    90.11
2025-05  10-14-2025  153.005
                    
 
