BOONE, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-29 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through an ordinance passed 12-10-2025 and
State legislation current through 2025 Legislative Service Pamphlet No. 2
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Section histories; statutory references
 
   
10.98   Appeals
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the municipality of Boone shall
be designated as the Code of Boone and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein or by law or implication required, the same
rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of State law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Terms defined. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ADMINISTRATION. The Manager or his or her designee.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COUNTY. Watauga County, North Carolina.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to
any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of North Carolina.
      SUBCHAPTER.
         (a)   A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
         (b)   Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      TOWN, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION or MUNICIPALITY. The Town of Boone, North
Carolina.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the
words YEAR OF OUR LORD.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
"and/or", if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this municipality exercising the powers, duties
or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
or modification shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may
be prosecuted, enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued
in force and unmodified unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, if enacted after publication of the first
edition of this code of ordinances, and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (G.S. § 160A-69) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory reference"
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
      § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
         This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 139-1 et seq.
§ 10.98 APPEALS.
   Except where this code specifically provides procedures for appeal, a notice
of violation or civil citation may be appealed to the Town Manager. The alleged
violator (appellant) must notify the Town Clerk in writing of the specific
grounds for the appeal within ten days of the date of the notice of violation
or citation. The Town Manager shall schedule a hearing on the appeal within a
reasonable time, not later than 14 calendar days from receipt of the written
notice of appeal and shall consider all relevant evidence in reaching a
decision. The Town Manager shall issue a written decision to the appellant not
later than seven calendar days from the date of the hearing. The Town Manager’s
decision shall be final and not appealable.
(Ord. passed 1-15-2019)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Except to the extent specifically provided otherwise in another chapter of
this code of ordinances, the following shall apply with respect to any
violation of this code of ordinances:
   (A)   In the event of a violation of this ordinance, the violator shall be
issued a citation or other written notice of the violation.
   (B)   A violation of a provision of this code shall not constitute a
criminal infraction or misdemeanor as provided at G.S. 14-4 and shall not be
subject to criminal prosecution.
   (C)   A violation of a town ordinance regulating the operation or parking of
vehicles shall subject the violator to a civil penalty of $50. Violation of any
other provision of this code shall subject the violator to a civil penalty in
the amount of $100.
   (D)   Civil penalties must be paid within 30 calendar days after receipt of
the notice. If the violator does not pay the penalty within 30 calendar days
after receipt of the notice, a late-payment penalty of $20 shall accrue. The
town may recover the penalty and any subsequently accruing penalties in a civil
action.
   (E)   Each day's continuing violation of any ordinance provision shall be a
separate and distinct violation subject to a separate civil penalty and
separate late-payment penalty.
   (F)   All ordinances also may be enforced by appropriate equitable remedies
issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction, including but not limited to
orders of abatement and/or injunction, and by any other remedy authorized
pursuant to G.S. 160A-175 or other law.
   (G)   In the event it is necessary for the town to institute a civil action
to collect a civil penalty for the violation of any provision of any town
ordinance, the offender shall pay all court costs, including filing fees, fees
for service of process, and other expenses incurred in the litigation, such as
costs of depositions, copying expenses and charges, and reasonable attorney's
fees incurred by the town.
(Ord. 13-01, passed 1-15-2013; Ord. passed 7-23-2015; Ord. passed 12-15-2016;
Ord. passed 11-21-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-175
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
30.   TOWN COUNCIL
         
31.   TOWN OFFICIALS
         
32.   POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
         
33.   OTHER DEPARTMENTS
         
34.   RESERVED
         
35.   BOARDS, COMMISSION, COMMITTEES AND OTHER SUCH ENTITIES
         
36.   TOWN LOGO
         
37.   CONTRACTS
         
38.   NONDISCRIMINATION
         
39.   HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
CHAPTER 30: TOWN COUNCIL
Section
Meetings
   
30.01   Organizational meeting
   
30.02   Regular meetings
   
30.03   Special meetings
   
30.04   Emergency meetings
   
30.05   Continued or recessed meetings
   
30.06   Agenda
   
30.07   Order of business
   
30.08   Presiding officer
   
30.09   Quorum
   
30.10   Taking official action
   
30.11   Debate
   
30.12   Voting
   
30.13   Adoption of ordinances
   
30.14   Closed sessions
   
30.15   Public hearings
   
30.16   Minutes
Motions
   
30.30   Substantive and procedural motions
   
30.31   Motion to amend
   
30.32   Motion to dispose of issue without deciding merits
   
30.33   Motions to revive or reconsider an issue
   
30.34   Renewal of motions
   
30.35   Motion to terminate debate
   
30.36   Procedural motions
Other Council Matters
   
30.50   Qualifications for office
   
30.51   Appointments
   
30.52   Code of Ethics
   
30.53   Robert's Rules of Order
MEETINGS
§ 30.01 ORGANIZATIONAL MEETING.
   At the first regular meeting in December (at any time after the results of
the municipal election have been officially determined and published) following
a general election in which Council members are elected, the Mayor and Council
members shall take and subscribe the oath of office as the first order of
business. As the second order of business, the Council shall elect from its
members a Mayor Pro Tempore who shall hold office at the pleasure of the
Council.
(Ord. passed 2-19-2015)
§ 30.02 REGULAR MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Council shall hold a regular meeting(s) each month. At its
organizational meeting, the Town Council shall fix the time and place of its
regular meetings. By ordinance, resolution or other official action, its
regular meeting schedule may be changed by the Council, but it shall direct
that a current copy of the revised schedule, showing the time and place of
regular meetings, be kept on file with the Clerk. A revised schedule shall not
take effect less than seven calendar days following its adoption.
   (B)   The Town Council shall ensure that its schedule of regular meetings is
posted to the town’s Web site.
(Ord. passed 3-20-2014; Ord. passed 2-19-2015)
§ 30.03 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   A SPECIAL MEETING is any non-emergency meeting of the Council held at
any time other than that specified in §
30.02. The Council acknowledges that special meetings of the Town Council,
although sometimes needed for the effective governance of the town, create
significant burdens on town staff and may impose significant costs on the town.
Excluding quarterly public hearings, budget workshops and properly called
emergency meetings under §
30.04, and recognizing the provisions of G.S. § 160A-71 regarding the calling
of a special meeting, in order to control those burdens and costs, the Council
shall seek to limit the number of special meetings called in any calendar year
to 12 or fewer, with the goal of no more than three meetings held each calendar
quarter. To facilitate this end, the Council shall ordinarily refrain from
scheduling a special meeting when the item of business for which a special
meeting is considered may be adequately addressed at another meeting of the
Council. In general, special meetings shall be used for matters involving the
following:
      (1)   Decisions, although not constituting an emergency, which must be
made prior to another scheduled meeting of the Council;
      (2)   Issues of scope or complexity that they cannot be accommodated
within the available times for other scheduled meetings of the Council; or
      (3)   Matters which, due to their nature, require the attendance of non-
staff guests who are unavailable at other scheduled meetings of the Council.
   (B)   The Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tempore or any two members of the Council
may, at any time, call a special meeting by signing a written notice stating
the time and place of the meeting, and the subject to be considered.
   (C)   Notice of the meeting shall be given to Council members as provided in
this division (C), preferably 48 hours, but not less than six hours, before the
meeting:
      (1)   Written notice shall be delivered personally to each Council
member; or
      (2)   If notice cannot be personally delivered, notice may be left at the
Council member's usual place of dwelling. In this event, administration shall
make every reasonable effort to contact the Council member by telephone.
   (D)   Special meetings may be held when all Council members are present and
consent thereto or when those not present have signed a written waiver of
notice, provided that the notice to the media required by division (E) below is
given.
   (E)   Administration shall give notice of a special meeting to the public
and the media at least 48 hours before the meeting by:
      (1)   Posting a notice of the time and place of the meeting on the town’s
principal bulletin board;
      (2)   Mailing or delivering notice of the meeting to each of the media
who has requested it in accordance with the Open Meetings Law;
      (3)   Mailing or delivering notice of the meeting to any person who has
filed with the Clerk a written request for it in accordance with the Open
Meetings Law; and
      (4)   Posting of notice of the meeting on the town’s Web site.
   (F)   Only those items of business specified in the notice may be transacted
at a special meeting unless all members are present or have signed a written
waiver of notice and all members present agree.
   (G)   A special meeting may also be called or scheduled by vote of the
Council in open session during another duly called meeting. The motion or
resolution calling or scheduling the special meeting shall specify its time,
place and purpose.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 3-20-2014)
§ 30.04 EMERGENCY MEETINGS.
   (A)   An EMERGENCY MEETING is a meeting of the Council called because of
generally unexpected circumstances that require immediate consideration.
   (B)   The Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tempore or any two members of the Council
may, at any time, call an emergency meeting by signing a written statement
stating the time and place of the meeting and the subjects to be considered.
   (C)   Notice of the meeting shall be given to Council members in the same
manner as notice of special meetings.
   (D)   Emergency meetings may also be held when all Council members are
present and consent thereto or when those not present have signed a written
waiver of notice, provided that the notice to the media required by division
(E) below is given.
   (E)   Administration shall give notice of an emergency meeting to each of
the media who has requested it in accordance with the Open Meetings Law. This
notice shall be given either by telephone or by the same method used to notify
Council members and shall be given immediately after the notice has been given
to those members.
   (F)   Only business connected with the emergency may be transacted at an
emergency meeting. No item may be added for action at an emergency meeting with
the exception of a request for the scheduling of another emergency meeting in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
(Ord. passed 9-21-2010)
§ 30.05 CONTINUED OR RECESSED MEETINGS.
   (A)   By majority vote, the Council may continue or recess any regular,
special, or emergency meeting to any place and time specified in the motion to
continue or recess the meeting.
   (B)   In the event of a continued or recessed meeting, the Council shall
direct the Town Clerk to post notice of the continued or recessed meeting on
the town’s Web site setting out the date, time, and location of the meeting. No
further notice need be given of any continued or recessed session of a meeting
set in accordance with division (A) above.
(Ord. passed 3-20-2014)
§ 30.06 AGENDA.
   (A)   Regular meetings.
      (1)   Requests to be placed on agenda. The Town Clerk shall provide
notice each month of the deadline for submission of items requested to be
placed on the agenda. Such notice shall be posted on the town’s website and on
the town’s principal bulletin board at least seven calendar days in advance of
the deadline. A request for an item to be placed on the agenda shall include a
description of the subject matter involved and an explanation of the action
which is requested. When appropriate, it shall be accompanied by such materials
and documents as may be needed in order to explain or understand the request.
As feasible, a copy of all proposed ordinances shall be provided with a request
that an ordinance be considered.
      (2)   Preparation of agenda. The Town Manager or his or her designee
shall prepare the agenda for the meeting.
      (3)   Distribution of agenda. On the Friday preceding the regular meeting
date, the Clerk shall provide a copy of the agenda to the Mayor and each member
of the Council, as well as each town department head. In addition, a copy of
the agenda shall be mailed, e-mailed, or delivered to each newspaper, wire
service, radio station, and television station that has filed a written request
for notice with the Clerk and to any person, in addition to the representatives
of the media listed above, who has filed a written request with the Clerk. Each
newspaper, wire service, radio station, and television station submitting a
written request for notice must renew its request annually by January 10 of
each year. Persons other than the media who request a copy shall be charged a
fee of $10 per calendar year for notice other than by e-mail, for which no
charge shall be made, and must renew their requests annually by January 10 of
each year. A copy of the agenda shall also be posted on the town’s Web site.
      (4)   Additions and deletions. As its regularly-scheduled meetings, the
Council may, by unanimous vote of the Council members present, add an item of
business or delete an item from the meeting agenda. Unless otherwise specified
by the Council, additions to the agenda shall be considered at the conclusion
of all other regular business.
      (5)   Inspection and distribution. Copies of the agenda and attachments
shall be available for public inspection as soon as they are completed.
Additional copies of the agenda shall be available for the press and interested
members of the public.
   (B)   Special and emergency meetings. The Town Manager or his or her
designee shall prepare the agenda for any special or emergency meeting,
including therein only such matters as have been included in the notice of the
meeting. Distribution of the agenda shall be in accordance with the
requirements of §§
30.03 and
30.04.
(Ord. passed 3-20-2014; Ord. passed 4-24-2014; Ord. passed 2-19-2015; Ord.
passed 6-16-2016)
§ 30.07 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   (A)   Items of business shall be taken up at a meeting in the order that
they appear on the agenda, except as provided in division (D) below.
   (B)   Items shall be placed on the agenda according to the “order of
business” in conformity with subsection (H).
   (C)   Broad categories of business may be included as agenda items; examples
included but are not limited to“members of the public wishing to be heard,”
“matters by the Manager,” or “matters by the Attorney.”
   (D)   Items may be considered out of order by consent of all the members
present or by majority vote upon a motion.
   (E)   Persons desiring to address the Council shall, if at all possible,
call the office of the Town Clerk and give their names, addresses, and subject
matters to be discussed and shall meet the agenda item request submission
deadlines as set forth at §
30.06(A)(1) if they wish to appear as part of an agenda item. Such deadlines do
not apply to a person addressing the Council as part of the “public comment”
part of the meeting. Persons desiring to speak on an agenda item will be
recognized to speak when the agenda item is reached if the agenda item
authorizes the receipt of public comment or the Council, by majority vote,
authorizes public comment in connection with a particular agenda item. No
person, in addressing the Town Council, except as otherwise provided herein,
shall be allowed to speak more than five minutes unless the presiding officer
allows an extension of time. The presiding officer may, in his or her
discretion, shorten the time for speaking when an unusually large number of
persons have registered to speak.
   (F)   Any person wishing to address the Council at any regular meeting, who
has not been authorized to address the Council as part of an agenda item, shall
place his or her name on a sign up sheet available for this purpose. The person
shall be entitled to speak under “Public Comment,” subject to the following
rules and regulations:
      (1)   Speakers shall be recognized in the order in which they have signed
up.
      (2)   During the public comment period, no person shall be allowed to
speak for more than five minutes unless the presiding officer allows an
extension of time. When the Mayor or other presiding officer determines that
there are more speakers than can be reasonably heard during the 15-minute
initial public comment period, the Mayor or presiding officer may limit each
speaker's presentation to less than five minutes. Likewise, the Town Council,
by motion and majority vote, may limit the time allotted to each speaker to
less than five minutes and may grant a speaker more than five minutes to
complete a public comment. Any person who wishes to address the Town Council
but is unable to speak during the initial 15-minute public comment period due
to the number of persons offering public comment who signed up ahead of that
person shall be given an opportunity to address the Town Council at the
conclusion of all business scheduled for open session, subject to the same
procedures and rules which apply to the initial 15-minute public comment
period.
      (3)   Should more than one person wish to make substantially the same
comments regarding the same subject, or where a group of persons supports or
opposes the same positions, the presiding officer may require that all persons
designate a spokesperson for their group to address the Town Council, and the
presiding officer may allot a larger amount of time for the presentation of the
group position by the spokesperson.
      (4)   When the number of persons wishing to address the Town Council
during the “public comment” period exceeds the number of people who can be
safely accommodated within the Town Council chambers or other location of the
meeting, the presiding officer may require that all persons select delegates
from the groups of persons supporting or opposing the same positions to address
the Town Council, and the presiding officer may allot a larger amount of time
for the presentation of the group position by each delegate.
      (5)   All persons addressing the Town Council during the public comment
period shall be treated respectfully by other persons in attendance at the
meeting, and all speakers shall conduct themselves with proper decorum. Should
any person present during a public comment period substantially interfere with
the ability of a person offering public comment or engage in behavior which
violates norms of accepted decorum, or should a person offering public comment
engage in behavior which violates norms of accepted decorum, after warning the
person(s) and, except in a situations where there is a risk of harm to any
person present, providing the person(s) the opportunity to alter his, her, or
their behavior to bring it into conformity with norms of accepted behavior, the
presiding officer may direct that the person(s) be removed from the meeting.
However, a person expressing positions which are critical of town policies or
actions, or criticizing the Mayor, Town Council members, town staff, town
officials, or town policies or actions shall not, on that basis alone, be
considered to have engaged in behavior which violates norms of accepted
decorum.
      (6)   Unless the agenda is amended in accordance with this section so as
to allow action on an item raised during the public comment period, the matter
presented by the speaker shall be for information.
   (G)   Items shall be placed on the agenda in the order directed by the Town
Manager, and shall generally include: call to order; announcements; public
hearings (other than quasi-judicial hearings); public comment; requested
appearances; consent agenda adoption; quasi-judicial hearings; Council matters;
announcements of vacancies to boards, commissions, task forces, advisory
bodies, and committees; appointments to boards, commissions, task forces,
advisory bodies, and committees; resolutions requesting appointments by the
County Commission of ETJ members to the Planning Commission and Board of
Adjustment; public comment not reached during the initial public comment
period; closed session; and adjournment. By general consent of the Council or
majority vote, items may be considered out of order and items not fitting into
one of the named categories may be considered. The Council may, by unanimous
vote of those present, add items to or subtract items from the proposed agenda,
except that the Council may not add items to the proposed agenda stated in the
notice of a special meeting called by the Mayor, Mayor Pro Tempore, and two
Council members, unless all members are present and agree, or those who are
absent sign a written waiver of notice, and all members who are present agree;
and only business connected with an emergency may be considered at an emergency
meeting. The Council shall not deliberate, vote, or otherwise take action on
any matter by reference to a letter, number or other designation, or other
secret device or method with the intention of making it impossible for persons
attending a meeting of the Council to understand what is being deliberated,
voted, or acted on. The Council may, however, deliberate, vote, or otherwise
take action by reference to an agenda, if copies of the agenda, sufficiently
worded to enable the public to understand what is being deliberated, voted, or
acted on, are available for public inspection at the meeting.
(Ord. passed 4-20-2006; Ord. passed 6-19-2008; Ord. passed 1-15-2009; Ord.
passed 3-20-2014; Ord. passed 2-19-2015; Ord. passed 10-20-2016)
§ 30.08 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at meetings of the Council, except as provided
in division (C) below. A member must be recognized by the Presiding Officer in
order to address the Council.
   (B)   As Presiding Officer, the Presiding Officer shall have the following
powers, in addition to those conferred elsewhere in this chapter:
      (1)   To rule motions in or out of order, including the right to rule out
of order any motion patently offered for obstructive or dilatory purposes;
      (2)   To determine whether a speaker has gone beyond reasonable standards
of courtesy in his or her remarks and to entertain and rule upon objections
from other members on this ground;
      (3)   To entertain and answer questions of parliamentary law or
procedure, subject to being overruled by a two-thirds vote of the membership of
the Council;
      (4)   To call a brief recess at any time; and
      (5)   To adjourn in the event of an emergency.
   (C)   If the Mayor is unable to attend the Council meeting, or if the Mayor
becomes actively engaged in debate on a particular proposal, he or she may
delegate the duty to preside to the Mayor Pro Tempore or to any other member of
the Council who is not so engaged and who acquiesces in the delegation. The
temporary Presiding Officer may only preside over the debate and may not
participate in it; however, he or she does not forfeit his or her right to vote
on the issue by acting as temporary Presiding Officer. The Presiding Officer
shall resume the duty to preside as soon as action upon the matter is
concluded.
§ 30.09 QUORUM.
   A majority of the actual membership of the Council and the Mayor, excluding
vacant seats, shall constitute a quorum. A quorum is necessary for the Council
to take any official action. A member who has withdrawn from a meeting without
being excused by majority vote of the remaining members present shall be
counted as present for purposes of determining whether a quorum is present.
§ 30.10 TAKING OFFICIAL ACTION.
   (A)   The Council shall proceed by motion. Any member may make a motion. A
motion shall require a second; it brings the matter before the Council for its
consideration. A member may make only one motion at a time.
   (B)   A motion may be withdrawn by the introducer at any time prior to a
vote. A substantive motion is out of order while another substantive motion is
pending.
   (C)   Subject to §
30.13 and other provisions of law, official action of the Council shall be by
majority vote. A motion shall be adopted by a majority of the votes cast, a
quorum being present, unless otherwise required by these rules of the laws of
the state.
§ 30.11 DEBATE.
   (A)   Once a motion has been introduced and seconded, the Mayor shall open
the floor to debate upon it.
   (B)   The Mayor shall preside over the debate according to the following
general principles:
      (1)   The introducer (the member who makes the motion) is entitled to
speak first;
      (2)   A member who has not spoken on the issue shall be recognized before
someone who has already spoken; and
      (3)   To the extent possible, the debate shall alternate between
proponents and opponents of the measure.
§ 30.12 VOTING.
   (A)   Once a member is physically present at a Council meeting, any
subsequent failure to vote shall be recorded as an affirmative vote unless the
member has been excused from voting in accordance with division (B) below or
has been allowed to withdraw from the meeting in accordance with division (C)
below.
   (B)   A member may be excused from voting on a particular issue by voting on
a particular issue by majority vote of the remaining members present if the
matter at issue involves the member's own financial interest or official
conduct.
   (C)   A member may be allowed to withdraw from the entire remainder of a
meeting by majority vote of the remaining members present for any good and
sufficient reason other than the member's desire to avoid voting on matters to
be considered at that meeting.
   (D)   A motion to allow a member to be excused from voting or excused from
the remainder of the meeting is only in order if made by or at the initiative
of the member directly affected.
   (E)   All votes shall be recorded.
   (F)   When this chapter specifies that action shall be taken by majority
vote or fails to specify the vote required, that shall be interpreted to mean a
vote of the majority of those present and not excused from voting. When a two-
thirds vote is required, that shall be interpreted to mean a vote of two-thirds
of those present and not excused from voting. When a vote of a certain
percentage of the Council membership is required, that shall be interpreted to
mean the specified percentage of all seats of the Council, excluding vacant
seats.
§ 30.13 ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   An affirmative vote equal to a majority of all the members of the
Council not excused from voting on the question in issue (including the Mayor's
vote in case of an equal division) shall be required to adopt an ordinance, to
take any action that has the effect of an ordinance or to make, ratify or
authorize any contract on behalf of the town. Subject to the provisions of G.S.
Ch. 159 (Local Government Finance), no ordinance or action that has the effect
of an ordinance may be finally adopted on the date on which it is introduced,
except by an affirmative vote equal to or greater than two-thirds of all the
actual membership of the Council, excluding vacant seats, and not including the
Mayor unless he or she has the right to vote on all questions before the
Council. No ordinance shall be adopted unless it has been reduced to writing
before a vote on adoption is taken.
   (B)   When an ordinance requires a public hearing, the ordinance shall be
considered introduced at the meeting when the Council sets a date for the
public hearing.
   (C)   Franchise ordinances and amendments shall not be finally adopted until
passed at two regular meetings of the Council. Except as provided in this
section, motions, resolutions and ordinances will be deemed adopted if passed
upon one reading.
   (D)   Adoption of the budget ordinance notwithstanding the provisions of any
charter, general law or local act.
      (1)   Any action with respect to the adoption or amendment of the budget
ordinance may be taken at any regular or special meeting of the Council by a
simple majority of those present and voting, a quorum being present;
      (2)   No action taken with respect to the adoption or amendment of the
budget ordinance need be published or is subject to any other procedural
requirement governing the adoption of ordinances or resolutions by the Council;
and
      (3)   The adoption and amendment of the budget ordinance and the levy of
tax in the budget ordinance are not subject to the provisions of any charter or
local act concerning initiative or referendum. During the period beginning with
the submission of the budget to the Council and ending with the adoption of the
budget ordinance, the Council may hold any special meetings that may be
necessary to complete its work on the budget ordinance. Except for the notice
requirements of the Open Meetings Law, which continue to apply, no provision of
the law concerning the call of a special meeting applies during that period so
long as each member of the Council has actual notice of each special meeting
called for the purpose of considering the budget; and no business other than
consideration of the budget is taken up. This rule does not allow, and may not
be construed to allow, the holding of closed meetings or closed sessions by the
Council if it is otherwise prohibited by law from holding a meeting or session.
(G.S. § 159-17)
§ 30.14 CLOSED SESSIONS.
   The Council may hold closed sessions as provided by law. The Council shall
only commence a closed session after a motion to go into closed session has
been made and adopted during an open meeting. The motion shall state the
general purpose of the closed session and must be approved by the vote of a
majority of those present and voting. The Council shall terminate the closed
session by majority vote. Only those actions specifically authorized by statute
may be taken in closed session. A motion to adjourn or recess the Council
meeting shall not be in order during a closed session. Minutes shall be kept of
closed sessions, but they may be withheld from public inspection so long as
public inspection would frustrate the purpose of the closed session.
§ 30.15 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Public hearings required by law or deemed advisable by the
Council shall be organized by a special order, adopted by a majority vote that
sets forth the subject, date, place, and time of the hearing as well as any
rules regarding the length of time for each speaker, and other pertinent
matters.
      (2)   The rules may include but are not limited to rules fixing the
maximum time allotted to each speaker; providing for the designation of
spokespersons for groups of persons supporting or opposing the same positions;
providing for the selection of delegates from groups of persons supporting or
opposing the same positions when a number of persons wishing to attend the
hearing exceed the capacity of the hall (so long as arrangements are made for
those excluded from the hall to listen to the hearing); and providing for the
maintenance of order and a quorum and the conduct of the hearing.
      (3)   All notice and other requirements of the Open Meetings Law
applicable to Council meetings shall also apply to public hearings at which a
majority of the Council is present. A public hearing for which any notices
required by the Open Meetings Law or other provisions of law have been given
may be continued to a time and place certain without further advertisement.
      (4)   The requirements of adjourned (or recessed) meetings shall be
followed and continuing a hearing at which a majority of the Council is
present.
   (B)   (1)   At the appointed time for the hearing, the Mayor or his or her
designee shall call the hearing to order and then preside over it.
      (2)   When the allotted time expires or when no one wishes to speak that
has not done so, the presiding officer shall declare the hearing ended.
   (C)   A quorum of the Council shall be required at all public hearings
required by state law. If a quorum is not present at a hearing, the hearing
shall be continued until the next regular Council meeting without further
advertisement or may be scheduled for a special hearing of the Council without
further notice so long as the date, time, and location of the special hearing
is announced.
(Ord. passed 3-20-2014)
§ 30.16 MINUTES.
   (A)   Full and accurate minutes of the Council proceedings shall be kept and
shall be open to the inspection of the public, except as otherwise provided in
this rule. The results of each vote shall be recorded in the minutes.
   (B)   (1)   Accurate minutes shall be kept of all actions taken during
closed sessions.
      (2)   Minutes and other records of a closed session may be withheld from
public inspection so long as public inspection would frustrate the purpose of
the closed session.
MOTIONS
§ 30.30 SUBSTANTIVE AND PROCEDURAL MOTIONS.
   (A)   A substantive motion is a motion that seeks to have the Council
exercise any of its powers, duties or responsibilities. A motion to amend a
substantive motion is also a substantive motion. A substantive motion, other
than to amend, is out of order while another substantive motion is pending.
(Note: This rule sets forth the basic principle of parliamentary procedure that
distinct issues will be considered and dealt with one at a time, and a new
proposal may not be put forth until action on the preceding one has been
concluded.)
   (B)   A procedural motion is a motion that relates either to the manner in
which the Council conducts its business in general or the manner in which the
Council deals with a particular substantive issue or substantive motion that is
before it.
   (C)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, all motions authorized by this
subchapter may be amended and debated.
§ 30.31 MOTION TO AMEND.
   (A)   An amendment to a motion must be pertinent to the subject matter of
the motion. An amendment is improper if adoption of the amended motion has the
same effect as a rejection of the original motion.
   (B)   A motion may be amended, and that amendment may be amended, but no
further amendments may be made until the last offered amendment is disposed of
by a vote.
   (C)   Any amendment to a proposed ordinance shall be reduced to writing
before the vote on the amendment of any member.
§ 30.32 MOTION TO DISPOSE OF ISSUE WITHOUT DECIDING MERITS.
   (A)   Motion to defer consideration until a date certain. This motion
requires that a date be set when without further action by the Council a matter
will again be placed on the agenda.
   (B)   Motion to defer consideration indefinitely. Adoption of this motion
removes the issue from the Council's consideration until the time as a motion
to revive consideration is adopted (see §
30.33(A)).
   (C)   Motion to refer to a committee. Unless this motion includes an
instruction to report the matter back by a date certain, or unless a motion is
adopted under §
30.33(B), a matter referred to a committee remains there until returned to the
Council by the committee.
§ 30.33 MOTIONS TO REVIVE OR RECONSIDER AN ISSUE.
   (A)   Motion to revive consideration of an issue. Adoption of this motion
brings an issue back before the Council for its consideration, regardless of
whether the issue had been deferred indefinitely or to a date certain.
   (B)   Motion to recall an issue from committee. Adoption of this motion may
bring a matter immediately before the Council, or the motion may direct a
committee to report an issue back to the Council by a date certain.
   (C)   Motion to reconsider a vote. This motion may be made only at the
meeting at which the vote in question was taken and only by a member who voted
with the prevailing side. If adopted, the effect is to negate the earlier vote
and bring the matter back before the Council as if the earlier vote had never
taken place.
§ 30.34 RENEWAL OF MOTIONS.
   A motion that is defeated may be renewed at any subsequent meeting.
§ 30.35 MOTION TO TERMINATE DEBATE.
   A motion to call the previous question is a motion to cut off debate on a
matter under consideration and put the matter to a vote. This motion shall be
in order at any time, but unless each Council member present has had an
opportunity to speak at least once on the issue, the motion requires a two-
thirds vote for adoption. This motion is not debatable and may not be amended.
§ 30.36 PROCEDURAL MOTIONS.
   In addition to substantive proposals, the following procedural motions, and
not others, shall be in order. Unless otherwise noted, each motion is
debatable, may be amended and requires a majority of the votes cast, a quorum
being present, for adoption:
   (A)   Divide a complex question and consider it by paragraph;
   (B)   Suspend the rules. The motion requires for adoption a vote equal to
two-thirds of the actual membership of the Council, excluding the Mayor and
vacant seats. The Council may not suspend provisions of the rules that state
requirements imposed by law on the Council;
   (C)   To take a brief recess;
   (D)   To adjourn. The motion may be made only at the conclusion of action on
pending substantive matter; it can not interrupt deliberation of a pending
matter. A motion to adjourn (or recess) to a time and place certain shall also
comply with requirements of §
30.05; and
   (E)   To rescind or appeal. The motion is not in order if recession or
repeal of an action is forbidden by law.
OTHER COUNCIL MATTERS
§ 30.50 QUALIFICATIONS FOR OFFICE.
   Upon the motion of any member, the Council shall determine the
qualifications of any member. An office may be declared vacant by majority vote
of the Council membership if the member fails to meet any of the statutory or
constitutional requirements of office.
§ 30.51 APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   All appointments made by the Council shall be made in open session.
The Council may not consider the qualifications, competence, performance,
character, fitness, appointment or removal of a member of the Town Council or
another body and may not consider or fill a vacancy among its own membership,
except in an open meeting. Final action making an appointment or discharge or
removal by a public body having final authority for the appointment or
discharge or removal shall be taken in an open meeting.
   (B)   Appointments to vacancies on Town Council. A vacancy on Town Council
shall be filled by the Council for the remainder of the unexpired terms.
      (1)   A candidate for appointment to a vacancy must complete and return
to the Town Clerk an application for appointment, on a form approved by the
Town Council and available from the town's website and the Town Clerk, by the
application deadline established by the Town Council or the Town Clerk.
      (2)   To be qualified for appointment to a vacant Town Council position,
a candidate must affirm the following on the application, under oath or by
affirmation:
         (a)   The candidate is or will be 21 years of age as of the date of
the application deadline; and
         (b)   The candidate resides within the town limits of Boone and has
resided within the town limits of Boone for the 30 days prior to the
application deadline, so that the candidate would have been qualified to vote
in a Town of Boone municipal election had an election been held on the date of
the application deadline.
      (3)   The Town Clerk shall reject any application in which the candidate
fails to affirm that the candidate meets the requirements of the foregoing
divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2).
      (4)   Procedure for appointment.
         (a)   Voting for appointment to a vacant Town Council position shall
first proceed by the nomination and ballot method:
            1.   The Mayor shall first open the floor to nominations.
Nominations shall be made by Council members from the applicants properly
before the Council, but a nomination shall require no "second." Once all
nominations have been made, the names of nominees shall be put forward by the
members and debated. Upon the conclusion of the debate, the Mayor shall propose
each name in alphabetical order and the members shall cast their votes. A
nominee receiving a majority of the votes cast shall be appointed.
            2.   Each Council member shall be entitled to one vote for each
position. If there are more than two nominees and no person receives a majority
of votes in the first vote, the applicant receiving the fewest votes shall be
excluded from further votes, and a second vote shall be taken. Unless excused
from voting, each member of the Council must cast a vote in each round of
voting. Voting rounds may continue in this fashion until a candidate receives a
majority of the votes or only two candidates remain for consideration.
         (b)   In the event voting by nomination and ballot results in a dead-
lock between two candidates, Council members shall proceed to vote by normal
motion procedure as provided at §§
30.10 through
30.13 herein.
   (C)   Vacancy in Office of Mayor. In case of a vacancy in the office of
Mayor, the remaining members of the Council may appoint a successor for the
unexpired term.
   (D)   All other appointments. The Council shall use the following procedure
to appoint individuals to various subordinate boards, commissions, task forces,
advisory bodies or committees, but this shall not apply to the designation by
the Council of one or more of its own members to participate or act as liaison
to boards, commissions, task forces, advisory bodies, committees or other
entities of its own creation or designation or appointment of one more of its
own members to participate or act as liaison to other bodies not created by the
town.
      (1)   At least two months before any anticipated vacancy on any board,
commission, task force, advisory body or committee (the "body") due to the
expiration of a term, the department head staffing the body shall notify the
Town Clerk of the expected vacancy. For vacancies created by resignation or
removal for failed attendance, the department head shall notify the Town Clerk
as soon as practical.
      (2)   At least 20 days before the Town Council meeting when the action is
to be taken, the Town Clerk shall cause to be published on the town's website
notice of the vacancies on town boards, commissions, task forces, advisory
bodies and committees for which appointments are contemplated, with the date
when action on the appointments is expected. So long as the advertisements
soliciting interest for an appointment to a body fully and accurately describe
criteria for membership that applies to multiple appointments to that body, the
Town Council may fill more than one position on the body from the applications
which are received, without regard to the time the vacancy occurs.
      (3)   Any person seeking appointment to a body, including individuals
seeking reappointment to the body and student representatives to the body, must
complete and submit to the Town Clerk an "Application for Appointment to a
Board, Commission, Task Force, Advisory Body or Committee" on a form approved
by the Town Council and available from the town's website and the Town Clerk.
      (4)   The Town Clerk shall include in the Board book for the meeting
where the appointment shall be considered:
         (a)   A copy of each timely application received for the appointment;
         (b)   A current roster of the membership of the body in question, with
terms shown; and
         (c)   A copy of the selection criteria, if any, established under
state law or town ordinance, such as the Unified Development Ordinance.
      (5)   Should an application be submitted too late for inclusion in the
Board book, it shall be included in the Board book of the Council’s regular
meeting the following month. Unless a person’s application is provided in the
Board book, the person shall not be considered for the appointment, but this
provision shall not prevent the Town Council from delaying appointment of the
position in question until a later meeting.
      (6)   Except as superseded by state law or otherwise directed by other
town ordinance, a person must be 18 years or older to be eligible for
appointment to a board.
      (7)   Except as superseded by state law or otherwise directed by other
town ordinance, people who reside in the town shall generally be favored for
appointment to town bodies over people who reside outside the town. However,
when an applicant does not reside in the town, but has particular skills or
experience that make appointment of that applicant desirable, the applicant may
nevertheless be appointed.
      (8)   The Town Council shall generally avoid appointment of any one
person to more than two bodies. In addition, no person other than a Town
Council member shall be allowed to serve on more than three concurrently
existing town bodies, including boards, commissions, task forces, advisory
bodies, committees or other entities. Any person inadvertently appointed to
more than three bodies shall be given an opportunity to resign from a
sufficient number of bodies to meet this limit, but after notice, if the person
fails to effectuate the resignations by notice to the Clerk within 30 days, the
Town Council shall designate the bodies upon which the person shall continue to
serve, and the designation shall operate to remove the person from all other
bodies.
      (9)   Council member may request that applicants for a body be present at
the Council meeting during which the appointment is expected to be made so that
the applicant may be questioned by members of the Council as to the applicant’s
qualifications. Even if no request is made, it shall be proper for Council
members to directly contact applicants to discuss the applicant’s interest in
and qualification for the appointment.
      (10)   At the meeting during which an appointment is to be made, the
Mayor shall first open the floor to nominations. Nominations shall be made by
Council members from the applicants properly before the Council, but a
nomination shall require no “second”. Once all nominations have been made, the
names of nominees shall be put forward by the members and debated. Upon the
conclusion of the debate, the Mayor shall propose each name in alphabetical
order and the members shall cast their votes.
      (11)   Each Council member shall be entitled to one vote for each
position, and when multiple appointments are made, each member cast each vote
for a different nominee. Voting shall continue until a nominee receives a
majority of the votes cast, whereupon that person shall be appointed. If more
appointments are to be made and an insufficient number of nominees receives a
majority of votes, there shall be successive votes until the requisite
appointments are made by majority vote. In each successive vote, any persons
receiving a majority of votes in the previous round and the applicant with the
fewest votes from the previous vote shall be excluded from further votes. If no
person receives a majority of votes in the second vote, the applicant receiving
the fewest votes in the second vote shall be excluded from further votes, and a
third vote shall be taken. Unless excused from voting, each member of the
Council must cast a vote in each round of voting.
      (12)   Members of a board, commission, task force, advisory body,
committee and other entity (hereafter, “the body”), except in cases in which a
particular term of service is specified, are appointed for the duration of the
body. However, if the duration of the body is indefinite, unless the Town
Council specifies a different term of membership, membership will be for three
years and may be renewed for one additional three-year term. Unless otherwise
specified by the Town Council, no person may serve on the body for more than
six consecutive years, but a person may be reappointed to the body following a
one-year period of non-membership. Unless the Town Council takes specific
action to excuse the absences and reappoints a member of the body after being
informed by the Town Clerk of the member’s removal, a member shall be
automatically removed for failure to attend three consecutive meetings or for
failure to attend 50% of the meetings within any 12-month period. Absence due
to sickness, death or other emergencies of like nature shall be recognized as
excused absences, and shall not be included in the attendance calculations nor
affect the member’s status on the body; except that, in the event of a long
illness or other cause for prolonged absence, the member shall be replaced. The
Town Clerk shall notify any member who has been removed. In addition, a member
of the Town Council may propose removal of a member for any cause related to
the performance of official duties, but before removal on that basis, the
member shall be given an opportunity to appear before the Town Council to
address the issues involved.
      (13)   Except for age and residency requirements, any of the foregoing
provisions may be waived by a four-fifths majority vote of Council where deemed
necessary in light of exigent circumstances. The Council recognizes that the
urgency of filling such vacancies may vary depending upon the circumstances of
the vacancy.
(Ord. passed 6-15-2006; Ord. passed 4-17-2008; Ord. passed 6-19-2008; Ord.
passed 10-29-2008; Ord. passed 6-18-2009; Ord. passed 4-15-2010; Ord. passed 8-
17-2010; Ord. passed 2-19-2015; Ord. passed 3-18-2021)
§ 30.52 CODE OF ETHICS.
   (A)   General principles underlying the Code of Ethics.
      (1)   Purpose. The purpose of this Code of Ethics is to establish
guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for members of the Town Council,
including the Mayor and members of the town's various volunteer boards,
committees and task forces (hereinafter, "committees") and to provide guidance
in determining what conduct is appropriate in particular cases. This Code
should not be considered a substitute for the law or for a Council member's
best judgment, and the provisions herein should be considered minimum standards
and examples. Town Council and committee members shall strive to bring the
perception and actual honesty to all endeavors related to town matters or which
may reflect on the public perception of the town.
      (2)   Commitment to the Code of Ethics. No person elected or appointed to
the Town Council or appointed to a committee of the town shall begin official
duties until that person has certified that he or she has read this Code of
Ethics. Each person so elected or appointed shall be provided by the Town Clerk
with a copy of this Code of Ethics.
      (3)   Foundation of Code of Ethics. The Code of Ethics is founded on the
following ideas and they shall inform the interpretation of the Code of Ethics.
         (a)   The stability and proper operation of democratic representative
government depends upon public confidence in the integrity of the government
and upon responsible exercise of the trust conferred by the people upon their
elected officials and the other persons they appoint to transact the
government's business.
         (b)   Governmental decisions and policy must be made and implemented
through proper channels, and fair and open processes of the governmental
structure to the extent possible.
         (c)   Elected local government officials must be able to act in a
manner that maintains their integrity and independence, yet is responsive to
the interests and needs of those they represent, without fear of reprisal or
condemnation.
         (d)   Elected local government officials must always remain aware that
at various times they play different roles:
            1.   As advocates, who strive to advance the legitimate needs of
the citizens;
            2.   As legislators, who balance the public interest and private
rights in considering and enacting ordinances, orders and resolutions; and
            3.   As fair and impartial decision-makers, when making quasi-
judicial and administrative determinations.
         (e)   Elected local government officials must know how to distinguish
among these roles, to determine when each role is appropriate, and to act
accordingly.
         (f)   Elected local government officials must be aware of their
obligation to conform their behavior to standards of ethical conduct that
warrant the trust of their constituents. Each official must ultimately find
within his or her own conscience the touchstone by which to determine what
conduct is appropriate.
         (g)   People serving on the various boards, committees and task forces
(hereinafter referred to as "committee members") that often inform the
legislative, administrative and decision-making processes must exercise their
roles in a manner as to justify the trust placed upon them by their elected
officials, and they must not use their positions for improper purposes.
   (B)   Code of Ethics.
      (1)   (a)   Principle 1-1. Town Council and committee members should obey
all laws, including state and federal laws and regulations, and local
ordinances which apply to their official actions.
         (b)   Principle 1-2. Town Council and committee members should be
guided by the spirit as well as the letter of the law in whatever they do.
         (c)   Principle 1-3. Town Council and committee members shall endeavor
to keep themselves up to date about new or ongoing legal or ethical issues they
may face in their official positions. They should avail themselves of resources
and training in these areas which may be reasonably available to them. Town
Council and committee members should review the pertinent sections in the
town's code, Unified Development Ordinance and other sources concerning the
procedures by which they perform their duties so that they will be
knowledgeable and informed as they do so.
      (2)   Mandates:
         (a)   Town Council and committee members must ask to be recused from
voting on matters involving their own direct or indirect financial interests or
official conduct and must not participate in the deliberations or votes
regarding the matters. They must avoid attempting to influence others who are
involved in approving, making or administering a contract with the town if they
will derive a direct benefit from the contract.
         (b)   Town Council and committee members must avoid soliciting or
receiving any gift or reward in exchange for recommending, influencing or
attempting to influence the award of any contract by the town.
         (c)   Town Council members and committee members shall reject any gift
or favor from a current, past or potential contractor of the town.
         (d)   Town Council members and committee members should not knowingly
accept any gift unless it falls within one of the exceptions set forth below. A
prohibited gift shall be promptly declined, returned, paid for at fair market
value, or donated to charity or the city.
            1.   Exceptions. These prohibitions shall not apply to any of the
following:
               a.   Gifts from the official’s extended family, or a member of
the same household.
               b.   Anything generally made available or distributed to the
general public without charge.
               c.   A memento such as a commemorative shovel, plaque, figurine,
trinket, or novelty item related to a civic occasion or event.
               d.   Informational materials relevant to the duties of the
official.
               e.   Food and beverages for immediate consumption in connection
with any of the following gatherings, so long as the official pays the same
amount, if any, that other attendees are charged for attending the gathering or
for the food and drink:
                  i.   A meeting of the Town Council (or committee).
                  ii.   Business meetings.
                  iii.   A gathering open to the general public.
               f.   Tickets or admittance to, and food and beverages for
immediate consumption at, an event or meeting where the official is clearly
representing the town and where the town has a legitimate purpose in being
represented at the event. By way of illustration but not limitation, this would
include community events sponsored by the town and events or meetings hosted by
the Boone TDA, the Downtown Boone Development Association, local government
agencies and authorities, Appalachian University and other educational
institutions, and similar organizations.
            2.   For purposes of this division,“gift” means anything of
monetary value given or received without fair market value given in return or,
for loans or other contractual arrangements, on terms that are not available to
the general public in the normal course of business. Gifts do not include the
following:
               a.   Academic or athletic scholarships given based on the same
criteria as applied to the general public.
               b.   Anything of value properly reported as required under G.S.
Ch. 163, Art. 22A (North Carolina Campaign Contributions Law).
               c.   Expressions of condolence related to a death of an
individual, including the giving of a sympathy card, letter, or note, flowers,
food or beverages for immediate consumption, or donations to a religious
organization, charity, the state or a political subdivision of the state, not
to exceed a total of $200 per death per donor.
         (e)   Town Council and committee members shall avoid using knowledge
of a contemplated action by the town, or information learned in their official
capacities and not made public, to acquire a financial interest in any
property, transaction or enterprise, or to otherwise gain a financial benefit
that may be affected by the information or contemplated action, and they shall
not help another person in doing so.
         (f)   Town Council and committee members shall not participate in or
vote upon any quasi-judicial matter coming before them if prior to hearing the
evidence of the case they have a fixed opinion that is not susceptible to
change; they have had undisclosed ex parte communications regarding the
substance of the matter involved; they have a close familial, business or other
associational relationship with an affected person; or they have a financial
interest in the outcome of the matter.
         (g)   Every Town Council member shall attend statutorily mandated
ethics training.
      (3)   (a)   Principle 2-1. Town Council and committee members should act
with integrity and with independence from improper influence as they exercise
the functions of their offices.
         (b)   Principle 2-2. Town Council and committee members should use
their best independent judgment to pursue the common good as they see it,
presenting their opinions to all in a reasonable, forthright and consistent
manner.
         (c)   Principle 2-3. Town Council and committee members should not be
subject to improper influence by family, friends, business associates or others
who are motivated by self-interest rather than the common good, but they must
be able to consider the opinions and ideas of others throughout the community
as they formulate approaches to the issues with which they are presented.
         (d)   Principle 2-4. Town Council and committee members should strive
to show respect toward other persons with whom they interact, including each
other, recognizing that they may often be perceived as representing the town
itself even when they are acting in a personal capacity.
         (e)   Principle 2-5. Town Council and committee members shall strive
to not form a final opinion regarding an issue until all sides have been given
a reasonable opportunity to present their viewpoints.
         (f)   Principle 2-6. In situations in which recusal from voting or
participation is not allowed, but an objective observer may believe that a
conflict of interest exists, Town Council members shall seek to explain their
inability to seek recusal while striving to discharge their responsibilities to
advance the common good.
      (4)   Mandates:
         (a)   Town Council and committee members must be free to assert policy
positions and opinions without fear of reprisal from fellow Town Council or
committee members or citizens. So, to assert that a Town Council or committee
member is behaving unethically based simply upon a disagreement with that Town
Council or committee member related to a question of policy, as opposed to the
Town Council or committee member's actual unethical behavior, is unfair,
dishonest, irresponsible and itself unethical.
         (b)   Town Council and committee members who are involved in quasi-
judicial procedures shall actively avoid inappropriate contacts with interested
persons regarding the issues involved in those procedures, and when despite
their best efforts they engage in the contacts, they shall disclose them and
withdraw from participation in the procedures.
      (5)   (a)   Principle 3-1. Town Council and committee members should
avoid impropriety in the exercise of their official duties. Their official
actions should be above reproach.
         (b)   Principle 3-2. Town Council and committee members should
recognize that they are part of a larger group and should act accordingly. They
should respect their office and not behave in ways that reflect badly on it.
They should treat other Town Council and committee members and the public with
respect, and should honor the opinions of others even when they disagree.
         (c)   Principle 3-3. If a Town Council or committee member concludes
that his or her actions which the Town Council or committee member believes are
legal and ethical may be misunderstood, he or she should seek the advice of the
Town Attorney as to whether the actions are legal and ethical. Alternatively,
he or she may state on the record the facts of the situation and the steps
taken to resolve it.
      (6)   Mandates:
         (a)   A Town Council or committee member should never make a request
to a town employee, including the Town Manager, for an action, forbearance or
other thing of value which would benefit himself or herself or any other person
or entity, whether or not the Town Council and committee member has a familial,
business or other relationship with that person or entity, unless as an
ordinary citizen of the town it would be appropriate to make a request. Even in
instances where a request would ordinarily be appropriate, a Town Council or
committee member making a request must disclose to the employee that he or she
is not entitled to preferential treatment, that the request should be rejected
if it would not customarily be granted to an ordinary citizen of the town, and
that the employee may refuse the request without fear of reprisal.
         (b)   Town Council and committee members shall not attempt to
influence a decision by the Town Council or the committee on which they serve
relative to any action from which they will derive a direct financial benefit,
although they shall not be precluded from appearing in an individual capacity
to testify in quasi-judicial zoning procedures which have a substantial impact
upon their own property interests so long as those interests are disclosed.
         (c)   Town Council and committee members shall not solicit or accept
any gift or other thing of value which might be perceived as affecting any vote
or decision involving the donor, but the receipt of an honorarium for
participating in a meeting, the receipt of an advertising item or souvenir of
nominal value or a meal furnished at a banquet will not be considered a
violation of this principle so long as it does not actually influence the Town
Council or committee member in the discharge of his or her official duties. In
the event a Town Council or committee member has inadvertently accepted a gift
or other thing of value from a person seeking action by the town, the Town
Council member or committee member may not attempt to influence the decision or
participate in any vote relating to the decision.
         (d)   Town Council and committee members must recognize that unless
specifically charged with representing the town, Council or committee, they are
not authorized to act on behalf of the town, Council or committee, and they
should not offer their opinions, positions or analysis as representing the
views of the town, Council or committee unless the Council or committee has
itself taken official action as a body in conformity with those opinions,
positions or analysis.
         (e)   Town Council members and committee members shall not demand
information from other Town Council members or committee members to which they
are not legally entitled by threatening to take formal legal action or by
making a public records request against the other if the recipient of the
request refuses to provide the requested information.
      (7)   (a)   Principle 4-1. Town Council and committee members should be
faithful in the performance of the duties of their offices.
         (b)   Principle 4-2. Town Council and committee members should be
diligent in their attendance at meetings and in their preparation for those
meetings. They should carefully analyze all credible information that is
provided to them and recognize the importance to the well being of the town and
its citizens of many of their decisions.
         (c)   Principle 4-3. Town Council members shall seek full
accountability from those over whom the Town Council has authority,
particularly with regard to the expenditure of public funds.
         (d)   Principle 4-4. Town Council members should set a good example
for others in the community, keeping in mind that trust and respect must
continually be earned.
         (e)   Principle 4-5. Town Council and committee members should be
willing to bear their fair share of the workload, commensurate with their
skills and other commitments.
         (f)   Principle 4-6. Town Council members in particular should strive
to recognize that by accepting the public trust, they may have to subordinate
their personal endeavors to discharge their official responsibilities. To the
extent appropriate, they should be willing to put the town's interests ahead of
their own.
      (8)   Mandates:
         (a)   Town Council and committee members should keep confidential
information entrusted to them in legally called and held closed sessions, the
disclosure of which has or may have a negative impact on the interests of the
town itself, and they shall keep private confidentially obtained information
about other members which would embarrass those members or expose them to
public ridicule, but which has no bearing on the performance of any official
duty.
         (b)   Unless such service has been authorized by action of a super
majority of the Town Council, four-fifths of the members in attendance, upon a
finding that individual service is in the interests of the town as a whole and
that an exception should therefore be made, members of the Town Council shall
not serve on the boards of directors of organizations that have contracts with
the town, or that seek funding or similar support from the town.
      (9)   (a)   Principle 5-1. Town Council and committee members shall
conduct the affairs of their boards in an open and public manner.
         (b)   Principle 5-2. Town Council and committee members should
remember when meeting that they are conducting the public's business.
         (c)   Principle 5-3. Town Council and committee members should
remember that except for those records otherwise protected by law against
public disclosure, the records of the town belong to the public and not to them
or the town's employees. They should make clear that a climate of openness is
to be maintained at all times in the town.
         (d)   Principle 5-4. In order to ensure strict compliance with the
laws governing openness, Town Council members should prohibit unjustified
delays in fulfilling public records requests should they become aware of the
delays. They should assure themselves before they go into closed session that
the closed session is called for a lawful purpose.
      (10)   Mandates: Town Council and committee members must comply with all
applicable laws governing open meetings and public records.
   (C)   Censure procedures.
      (1)   If the Town Council has reason to believe that one of its members
or a member of a town committee has violated a mandate of this Code of Ethics,
by majority vote of the Town Council members present and voting, it may open an
investigation into the matter, using the resources of the town to compile the
necessary information to make a determination. If the proceeding involves a
Town Council member's actions, that member shall not participate in the vote to
authorize the investigation.
      (2)   Following investigation, all information compiled, including any
grounds for the finding of probable cause that a mandate has been violated
shall be summarized in writing by the Town Manager, Town Attorney or other
person as may be designated by the Town Council, and the written summary shall
be shared with the accused Town Council or committee member promptly when it is
available. All information pertaining to the case shall be open to public
inspection and copying as pursuant to G.S. §§ 132-1 et seq.
      (3)   Following the investigation and report, should the Town Council
determine, by vote of a two-thirds majority of those present and voting, that
it wishes to proceed further with a censure proceeding, it shall call for and
schedule a quasi-judicial hearing at a regular meeting or special meeting
convened for that purpose. If the proceeding involves a Town Council member's
actions, that member shall not participate in the vote to proceed or schedule
the hearing.
      (4)   The notice of the hearing stating its time, place, and purpose
shall be published at least two times, once each in two separate calendar weeks
in a newspaper of general circulation, or it shall be advertised daily for at
least ten days on the town's official website. If placed in the newspaper, the
initial notice shall be published at least ten days and not more than 25 days
before the date set for the hearing and shall state that the summary regarding
the allegations against the Town Council or committee member is available for
public inspection and copying in the office of the Town Clerk.
      (5)   The hearing shall be convened at the time and place specified. Any
and all votes during the hearing and any deliberations that follow shall be
taken by a vote of the full Town Council in attendance and participating, and
each vote shall be recorded in the minutes. The hearing and any deliberations
shall be conducted in open session in accordance with the requirements of the
state's open meetings statutes, G.S. §§ 143-318.9 and 143-318.10.
      (6)   The accused Town Council or committee member shall have the right
to challenge the participation in the case of any other Town Council member or
the Presiding Officer, based on bias or self-interest. If a challenge is made,
the Town Council shall immediately hear evidence and vote on the challenge in a
separate hearing conducted for that purpose. It shall not be a basis for
removal of a Town Council member that he or she was the person who offered the
motion to investigate the behavior in question or to conduct the hearing.
Neither the accused Town Council member, if any, nor the Town Council member
whose participation is challenged, may vote on the challenge although both may
offer evidence. The challenge shall be decided by a majority vote of those
present and voting, a quorum being present not including the person accused and
the person challenged. If more than one person's participation is challenged,
however, a separate hearing shall be conducted as to each challenged member's
participation and all members, except the accused member and challenged member
shall participate in the vote as to the right of the challenged member to
participate.
      (7)   The rules governing any hearing as to bias and the hearing on the
underlying ethical charges shall be those that apply to a standard quasi-
judicial hearing, and an audio or video recording of the proceedings shall be
made. All hearings on this policy shall be conducted by the Town Attorney.
During the hearing, the accused Town Council or committee member shall have the
right:
         (a)   To have counsel present;
         (b)   To present and cross-examine expert and other witnesses; and
         (c)   To offer evidence.
      (8)   Any person in attendance at the hearing with knowledge of the
alleged incident(s) giving rise to or materially related to the allegation
shall be given an opportunity to testify, and all testimony shall be taken
under oath.
      (9)   Once the hearing is concluded, it shall be closed by majority vote.
The Presiding Officer shall then entertain a motion to adopt a non-binding
resolution censuring the Town Council or committee member based on specified
violations of the mandates of the Code of Ethics. Any motion made must be an
affirmative one in favor of adopting a non-binding resolution of censure. If
the motion or resolution does not state particular grounds for censure under
the Code of Ethics, the Presiding Officer shall rule it out of order. If a
motion to adopt a non-binding resolution of censure stating particular grounds
under the Code of Ethics has been made, the Board shall debate the motion. The
accused Town Council member, if any, and any other Town Council member who has
been removed from participation because of bias or self-interest may remain
present, but shall not be allowed to participate in the debate. At the
conclusion of the debate, the Town Council shall vote, except for the accused
Town Council member, if any, and any other Town Council member who has been
removed from participation. If the motion is approved by a minimum two-thirds
vote of those present and voting, a quorum being present, the motion will be
approved and the non-binding resolution of censure adopted. The quorum
requirement shall be met if the requisite number is present, even though
removal of some from participation may prevent a quorum from actually voting on
the issue.
      (10)   If a resolution of censure is adopted, it shall become a part of
the official record of the Town Council. If it pertains to a member of a
committee, it shall be the basis for further action, which may be taken
immediately following the vote of censure, to remove the committee member from
the committee upon which he or she serves.
(Ord. passed 11-16-2010; Res. passed 11-20-2014; Ord. passed 8-13-2019; Ord.
passed - -)
§ 30.53 ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER.
   Robert's Rules of Order shall govern all procedural matters not addressed by
the provisions of this chapter. However, no action taken by the Council shall
be invalidated by a failure to abide by Robert's Rules of Order.
CHAPTER 31: TOWN OFFICIALS
Section
   
31.01   Oath and bond of officers and employees
   
31.02   Town Manager
   
31.03   Town Clerk
   
31.04   Town Attorney
   
31.05   Finance Officer
   
31.06   Budget Director
   
31.07   Tax Collector
   
31.08   Human Resource Officer
§ 31.01 OATH AND BOND OF OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   All officers and employees appointed by the Council shall serve at the
pleasure of the Council, except as otherwise provided by law, and shall receive
for their services compensation as may be established annually in the budget
ordinance.
   (B)   The Council shall prescribe the required bond for each officer or
employee. No officer or employee may begin the duties of his or her office
until the required bond has been obtained.
   (C)   All town officers shall take the following oath before beginning their
duties:
 
"I,                             , do solemnly swear (affirm) that I will support and maintain the
Constitution and laws of the United States and the Constitution and laws of North Carolina not
inconsistent therewith, and that I will faithfully discharge the duties of my office as
            , so help me God."
 
   (D)   This oath may be administered by the Mayor or by any other official
authorized to administer oaths and shall be subscribed and filed with the Town
Clerk.
§ 31.02 TOWN MANAGER.
   (A)   Appointment. The Council shall appoint a Manager to serve at its
pleasure. The Manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his or her
executive and administrative qualifications. He or she need not be a resident
of the town or state at the time of his or her appointment.
   (B)   Power and duties. The Manager shall be the chief administrator of the
town. He or she shall be responsible to the Council for administering all
municipal affairs placed in his or her charge by them and in addition to those
powers and duties assigned to him or her by the Town Charter and by other
provisions of the law, he or she shall:
      (1)   Appoint and suspend or remove all town officers and employees not
elected by the law, in accordance with general personnel rules, regulations,
policies or ordinances as the Council may adopt;
      (2)   Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices
and agencies of the town, subject to the general direction and control of the
Council, except as otherwise provided by law;
      (3)   Attend all meetings of the Council and recommend any measure that
he or she deems expedient;
      (4)   See that all laws of the state, the Charter and the ordinances,
resolutions and regulations of the Council are faithfully executed within the
town;
      (5)   Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the
Council;
      (6)   Annually submit to the Council and make available to the public a
complete report of the finances and administrative activities of the town as of
the end of the fiscal year;
      (7)   Make any other reports that the Council may require concerning
operations of town departments, offices and agencies; and
      (8)   Perform any other duties that may be required or authorized by the
Council.
§ 31.03 TOWN CLERK.
   (A)   Appointment. The Town Clerk shall be appointed by the Town Manager.
   (B)   Duties. The Town Clerk shall:
      (1)   Give notice of meeting of the Council;
      (2)   Keep a journal of the proceedings of the Council;
      (3)   Record in a book kept for the purpose of all ordinances and
resolutions;
      (4)   Be the custodian of all town records; and
      (5)   Perform other duties as are prescribed by law or by the Town
Charter or required by the Council or by the Manager.
§ 31.04 TOWN ATTORNEY.
   The Council shall appoint a Town Attorney to serve at its pleasure and shall
prescribe his or her duties and his or her rate of compensation.
§ 31.05 FINANCE OFFICER.
   (A)   Appointment. The Manager shall appoint a Finance Officer.
   (B)   Duties. The duties of the Finance Officer shall be to:
      (1)   Keep the town's accounts in accordance with generally accepted
principles of governmental accounting and the rules and regulations of the
Local Government Commission;
      (2)   Disburse all funds of the town in strict compliance with the Local
Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act, the budget ordinance and each project
ordinance, and pre-audit obligations and disbursements as required by the Local
Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act;
      (3)   Prepare and file with the Council a statement of the financial
condition of the town whenever requested to do so by the Council;
      (4)   Receive and deposit all monies accruing to the town and supervise
the receipt and deposit of money by other duly authorized officers or
employees;
      (5)   Maintain all records concerning the town's bonded debt, and
determine the amount of money that will be required for debt service during
each fiscal year, and maintain all sinking funds;
      (6)   Supervise the investment of the town's idle funds; and
      (7)   Perform other duties as may be assigned to him or her by law, the
Budget Officer, the Council or by rules and regulations of Local Government
Commission.
§ 31.06 BUDGET DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Town Manager shall be the Budget Director.
   (B)   The Budget Director shall perform those duties and responsibilities
assigned to him or her by the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act,
G.S. Ch. 159, Art. III.
§ 31.07 TAX COLLECTOR.
   The Town Manager shall appoint a Tax Collector to serve for a term of two
years and until his or her successor has been appointed and qualified. The Town
Manager may remove the Tax Collector under the circumstances and in accordance
with the procedure specified in G.S. § 105-349(a). The Tax Collector shall not
begin his or her duties until he or she has furnished a bond in accordance with
G.S. § 105-349(c), nor shall he or she continue collecting taxes after the bond
has expired without renewal.
§ 31.08 HUMAN RESOURCE OFFICER.
   (A)   The Human Resource Officer shall be responsible to the Town Manager
for the custody, administration and technical direction of the personnel
program.
   (B)   More specifically, the Human Resource Officer shall:
      (1)   Recommend rules and revisions to the personnel system to the Town
Manager and Council for consideration;
      (2)   Determine the administrative, professional and managerial positions
to be exempt from F.L.S.A. requirements;
      (3)   Establish and maintain a roster of all persons in the town's
service, setting forth each officer and employee, class title of position,
salary, any changes in class title and status and data as may be deemed
desirable or useful;
      (4)   Develop and administer with recruiting programs as may be necessary
to obtain an adequate supply of competent applicants to meet the needs of the
town;
      (5)   Develop and coordinate training and education programs for town
employees;
      (6)   Investigate periodically the operation and effect of the town's
personnel policies and report the findings and recommendations to the Town
Manager; and
      (7)   Perform other personnel duties as may be assigned by this code or
by the Town Manager.
CHAPTER 32: POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
Section
   
32.01   Police Department
   
32.02   Fire Department
§ 32.01 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Police Department shall consist of a Chief of Police and as many
other police officers as may be provided for from time to time by the Council.
   (B)   As provided in G.S. §§ 160A-281 through 160A-289, police officers
shall:
      (1)   Take, subscribe and file with the Clerk the oath of office
prescribed by Art. VI, § 7, of the State Constitution; and
      (2)   Have all the powers invested in law enforcement officers by statute
or common law within the corporate limits owned or leased by the town.
   (C)   (1)   As provided in G.S. § 160A-282(a) and (b), the Town of Boone
Auxiliary Police Department shall be made up of as many volunteer members as
may from time to time be determined by the Chief of Police and approved by the
Town Manager.
      (2)   The auxiliary police division shall be a volunteer organization,
whose members shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. passed 6-8-2022)
§ 32.02 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Fire protection services shall be provided to the town by a Fire
Department.
   (B)   All members and officers shall be appointed by and be under the full
administrative control and supervision of the Fire Chief.
   (C)   All equipment used by the Fire Department shall remain the property of
the town.
Cross-reference:
   Fire Department, see §§
92.01 through
92.05
CHAPTER 33: OTHER DEPARTMENTS
Section
   
33.01   Department of Planning and Inspections; Division
   
33.02   Public Utilities Department
   
33.03   Public Works Department
§ 33.01 DEPARTMENT OF PLANNING AND INSPECTIONS; DIVISION.
   There shall be a Building Inspections Division within the Department of
Planning and Inspections. The Division shall have the authority and
responsibility to enforce the State Building Code. The Building Inspections
Division shall have the authority and shall follow the procedures set forth in
G.S. §§ 160A-360 through 160A-458.4 and Chapter 1 of the State Building Code.
From time to time, the Council may make arrangements to have the functions of
the Building Inspections Division performed by other than town employees, as
provided in G.S. § 160A-413. The Department shall have responsibilities as may
be placed upon it by the zoning, subdivision and other ordinances adopted by
the Council.
§ 33.02 PUBLIC UTILITIES DEPARTMENT.
   Departmental responsibilities for Public Utilities Department shall be as
follows.
   (A)   There shall be a Water and Sewer Department, which shall operate and
maintain the town's water distribution and wastewater collection system. This
Department shall be headed by a Water and Sewer Superintendent.
   (B)   There shall be a Wastewater Treatment Department, which shall operate
and maintain the wastewater treatment plant. This Department shall be headed by
a Superintendent.
   (C)   There shall be a Water Treatment Department, which shall operate and
maintain the water treatment plant. This Department shall be headed by a
Superintendent.
§ 33.03 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Departmental responsibilities for Public Works Department shall be as
follows.
      (1)   There shall be a Street Department, which shall maintain town
streets. This Department shall be headed by a Superintendent.
      (2)   There shall be a Traffic Operations Department, which shall
maintain town signs and lights.
      (3)   There shall be a General Maintenance Department, which shall
maintain various maintenance projects.
      (4)   There shall be a GIS Department, which shall maintain a town
database.
   (B)   The Public Works Department will be supervised by the Public Works
Director.
CHAPTER 34: RESERVED
CHAPTER 35: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COMMITTEES AND OTHER SUCH ENTITIES
Section
   
35.01   Grant of authority
   
35.02   Procedure for creation
   
35.03   Powers
   
35.04   Meetings
   
35.05   Resignation
   
35.06   Duration
§ 35.01 GRANT OF AUTHORITY.
    The Town Council is authorized to create boards, commissions, task forces,
advisory bodies, committees and other entities as it may find useful or
necessary to the discharge of its duties or the effective operation of the
town.
(Ord. passed 6-18-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2025)
§ 35.02 PROCEDURE FOR CREATION.
   (A)   All boards, commissions, task forces, advisory bodies, committees or
other entities shall be created by motion, second and majority vote of the
Council.
   (B)   The Council shall appoint the members of each board, commission, task
force, advisory body, committee and other entity (hereafter, "body") in
accordance with the town's Unified Development Ordinance and §
30.51, supra, as appropriate.
(Ord. passed 6-18-2009; Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 6-16-2016; Ord.
passed 2-12-2025)
§ 35.03 POWERS.
   (A)   All boards, commissions, task forces, advisory bodies, committees or
other entities shall have only those powers and duties which have been assigned
to the body by the Council.
   (B)   No individual member of any body shall purport to speak or act on
behalf of the body without action by the body explicitly authorizing the member
to speak or act on its behalf.
   (C)   No individual member of any body, nor the body itself, shall purport
to speak or act on behalf of the town without action by the Town Council
explicitly authorizing the member or empowering or authorizing the body to
speak or act on its behalf.
   (D)   Without an express grant of authority or explicit authorization by the
Town Council, no individual member of any body, nor the body itself, may direct
staff members of the town to take action or engage in actions requiring the
expenditure of town funds.
   (E)   Unless expressly prohibited from doing so by a charge of the Town
Council, a body may, upon official action duly taken by majority vote, create
and appoint the membership of a subcommittee or working group. A board is
responsible to ensure that any subcommittee or working group created by it
complies with all applicable state law and town regulations, including
requirements related to open meetings, meeting minutes, and records retention.
To ensure such compliance, the board must consult with the Town Clerk and/or
Town Attorney before any meetings of such subcommittee or working group take
place. Exception: The first sentence of this subsection (E) shall not apply to
boards created under the town's Unified Development Ordinance, which boards may
create a subcommittee or working group only upon consulting with Planning staff
and obtaining the approval of Council.
   (F)   Unless otherwise directed by Council, a body may select its own Chair
and Vice-Chair.
(Ord. passed 6-18-2009; Ord. passed 6-16-2016; Ord. passed 1-15-2019; Ord.
passed 2-12-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 35.04 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Every board, commission, task force, advisory body, committee and
other entity created by the Council, including any sub-committee or working
group, by whatever name or designation, and whether created by the Council or
other town body with Council approval, must operate in compliance with the
State Open Meetings Law, codified as G.S. §§ 143-318.9 et seq. Meetings of all
town bodies or sub-committees shall be conducted as follows:
      (1)   Notice of any official meeting, other than an emergency meeting,
shall be given by posting of the date, time and name of the town body or sub-
committee at least 48 hours in advance, on the bulletin board for that purpose
in Town Hall. If an agenda has been distributed to members of the town body or
sub-committee prior to the meeting, it shall also be posted. When an agenda has
not been distributed prior to the meeting, it shall be distributed at the
beginning of the meeting before the meeting is called to order and additional
copies shall be available for members of the media and public.
         (a)   An OFFICIAL MEETING occurs whenever a scheduled meeting of the
town body or sub-committee occurs, whether or not a quorum is present, or when
a majority of the town body or sub-committee meet, whether in person or by
electronic means such as conference call or e-mail, to conduct a hearing,
deliberate, take action or otherwise transact public business.
         (b)   DELIBERATE includes examining, weighing or reflecting upon the
reasons for or against a possible decision and also includes the collective
acquisition and exchange of facts preliminary to a decision.
         (c)   An EMERGENCY MEETING is one that concerns generally unexpected
circumstances which require the immediate consideration of the town body or
sub-committee. In the event of an emergency meeting, a local news medium must
be notified prior to the meeting;
      (2)   All official meetings shall be open to the public, except as to a
closed session conducted in accordance with law; and
      (3)   Full and accurate minutes of the meeting shall be kept, a copy of
which shall be provided to the Town Clerk once approved by the body or sub-
committee.
   (B)   Unless the Council adopts procedures specific to the body or sub-
committee, it will conduct its meetings in compliance with the following
procedures.
      (1)   A quorum shall be 50% of the persons initially appointed to the
body or sub-committee.
      (2)   In the absence of the Chair, the Vice-Chair shall conduct any
meeting of the body or sub-committee, and in the absence of both officers, the
Mayor may designate a person to act as chair for the meeting in question.
      (3)   Agendas.
         (a)   The agenda of the body or sub-committee shall include only those
matters within the responsibilities and powers of the body or sub-committee
which have been conferred upon it by the Council.
         (b)   The Chair or his or her designee (e.g. the Board's Secretary)
shall prepare the agenda for each meeting.
         (c)   At any regularly-scheduled meeting, the body or sub-committee
may, by majority vote, add an item to or delete an item from its agenda.
         (d)   At any special or emergency meeting, the body or sub-committee
may consider only those matters included in the notice of the meeting.
      (4)   The business of the body or sub-committee shall be conducted in a
manner as to afford all members an opportunity to speak. However, no member
shall generally address the body until first recognized by the chair, and
members of the committee, task force or advisory body shall be respectful to
each other and shall avoid interrupting each other.
      (5)   Town Council may appoint Council members and/or the Mayor to serve
as liaisons on various town boards, commissions, committees and other town
bodies so long as the number of such liaison members does not exceed two per
body; provided, that Council members and the Mayor shall not serve on any board
created under the town's Unified Development Ordinance (UDO) other than the
Historic Preservation Commission acting in its advisory capacity. Unless
otherwise provided by Council, these liaisons shall be voting members of such
bodies and may serve as the Chair or Vice-Chair of the body. Their role shall
be:
         (a)   To provide direction to the body or sub-committee regarding the
relationship between the Town Council and the body or sub-committee;
         (b)   To assist with procedural matters;
         (c)   To serve as a resource; and
         (d)   To communicate concerns and initiatives of the body back to the
full Town Council.
      (6)   Minutes of the body or sub-committee shall be subject to revision
and adoption by the group as a whole.
      (7)   All actions or recommendations of the body or sub-committee shall
require the presence of a quorum and are only effective or adopted upon
majority vote, following a motion and second. When the action is to be reported
to the Town Council, the committee, task force or advisory body shall not only
report the action or recommendation adopted, but the vote by which it was
adopted.
      (8)   Meetings of the body or sub-committee shall proceed in the
following order: adoption of an agenda, approval of the minutes, public comment
(if public comment is to be accepted), unfinished business, new business,
informal discussion. By majority vote of the members of the body or sub-
committee in attendance, the order of business may be altered.
      (9)   At any meeting, if public comment is permitted at the discretion of
the body or sub-committee, any person wishing to address the body or sub-
committee shall state his or her name and whether or not he or she is a
resident of the town.
         (a)   If there is a sign up sheet provided for speakers, speakers
shall be recognized in the order in which they have signed up.
         (b)   Unless by motion, second, and majority vote a different time
limit is adopted by the committee, task force or advisory body, no person shall
be allowed to speak for more than five minutes.
         (c)   Should more than one person wish to make substantially the same
comments regarding the same subject, or where a group of persons supports or
opposes the same positions, the Presiding Officer may require that all persons
designate a spokesperson for their group to address the committee, task force
or advisory body, and the Presiding Officer may allot a larger amount of time
for the presentation of the group position by the spokesperson.
         (d)   All persons addressing the body shall be treated respectfully by
other persons in attendance at the meeting, and all speakers shall conduct
themselves with proper decorum. Should any person present during a public
comment period substantially interfere with the ability of a person offering
public comment or engage in behavior which violates norms of accepted decorum,
or should a person offering public comment engage in behavior which violates
norms of accepted decorum, after warning the person(s) and, except in a
situation where there is a risk of harm to any person present, providing the
person(s) the opportunity to alter their behavior to bring it into conformity
with norms of accepted behavior, the Presiding Officer may direct that the
person(s) be removed from the meeting.
(Ord. passed 6-18-2009; Ord. passed 9-21-2010; Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord.
passed 4-21-2016; Ord. passed 6-16-2016; Ord. passed 1-15-2019; Ord. passed 3-
15-2024; Ord. passed 2-12-2025)
§ 35.05 RESIGNATION.
   A member of a board, commission, task force, advisory body, committee or
other entity may resign by notifying the Mayor, Town Manager or relevant
department head.
(Ord. passed 6-18-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2025)
§ 35.06 DURATION.
   Unless a different duration is specified by the Council at the time of
creation of a board, commission, task force, advisory body, committee or other
entity, including a sub-committee, the duration of the body shall be one year,
but it may be extended by action of the Council.
(Ord. passed 6-18-2009; Ord. passed 2-12-2025)
CHAPTER 36: TOWN LOGO
Section
   
36.01   Town logo designated
   
36.02   Use of town logo
   
36.99   Penalty
§ 36.01 TOWN LOGO DESIGNATED.
   The following is the official logo for the town:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1929.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed 12-14-2010; Ord. passed --)
§ 36.02 USE OF TOWN LOGO.
   (A)   Use by employees of the town. Any employee of the town is authorized
to reproduce the town logo on letterhead, agendas, minutes of meetings,
brochures, electronic communication and other forms of communication used for
official correspondence or communication by an employee on behalf of the town.
A department head may authorize the reproduction of the town's logo on
equipment which is owned or being purchased by the town and on signs
identifying real and personal property of the town. Any other use of the town
logo by a town employee or department head must be approved by the Town Manager
or Town Council. No employee may authorize any other person to reproduce the
town's logo without the express authorization of the Town Manager.
   (B)   Authorization by Town Manager. Except for those matters expressly
reserved to the Town Council, the Town Manager may authorize the reproduction
and display of the town logo, including, but not limited to, clothing and other
items for distribution by the town to town employees or other persons.
   (C)   Use as part of a publication, design or other item in which another
person or entity claims intellectual property rights. Except pursuant to the
express approval by the Town Council, the town's logo may not be used or
reproduced in any publication, design or other item in which another person or
entity claims intellectual property rights. Furthermore, even with Town Council
approval, it is the policy of the town that no person may reserve or claim
intellectual property rights in any publication, design or other item which
includes or incorporates the town's logo unless the town is simultaneously
licensed for the unlimited reproduction of the publication, design or other
item without any further approval required.
   (D)   Reproduction of town logo by third persons. Unless explicitly
authorized by the town, a person who is not authorized hereunder to reproduce
the town's logo may not do so. The town expressly reserves all rights to its
logo.
   (E)   Use of town logo in signs. No person or entity may include the town's
logo in a sign, as that term is defined in the town's Unified Development
Ordinance, Art. 18, without action by the Town Council approving the use.
(Ord. passed 12-14-2010)
§ 36.99 PENALTY.
   The general penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code apply to any violation of this chapter. In addition, the
town is authorized to take all necessary action to protect its logo, including,
but not limited to, the initiation of a civil action and pursuit of an
injunction to prohibit or stop the unauthorized display, reproduction or other
use of the town’s logo. Should the town initiate a civil action to protect its
logo, it shall be entitled to recover its court costs, including attorney’s
fees against a person or entity who has improperly displayed, reproduced or
used the town’s logo.
(Prior Code, § 36.03) (Ord. passed 12-14-2010; Ord. passed 8-14-2018)
CHAPTER 37: CONTRACTS
Section
   
37.01   Contracts in which party reserves intellectual property rights
§ 37.01 CONTRACTS IN WHICH PARTY RESERVES INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS.
   (A)   The town shall not enter into any contract in which another party
reserves intellectual property rights unless the town is concurrently licensed
for the unlimited use of the subject matter of the contract, including the
right to reproduce or reuse the items.
   (B)   No contract may bind the town to use a single source, party or entity
to reproduce or supply equipment, personal property or other items for which
the town may have a future need. Any provision in any contract to which the
town is party which seeks to bind the town in that manner is declared null and
void.
(Prior Code, § 37.06) (Ord. passed 12-14-2010)
CHAPTER 38: NONDISCRIMINATION
Section
   
38.01   Declaration of policy
   
38.02   Definitions
   
38.03   Town policy with respect to town operations
   
38.04   Public accommodations
   
38.05   Employment and contracting
   
38.06   Inclusive interpretation of race and sex discrimination in assisting
residents with discrimination claims in housing and in general
   
38.07   Conciliation by the Human Resources Commission
   
38.08   Penalties and enforcement
   
38.09   Compliance with laws
§ 38.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the town in the exercise of its
licensing and police powers, and under the authority of state law for the
preservation of the peace and protection of the health, safety and welfare of
persons in the town, to prohibit discriminatory practices in places of public
accommodations, in employment and contracting, and in housing as described
herein.
(Ord. passed 1-25-2023)
§ 38.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Where
terms are not defined in this section, they shall have their ordinarily
accepted meanings or such as the context may imply.
   DISCRIMINATION. Any difference in treatment based on a protected class as
defined herein.
   EMPLOYER. Any person employing one or more persons within the town and any
person acting in the interest of an employer, directly or indirectly, including
an employment agency. EMPLOYER shall include the town and any town contractor.
   GENDER IDENTITY or EXPRESSION. Having or being perceived as having gender-
related identity, expression, appearance, or behavior, whether or not that
identity, expression, appearance, or behavior is different from that
traditionally associated with the sex assigned to that individual at birth.
   PROTECTED CLASS. Race, natural hair or hairstyles, ethnicity, creed, color,
sex, pregnancy, marital or familial status, sexual orientation, gender identity
or expression, national origin or ancestry, National Guard or veteran status,
religious belief or non-belief, age, or disability.
   PROTECTED HAIRSTYLE. Any hairstyle, hair type, or hair texture historically
associated with race such as, but not limited to, braids, locks, twists, tight
coils or curls, cornrows, Bantu knots and afros.
   PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. Any place, facility, store or other establishment
which supplies accommodations, goods, or services to the public or which
solicits or accepts the patronage or trade of the public.
(Ord. passed 1-25-2023)
§ 38.03 TOWN POLICY WITH RESPECT TO TOWN OPERATIONS.
   (A)   The policy of the Town of Boone is, and shall be, to oppose any
discrimination based on actual or perceived age, mental or physical disability,
sex, religion, creed, race, color, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, familial or marital status, economic status, veteran status or
national origin in any aspect of modern life.
   (B)   The administration, committees, commissions, and boards of the town
are hereby directed to use their full power and resources, as by law duly
given, to prohibit and discourage discrimination as hereinabove mentioned.
   (C)   The Town Manager and the Town Attorney are directed to include within
the terms of all contracts of and grants from the town a nondiscrimination
provision which will carry out the effect of this section; provided that
nothing in this section shall be construed to encroach upon the powers or
immunities of the state or federal governments or to require any action
prohibited by state or federal law.
   (D)   The Town Manager is directed to establish such policies as will ensure
that there is no discrimination in any function or area of town government.
   (E)   Recognizing the substantial benefits that an equitable, diverse, and
inclusive community provides, the town supports those community members and
businesses whose efforts support a community free from discrimination. Equity,
diversity and inclusion are cornerstones of a strong local economy and a strong
civic community. The town will not tolerate illegal discrimination and
encourages its corporate and individual community partners to oppose
discrimination in all forms. All residents, visitors, workers, and employers in
the town, individual and corporate, are requested and urged to use their power
and influence to the end that this town shall be one of equal opportunity for
all citizens.
(Ord. passed 3-16-2021; Ord. passed 1-25-2023)
§ 38.04 PUBLIC ACCOMMODATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, employer, keeper, or
manager in a place of public accommodation to deny any person because of
protected classes the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodations,
advantages, facilities, or privileges thereof.
   (B)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   A private club or other establishment that is not, in fact, open to
the public; or
      (2)   Bathroom accommodations, which are regulated by the North Carolina
legislature.
(Ord. passed 1-25-2023)
§ 38.05 EMPLOYMENT AND CONTRACTING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any employer, because of the protected class
of any person, to fail or refuse to hire, discharge, or otherwise discriminate
against that person with respect to tenure, promotion, transfer, compensation,
terms, conditions or privileges of employment, or any other matter directly or
indirectly related to employment.
   (B)   As a condition of submitting a bid or proposal to the town, the bidder
or proposer agrees to comply with this chapter. Falsification of this
certification shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall be grounds
for rejection of the bid or termination, without fault to the town, of a
contract.
   (C)   A religious organization's requirement that employees adhere to its
tenets as a condition of employment is not a discriminatory practice covered by
the town ordinance. An employee may express their sincerely held religious
commitments in the workplace in a reasonable, nondisruptive and non-harassing
way, unless the expression is in direct conflict with the essential business-
related interests or the needs of the employer.
(Ord. passed 1-25-2023)
§ 38.06 INCLUSIVE INTERPRETATION OF RACE AND SEX DISCRIMINATION IN ASSISTING
RESIDENTS WITH DISCRIMINATION CLAIMS IN HOUSING AND IN GENERAL.
   (A)   With respect to housing discrimination claims filed with the North
Carolina Human Relations Commission, the town interprets the prohibition on
race discrimination in housing to include discrimination on the basis of
protected hairstyles.
   (B)   With respect to housing discrimination claims filed with the North
Carolina Human Relations Commission, the town interprets the prohibition on sex
discrimination in housing to include discrimination on the basis of sexual
orientation, gender identity and gender expression.
   (C)   The North Carolina State Fair Housing Act is used in this instance, in
part, for illustrative purposes. The town will interpret all legal prohibitions
on race discrimination to include discrimination on the basis of protected
hairstyles. The town will interpret all legal prohibitions on sex
discrimination to include discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation,
gender identity and gender expression.
(Ord. passed 1-25-2023)
§ 38.07 CONCILIATION BY THE HUMAN RESOURCES COMMISSION.
   The town's Human Resources Commission may accept, investigate, and seek
conciliation of complaints of violations of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-25-2023)
§ 38.08 PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.
   In addition to or in lieu of other remedies available by law, any person
violating any provision of this chapter may be subject to an enforcement action
brought by the town under G.S. § 160A-175(d) and (e) for an appropriate
equitable remedy, including but not limited to a mandatory or prohibitory
injunction commanding the defendant to correct the conduct prohibited under
this chapter. This chapter is not intended to limit the remedies available to
any person under state or federal law.
(Ord. passed 1-25-2023)
§ 38.09 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any
requirement, power or duty in conflict with any existing federal or state law
or either the federal or state constitutions.
(Ord. passed 1-25-2023)
CHAPTER 39: HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
Section
   
39.01   Declaration of policy
   
39.02   Establishment
   
39.03   Powers and duties
   
39.04   Membership qualifications and terms of office
   
39.05   Officers and procedures
§ 39.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   The Town Council finds that prejudice and the practice of
discrimination against any individual or group based on actual or perceived
age, mental or physical disability, sex, religion, creed, race, color, sexual
orientation, gender identity or expression, familial or marital status,
economic status, veteran status or national origin, may menace the peace and
public welfare. To work towards elimination of such prejudice and
discrimination, a commission should be established through which the citizens
of Boone may be kept informed of developments in human relations, the officers
and departments of the town may obtain advice and assistance concerning
practices to keep peace and good order, and private persons and groups may be
officially encouraged to promote tolerance and goodwill to all people.
   (B)   The purpose of the Boone Human Relations Commission is to promote and
improve human relations and equity among all citizens in the town. The
Commission will work with town government and partner with communities and
outside agencies in an effort to encourage and ensure diversity, fairness,
equity and inclusion throughout the town. In furtherance thereof, the
Commission should endeavor to identify and assist in addressing all forms of
individual, institutional and community discrimination through education,
advocacy and policy recommendations.
(Ord. passed 11-16-2021)
§ 39.02 ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The Boone Human Relations Commission (hereinafter, "Commission") is
hereby created pursuant to the authority set forth at G.S. § 160A-492.
   (B)   The duration of the Committee shall initially be for five years, after
which the Committee shall expire unless action has been taken by the Town
Council to extend its duration.
(Ord. passed 11-16-2021)
§ 39.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To serve as an advisory body to the Town Council.
   (B)   To study and recommend strategies for the prevention of potential
human relations problems and for the promotion of good relations.
   (C)   To endeavor to make the Commission itself a model of good human
relations at work.
   (D)   To promote equality of opportunity in the economic, educational,
governmental, and cultural life of the community for all citizens without
regard to actual or perceived age, mental or physical disability, sex,
religion, creed, race, color, sexual orientation, gender identity or
expression, familial or marital status, economic status, veteran status or
national origin, and work to eliminate discrimination on any of these bases.
   (E)   To invite and enlist the cooperation of persons and groups
representing various economic, educational, and social groups in all areas of
the town, and to act as a coordinating agency among these and other groups in
the community in the establishment and maintenance of educational programs in
the community designed to bring about better human relations.
   (F)   To cooperate with any interested citizen, and all state, federal and
local agencies whenever such cooperation is appropriate in furthering the
purpose of this chapter.
   (G)   To institute and conduct educational and other programs to promote the
equal rights and opportunities of all persons, regardless of their race, color,
religion, creed, national origin or marital status, sexual orientation or
gender identity, and to promote understanding among all such persons and
groups.
   (H)   To accept, investigate, and seek voluntary conciliation of complaints
of alleged violations of
Ch. 38 of the Town Code. With respect to such efforts, the Commission may
proceed only by means of voluntary cooperation and compliance and shall not
have authority to compel cooperation or compliance. The Commission may make
recommendations to the Town Council as to any enforcement actions that may be
available to the town under
Ch. 38.
   (I)   To seek grants and donations to the town from foundations and others
for the purpose of carrying out the above-listed functions.
   (J)   To prepare and render to the Town Council annual reports on its
progress in accomplishing the objectives of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 11-16-2021; Ord. passed 1-25-2023)
§ 39.04 MEMBERSHIP QUALIFICATIONS AND TERMS OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Town Council shall appoint up to ten members of the Commission. The
members shall be persons committed to the values set forth in the declaration
of policy above and shall represent a cross section of the community.
   (B)   For sake of stability of the Commission, the initial members shall be
appointed for staggered terms of one-, two- and three-year terms. Thereafter,
except for student members, terms of office of the members shall be three
years.
   (C)   High school and college student members may be appointed for one-year
terms in the discretion of Town Council.
   (D)   Except as may be expressly set forth herein, members shall hold office
subject to existing ordinances and policies applicable to all Town Board and
Commission members.
   (E)   Town Council may appoint one or more of their members to serve as non-
voting liaison members of the Commission.
(Ord. passed 11-16-2021)
§ 39.05 OFFICERS AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Commission shall select from its membership a chairperson, a vice
chairperson, and a secretary, each to serve for a period of one year or until a
successor is appointed.
   (B)   The time and place of the regularly scheduled meetings of the
Commission shall be established and filed with the Town Clerk. Such meetings
shall take place no less than quarterly.
   (C)   A majority of the Commission's total membership (not including vacant
or liaison positions) shall constitute a quorum for transaction of official
business.
   (D)   The Commission shall keep a full record of its proceedings and minutes
of its meetings showing the business transacted at each meeting and upon
approval of such records and minutes, copies shall be provided to the Town
Manager.
   (E)   The Commission may adopt bylaws and prescribe rules and regulations
for the conduct of its meeting and the transaction of its business; however,
such rules and regulations shall be consistent with existing town ordinances
and policies.
   (F)   Except as otherwise expressly set forth herein, the Commission shall
function as any other advisory committee of the town pursuant to the provisions
of Chapters 30 and 35 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. passed 11-16-2021)
 
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS AND UTILITIES
      Chapter
         
50.   WATER AND SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: WATER AND SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
50.001   Authority
   
50.002   Title
   
50.003   Definitions
   
50.004   Financial hardship policy
   
50.005   Unusual fact guidelines
   
50.006   Purpose and intent
   
50.007   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
50.008   Interpretation
   
50.009   Severability
   
50.010   Conflict
Water System Standards
   
50.025   General
   
50.026   General information
Installation Specifications and Materials
   
50.040   Clearing
   
50.041   Site grading
   
50.042   Earthwork
   
50.043   Clean-up of site
   
50.044   Materials
   
50.045   Excavation
   
50.046   Backfilling
   
50.047   Pipe laying
   
50.048   Pipe bedding
   
50.049   Installation limitations
   
50.050   Portland cement concrete
   
50.051   Testing
   
50.052   Disinfection of mains
   
50.053   Drainage of mains
   
50.054   Water use
   
50.055   Final grading and landscaping
   
50.056   Erosion and sedimentation control measures
   
50.057   Ductile iron pipe
   
50.058   Ductile iron or cast iron fittings
   
50.059   Polyvinyl chloride pipe (PVC) and fittings
   
50.060   Gate valves
   
50.061   Air release valves
   
50.062   Tapping sleeves and tapping saddles
   
50.063   Valve boxes
   
50.064   Fire hydrants
   
50.065   Taps
   
50.066   Meters, meter assemblies and enclosures
   
50.067   Multiple meter assemblies
   
50.068   Backflow preventers
   
50.069   Water system design criteria
   
50.070   Water plans checklist
   
50.071   Water lines; general notes
Underground Packaged Water Booster Pumping Station
   
50.085   Scope of work
   
50.086   Equipment capsule
   
50.087   Booster pump system
   
50.088   Piping
   
50.089   Electrical apparatus; design, assembly and test
   
50.090   HVAC
   
50.091   Factory start-up service
Water and Sewer System Regulations
   
50.105   Application for service and payment of initial fees and deposits
   
50.106   Classification of service
   
50.107   Rate schedule and deposits
   
50.108   Minimum monthly charges
   
50.109   Individual metering required; exception for master meters for
multifamily residential
   
50.110   Location of meters
   
50.111   Connection of service by town
   
50.112   Town not responsible for certain matters or damages
   
50.113   System development fees
   
50.114   Customer’s and adjunct customer’s responsibilities
   
50.115   Meter reading; billing; collecting
   
50.116   Involuntary discontinuance of service
   
50.117   Procedures for discontinuation of service or denial of service and
customer’s appeal rights
   
50.118   Service termination   
   
50.119   Reinstatement of service
   
50.120   Termination of service at customer’s request
   
50.121   Complaints
   
50.122   Prohibited activities
   
50.123   Collection of damages due the town; other remedies
   
50.124   Abridgment or modification of rules
   
50.125   Requests for adjustments
Sewer Use Regulations
   
50.135   Findings and declaration of policy
   
50.136   Application to sewer service
   
50.137   Unlawful to deposit
   
50.138   Unlawful to discharge
   
50.139   Unlawful to construct
   
50.140   Required facilities
   
50.141   Rainwater harvesting and reuse systems
   
50.142   Private wastewater disposal
   
50.143   Permit required
   
50.144   Effective date of permit
   
50.145   Compliance of private wastewater systems
   
50.146   Required connection
   
50.147   Sanitary manner
   
50.148   Additional requirements
   
50.149   Use of grey water prohibited
   
50.150   Unauthorized connections
   
50.151   Building sewer permits
   
50.152   Costs of installation
   
50.153   Separate sewers required
   
50.154   Sewer bills for discharge from private water systems
   
50.155   Old building and existing building sewers
   
50.156   Standards generally
   
50.157   Unauthorized connections
   
50.158   Requirements of connections
   
50.159   Inspection of sewer
   
50.160   Excavations
   
50.161   Owner maintenance requirements
   
50.162   Vandalism of wastewater disposal system
Sewer System Specifications
   
50.175   Ductile iron pipe
   
50.176   Polyvinyl chloride gravity sewer pipe (PVC)
   
50.177   Steel pipe
   
50.178   Manholes
   
50.179   Manhole rings and covers
   
50.180   Service connections to sewer system
   
50.181   Sanitary sewer design criteria
   
50.182   Sanitary sewer plans checklist
Sewer Installation Specifications
   
50.195   Clearing
   
50.196   Site grading
   
50.197   Earthwork
   
50.198   Clean-up of site
   
50.199   Materials
   
50.200   Excavation
   
50.201   Backfilling
   
50.202   Pipe laying
   
50.203   Pipe bedding
   
50.204   Installation limitations
   
50.205   Portland cement concrete
   
50.206   Testing
   
50.207   Final grading and landscaping
   
50.208   Erosion and sedimentation control measures
Pump Stations
   
50.220   General
   
50.221   Pumps
   
50.222   Controls
   
50.223   Guide rail installation
   
50.224   Wet well
   
50.225   Baskets
Powers and Authority of Inspectors
   
50.240   General
   
50.241   Obtaining information
   
50.242   Safety rules and regulations
   
50.243   Entrance permitted
Establishment of Revenue System
   
50.255   General
   
50.256   User charge system biannual review
   
50.257   User charge preempts
   
50.258   Basis of user charge
   
50.259   Sewer financial controls
User Penalties for Sewer System
   
50.270   Findings and declaration of policy
   
50.271   Rates in effect
   
50.272   Excessive strength wastewater
   
50.273   Toxic rates
   
50.274   Monitoring rate
Water and Sewer Extensions
   
50.285   General
   
50.286   Extensions to mains and service connections
   
50.287   Extensions of service to developed property within the town
   
50.288   In-town extensions to and within new subdivisions and other new
developments
   
50.289   Replacement of dilapidated water and/or sewer lines
   
50.290   Extensions and new connections outside of town
   
50.291   Extensions and non-hardship connections outside of the town limits
prohibited except upon approval of annexation and zoning; exceptions
   
50.292   Inspection by town of work done by others
   
50.293   Easements necessary for line extensions
   
50.294   Dedication of water and sewer line extensions
   
50.295   Easements necessary for line extensions
   
50.296   Dedication of water and sewer line extensions
Water Conservation Regulations
   
50.305   Applicability
   
50.306   Announcement of water shortage
   
50.307   Goals for each water shortage
   
50.308   Specific conservation methods and recommendations applicable to all
water shortages
   
50.309   Stage II Water Shortage restrictions
   
50.310   Stage III Water Shortage restrictions and measures
   
50.311   River operating conditions
   
50.312   Appeals
   
50.313   Lifting of restrictions imposed during a water shortage
Pretreatment Standards
   
50.325   (Reserved)
   
50.326   (Reserved)
   
50.327   General provisions
   
50.328   General sewer use requirements
   
50.329   Local limits
   
50.330   State requirements
   
50.331   Right of revision
   
50.332   Dilution
   
50.333   Pretreatment of wastewater
   
50.334   Accidental discharge/slug control plans
   
50.335   Hauled wastewater
   
50.336   (Reserved)
   
50.337   (Reserved)
   
50.338   Fees
   
50.339   Wastewater discharge permit application and issuance
   
50.340   Confidential information
   
50.341   Signatories and certifications
Reporting Requirements Generally
   
50.355   Baseline monitoring reports
   
50.356   Compliance schedule progress reports
   
50.357   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline
   
50.358   Periodic compliance reports
   
50.359   Reports of changed conditions
   
50.360   Reports of potential problems
   
50.361   Reports from unpermitted contributors
   
50.362   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting
   
50.363   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste
   
50.364   Analytical requirements
   
50.365   Sample collection
   
50.366   Timing
   
50.367   Record keeping
   
50.368   Electronic reporting
Compliance Monitoring
   
50.380   Monitoring facilities
   
50.381   Inspection and sampling
   
50.382   Search warrants
Enforcement; Administrative Remedies
   
50.395   Notice of violation
   
50.396   Consent orders
   
50.397   Show cause hearing
   
50.398   Administrative orders
   
50.399   Emergency suspensions
   
50.400   Termination of wastewater permit or permission to discharge
   
50.401   Annual publication of significant noncompliance
   
50.402   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations
Cross-Connection Control Standards
   
50.415   Introduction
   
50.416   Objectives
   
50.417   Responsibilities
   
50.418   Definitions
   
50.419   Right of entry
   
50.420   Elimination of cross-connections; degree of hazard
   
50.421   Installation of assemblies
   
50.422   Testing and repair of assemblies
   
50.423   Facilities requiring protection
   
50.424   Connections with unapproved sources of supply
   
50.425   Fire protection systems
   
50.426   Enforcement
   
50.427   Adoption
Fat, Oil and Grease Prevention Program Standards
   
50.440   Purpose
   
50.441   Definitions
   
50.442   Education
   
50.443   Installation
   
50.444   Maintenance
   
50.445   Records and reports
   
50.446   Inspection
   
50.447   Fees
   
50.448   Enforcement response plan
Rates and Charges
   
50.460   General rates and charges
   
50.461   Overdue fees and other charges
   
50.462   User charge methodology
 
   
50.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:    Images
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.001 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is adopted under the authority granted by G.S. Ch. 160A.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 2-21-2019)
§ 50.002 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known under the general title of, referred to or cited
as the "Water and Sewer Use Ordinance for the Town of Boone, State of North
Carolina" and hereinafter referred to as "this chapter".
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 2-21-2019)
§ 50.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words
used in the present tense include the future; the singular includes the plural;
and the plural includes the singular. The word “shall” is mandatory and not
directory, while the word “may” is permissive.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, as amended,
Pub. Law No. 92-500, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. (Supp. IV, 1974).
   ADJUNCT CUSTOMER. Any individual, family, business or institution who would
typically be required to have his or her own meter to receive service, but who,
with prior approval of the Administrator, is allowed to connect onto the town’s
water system through the meter of another customer or to receive water through
a meter assigned to another customer.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The person or persons selected by the Town Manager or Town
Council to carry out the provisions of this chapter.
   AFFORDABLE OWNER-OCCUPIED DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms within a
dwelling forming a single independent habitable unit containing independent
kitchen, sanitary and sleeping facilities, which complies with the town’s
Minimum Housing Code and which has been sold or will be offered for sale for a
gross price at which the monthly gross principal and interest payment, in a
mortgage financing 90% of the purchase price, amortized over a period of 30
years and calculated with interest at the legal rate, is no greater than 25% of
the monthly area median income for a family of four, as established annually by
the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and, if sold,
the purchaser of which is a family in need of housing protection.
   AFFORDABLE OWNER-OCCUPIED HOUSING DEVELOPMENT. One in which more than 50% of
the included dwelling units are or, upon completion of the development, will
be, affordable owner-occupied dwelling units, as that phrase is defined herein.
   AFFORDABLE RENTAL DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms within a dwelling
forming a single independent habitable unit containing independent kitchen,
sanitary and sleeping facilities, which complies with the town’s Minimum
Housing Code, for which the monthly gross rental payment is no  greater than
25% of the monthly area median income for a family of four, as established
annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and
which is occupied by a family in need of housing protection.
   AFFORDABLE RENTAL HOUSING PROJECT. One in which more than 50% of the
included dwelling units are or, upon completion of the project, will be,
affordable rental dwelling units, as that phrase is defined herein.
   AVAILABILITY FEE. The fee charged:
      (1)   To all new customers to the town’s water and/or sewer system; and
      (2)   To all existing customers who expand their home or business,
thereby increasing their demand for water and/or sewer service.
   BILLABLE EXCESS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). A user’s loading in pounds
of BOD, calculated using the billable flow and concentration of BOD in the
waste in excess of 400 mg/l, as determined by the Superintendent.
   BILLABLE EXCESS TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). A user’s loading in pounds of
TSS calculated using the billable flow and concentration of TSS in the waste in
excess of 400 mg/l, as determined by the Superintendent.
   BILLABLE FLOW. A user’s recorded water usage as metered by the appropriate
water utility, plus metered water from wells and other sources, and less any
sewer-exempt metered data, times the local government-approved percentage
factor for wastewater entering the sewer system out of the metered water.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen, expressed in
milligrams per liter (mg/l) utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter, under standard laboratory procedures, in five days at 20°C.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives sanitary or industrial sewage only and is located inside
the walls of a building and conveys the sewage to the building sewer, which
begins five feet outside the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal, and which conveys only sanitary or industrial sewage.
This is also known as a HOUSE CONNECTION.
   CLASSES OF USERS. The division of wastewater treatment customers by waste
characteristics and process discharge similarities or function, such as
residential, commercial, institutional, industrial or governmental.
   COLLECTION SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect wastewaters
from individual point source discharge.
   COMMERCIAL USER. For the purpose of the user charge system, a user engaged
in the purchase or sale of goods or in a transaction or business or who
otherwise renders a service. In addition, for billing purposes, COMMERCIAL USER
shall refer to any commercial, industrial, public and/or institutional user, as
well as any residential user with meter size greater than one inch.
   COSTS OF LABOR AND MATERIALS. Actual costs of meters, fittings, pipe,
adapters and replacement of paving as well as the necessary labor and equipment
costs to accomplish the installation.
   CUSTOMER. Any individual, family, business or institution who, after duly
filing an application for service, with the permission of the Administrator,
connects onto the town’s water and/or sewer system through a meter registered
in his or her name.
   DEVELOPED PROPERTY. All property that has a habitable residential,
commercial, industrial or institutional structure existing on the property on
or before the effective date of this chapter. Any existing subdivisions platted
and recorded before the effective date of this chapter and not developed, as
defined above, shall fall under the provisions of a new subdivision, as
described herein.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right, less than fee simple, for a specific use
of land owned by others.
   FAMILY IN NEED OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING. A family in need of housing protection
is one or more individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption, living with
each other in a “common law” or spousal relationship without the benefit of
marriage or as “domestic partners”, occupying a premises and living as a
single, non-profit housekeeping unit, including domestic servants and/or live-
in help, including: a single person or married couple; a single person or
married couple’s biological, foster or adopted child, a step-child or other
legal ward; a single person or married couple’s parents, siblings and persons
preceding or succeeding generation denoted by the prefixes of grand, great or
great-great; spouses of any persons named in the above groups; cousins, who are
defined to be relatives who are descendants from a common grandparent, with an
aggregate current income and aggregate income for the previous 12 months equal
to or less than the area median income, as established annually by the United
States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and for which the head of
the household  is not claimed as a dependent on the federal tax return of any
other person currently or in the most recently completed federal tax year, and
for which any other adult occupant(s) is not and can not be currently claimed
as a dependent(s) for federal tax purposes by any person(s) not residing in the
dwelling unit.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state so that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a pretreatment facility
approved by the local government. Wastewater shall be considered free of
FLOATABLE FAT if it is properly pre-treated and the wastewater does not
interfere with the collection system.
   GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the commercial handling,
storage and sale of produce.
   GREY WATER. Water generated from the use of the shower, bathtub, spa bath,
hand basin, laundry tub, clothes washing machine, kitchen sink and/or
dishwasher. GREY WATER may not contain wastewater from the toilet, urinal or
bidet.
   HEALTH OFFICER. Any person designated by the Town Council to be responsible
for maintaining sanitary conditions and reporting violations.
   HOOK ON FEE. A fee equal to the actual labor, equipment and materials cost
incurred by the town installing the necessary lines and meter for the customer.
   INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY SYSTEM. The system of charges levied to recover
from the industrial users of the wastewater disposal system the federal grant
amount, issued under Pub. Law No. 92-500, as amended, allocatable to the
construction of facilities for treatment of wastes from the industrial users.
These charges are separate from and not a part of the wastewater treatment bill
whose constituent elements include the user charge system and the billing and
collection charge.
   INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   For the purpose of the user charge system, a manufacturing or
processing facility which is engaged in a production or profit-making venture.
For the purpose of the industrial cost recovery system, an industrial user
shall mean any non-governmental user of public-owned treatment works,
identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, as amended
and supplemented, prepared by the Statistical Police Division, Office of
Management and Budget, including, but not limited to, the following divisions:
         (a)   Division B, Mining;
         (b)   Division D, Manufacturing;
         (c)   Division E, Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services; and
         (d)   Division I, Services.
      (2)   A user identified in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual
may be excluded from the industrial cost recovery system if it is determined by
the Superintendent that the industry will introduce primarily segregated
domestic wastes or wastes from sanitary convenience.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The wastewater from industrial processes, trade or
business and distinguished from domestic or industrial wastes.
   INFILTRATION. The water unintentionally entering the public sewer system,
including sanitary building drains and sewers, from the ground through such
means as, but not limited to, defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or
manhole walls. INFILTRATION does not include, and is distinguished from,
inflow.
   INFLOW. The water discharge into a sanitary sewer system, including building
drains and sewers, from such sources as, but not limited to: roof leaders,
cellar, yard and area drains, foundation drains, unpolluted cooling water
discharges, drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross-
connections from storm sewers and/or combined sewers, catch basins, storm
waters, surface runoff, street wash waters or drainage. INFLOW does not
include, and is distinguishable from, infiltration.
   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport wastewater
to a treatment facility.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The Town of Boone, Watauga County, North Carolina, acting
through its Mayor and Town Council members or other duly authorized
representatives.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT USER. One of the following entities, as it relates to each
entity's connection to the water and sewer system of the town: the county; and
the County Board of Education.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION PERMIT. A permit issued under the
national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) for discharge of
wastewaters to the navigable waters of the United States, pursuant to § 402 of
Pub. Law No. 92-500, as amended.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet, including storm sewers into a watercourse, pond,
ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground water.
   NEW DEVELOPMENTS or NEW SUBDIVISIONS. Any property developed or subdivided
after the effective date of this chapter. The term DEVELOPED as it relates to
new developments is defined as any new construction relating, but not limited
to, residential, commercial, industrial, public and/or institutional activity.
   NORMAL DOMESTIC STRENGTH SEWAGE. Wastewater having an average daily
suspended solids (SS) concentration of not more than 200 milligrams per liter
and an average daily BOD of not more than 200 milligrams per liter.
   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS. All costs, direct and indirect, not
including debt service, but inclusive of expenditures attributable to
administration, replacement of equipment and treatment and collection of
wastewater collection and treatment on a continuing basis which conforms to
applicable regulations and assures optimal long-term facility management.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   pH. The term used to express the intensity of the acid or base condition of
a solution, calculated by taking the logarithm of the reciprocal of the
hydrogen ion concentration. The concentration is the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of industrial wastes from privately-owned
industrial sources by the generator of that source prior to introduction of the
waste effluent into a publicly-owned treatment works.
   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer which is not owned by the town.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of foods that have been shredded to a degree that it does not create
a problem with equipment and piping apparatus.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer which is owned and controlled by the town and is
separate from and does not include sewers owned by other governmental units.
   RAINWATER HARVESTING AND REUSE. The collection, storage and treatment of
rain from roofs or from surface catchments that is recycled back into the
natural environment for safe allowable non-drinking purposes. The water is
generally stored in rainwater tanks or directed into mechanisms which recharge
ground water.
   REPLACEMENT COSTS. The expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories or appurtenances necessary during the service life of the treatment
works to maintain the capacity and performance for which the works were
designed and constructed. The term OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE COSTS, as defined
above, includes REPLACEMENT COSTS.
   RESIDENTIAL USER FOR BILLING PURPOSES. Any residential dwelling with a meter
size of one inch or less. It shall not refer to multi-family residential
dwellings with common meters.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries only sanitary or sanitary and
industrial wastewaters from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants
and institutions and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not
intentionally admitted.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period duration longer
than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows
during normal operation and shall adversely affect the collection system and/or
performance of the wastewater treatment works so as to prevent attainment of
effluent limitations or to substantially increase operation and maintenance
requirements.
   STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the following
sources: Standard Method for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, 13th
edition, as amended, prepared and published jointly by the American Public
Health Association and Water Pollution Control Federation; Methods for Chemical
Analysis of Water and Wastes, 1971, prepared and published by the Analytical
Quality Control Laboratory, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency; Guidelines
Establishing Test Procedures for the Analysis of Pollutants, enumerated in 40
C.F.R. §§ 136.1 et seq. (1975), as amended; and/or any other procedures
recognized by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the State Division
of Environmental Management.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries only storm waters, surface runoff, street
wash and drainage and to which sanitary and/or industrial wastes are not
intentionally admitted.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Town Manager of the town or any authorized deputy, agent
or representative.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS) or TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). Total suspended
matter that either floats on the surface of or is in suspension in water,
wastewater or other liquids and is removable by laboratory filtration as
prescribed in the Standard Methods.
   TOXIC. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants which upon exposure in
sufficient quantity to or assimilation into an organism will cause adverse
effects such as cancer, genetic mutations and physiological manifestations as
defined in standards issued pursuant to § 307(a) of Pub. Law No. 92-500, as
amended.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of a quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that is of sufficient quality that it would not be
in violation of federal or state water quality standards if the water were
discharged into navigable waters of the state. UNPOLLUTED WATER would not be
benefitted by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment
facilities provided.
   UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCE CASE. A situation in which the strict implementation of
the water and/or sewer regulations or fees shall defeat the policy or rationale
underlying the regulations or fees.
   USEFUL LIFE. The anticipated term in years of physical and/or functional
productivity of elements and/or the whole of the wastewater disposal system
which can be reevaluated as a result of preventive maintenance, renewal which
offsets physical and/or functional obsolescence, renewal of capital elements
due to consumption and physical and/or functional betterments, direct or
indirect.
   USER CHARGE SYSTEM. The system of charges levied on users for the cost of
operation and maintenance, including replacement reserve requirements on new
and old wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
   WASTEWATER. The combination of the liquid- and water-carried wastes from
residence, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, including
polluted cooling water and unintentionally admitted infiltration and/or inflow.
      (1)   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. A combination of liquid- and water-carried
wastes discharged from any industrial establishment and resulting from any
trade or process carried on in that establishment, and shall include the wastes
from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water.
      (2)   SANITARY WASTEWATER. The combination of liquid- and water-carried
wastes discharged from toilets and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
   WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM. The structures, equipment and processes required
to collect, transport and treat domestic and industrial wastes, and to dispose
of the effluent and accumulated residual solids.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 7-17-2012; Ord. passed 9-18-2014; Ord.
passed 6-19-2018; Ord. passed 2-21-2019)
§ 50.004 FINANCIAL HARDSHIP POLICY.
   (A)   A FINANCIAL HARDSHIP CASE shall be defined as an individual and/or
family living below the poverty level, as defined by the United States
Government.
   (B)   In financial hardship cases, the Town Manager shall have the authority
to modify or waive any water and/or sewer regulation or fee when the amount in
question does not exceed $3,000. In each financial hardship case, the Public
Works Director shall provide the Town Manager with a written report summarizing
all of the relevant facts and detailing his or her recommendation. This report
shall include a written verification that the individual does in fact fall
below the poverty level.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 9-18-2014; Ord. passed --2017; Ord. passed
--; Ord. passed 2-21-2019)
§ 50.005 UNUSUAL FACT GUIDELINES.
   (A)   An UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCES CASE is defined as a situation in which the
strict implementation of the water and/or sewer regulations or fees shall
defeat the policy or rationale underlying the regulations or fees.
   (B)   (1)   The Town Manager shall have the authority to modify or waive the
water and sewer regulations and/or fees in unusual circumstances cases when the
amount requested to be waived does not exceed $3,000. A decision of the Town
Manager is final and may not be appealed to the Town Council, even if the Town
Manager refuses to waive or make any adjustment in the amount in question.
However, in cases in which the Town Manager has declined to exercise authority
or where the amount a current customer seeks to have waived or modified exceeds
$3,000, the request shall be referred to the Town Council for action. The Town
Council may waive or modify the amount up to a total of $15,000, and may
authorize repayment of any amount which is not waived in equal installments
over a period of up to eight months. For the Town Council to exercise any
authority under this section, it must conclude that the cause of the unpaid
bill was beyond the control of the customer, that the customer acted
expediently in the case of a leak once the existence of the leak was
discovered, and that the customer has acted in good faith and with an interest
in minimizing any loss of water to the town’s system. In general, neither the
Town Manager, nor the Town Council, should waive any portion of an unpaid
amount which has accrued over a period exceeding three billing cycles.
      (2)   The Director of Public Utilities shall provide the Town Manager
with a written report summarizing the unusual circumstances and providing his
or her recommendation. In each case in which Town Council approval must be
sought, the Director of Public Utilities shall also provide the Town Council
with the report and recommendation.
   (C)   In cases in which the amount sought to be waived is caused by a water
leak and the amounts incurred by the customer relate to both water and sewer
charges, the Town Manager can also modify and waive the indebtedness relating
to the sewer charges without limit, if it is determined that none of the water
for which the charges are waived actually discharged into or impacted the sewer
system.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 2-21-2019)
§ 50.006 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety,
prosperity, aesthetics and general welfare of the citizens of the town and is
designed to provide the legislative enactments required under Pub. Law No. 92-
500, as amended, and applicable federal regulations for the acceptance of
construction grants to improve the quality of effluent discharges from waste
treatment works. It is further intended to provide for administration and
enforcement of the chapter and to provide penalties for its violations.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 2-21-2019)
§ 50.007 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   It is not intended by this chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair or
interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, rules, regulations, ordinances or permits previously adopted or
issued pursuant to law. However, wherever this chapter imposes greater
restrictions, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 2-21-2019)
§ 50.008 INTERPRETATION.
   In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be held to be minimum requirements, shall be liberally construed in favor
of the local government, and shall not be deemed a limitation or repeal of any
other power granted by the statutes of the state.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 2-21-2019)
§ 50.009 SEVERABILITY.
   If any word, provision, paragraph, section or subchapter of this chapter is
invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining words,
provisions, paragraphs, sections and subchapters shall not be affected and
shall continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 12-13-2012; Ord. passed 2-21-2019)
§ 50.010 CONFLICT.
   All other articles or ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent
or conflicting with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent
of such inconsistency or conflict.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 12-13-2012; Ord. passed 2-21-2019)
WATER SYSTEM STANDARDS
§ 50.025 GENERAL.
   The following shall be used as a standard for design and construction of a
water system connected to the town system. Failure to follow these standards
shall be sufficient grounds for the town to deny service.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.026 GENERAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Permits and approvals.
      (1)   The town shall review and approve all plans prior to submittal to
any other reviewing agency (state, federal or utility).
      (2)   All approvals by all regulating authorities shall be obtained
before any construction is started. Copies of these approvals, including all
permits, maps and plans shall be received by the town before construction
begins.
      (3)   Approvals must be obtained from (but not limited to) the State
Department of Human Resources, Division of Health Services (Water), the State
Department of Natural Resources and Community Development, Division of
Environmental Management (Sewer and Sedimentation Erosion Control), the State
Department of Transportation (Right-of-Way Encroachment), Railroads and
Utilities (Right-of-Way Encroachment) and private property owners (right-of-
way). These shall be obtained in the name of the owner/developer and
transferred to the town or in the town's name initially. The town shall incur
no expense for permitting.
   (B)   Approval by the town. Approval by the town shall be obtained by the
following procedures:
      (1)   Submit three sets of plans and one reproducible set of plans with a
letter requesting approval of the plans;
      (2)   The town shall review the plans for conformance with the town's
ordinances and standards. The town shall make appropriate comments and return
the plans. The town shall return an approved set of plans with a letter of
approval when no comments are warranted;
      (3)   Obtain all other approvals, easements and rights-of-way and submit
copies to the town; and
      (4)   The Director of Public Utilities shall allow construction to begin
when all permits have been received.
   (C)   Construction records and inspection.
      (1)   As-built drawings shall be prepared to reflect all changes made
during construction. A field survey to locate all new manholes and to determine
the inverts of new sewer lines as well as location of all water lines,
hydrants, bends and connection points shall be conducted by the owner/
developer. As-built drawings shall show locations of all sewer laterals and
water services referenced to fixed points so as to be easily located in the
event that the markers are destroyed. The method of location on the as-built
drawings shall be as directed by the Director of Public Utilities. The owner/
developer shall mark the location of sewer lateral ends with a steel post
painted yellow extending at least three feet above ground.
      (2)   Construction inspection of water and sewer installations is
required per §§ .0903 and .0906 of the rules governing public water supplies.
Construction inspection by a registered professional engineer or a
representative of the engineer's office, under the engineer's supervision, is
required. The engineer must submit a statement, acceptable to state agencies,
reflecting that the water and sewer system was constructed in accordance with
the approved plans and specifications.
   (D)   Guarantee of the work. The work shall be guaranteed by the owner/
developer for a period of one year. The guarantee shall cover materials and
workmanship. Any defective work or materials shall be repaired or replaced, at
no expense to the town.
   (E)   Acceptance of the facilities by the town. The town shall accept new
facilities upon completion of the following:
      (1)   All construction is complete and all tests satisfactory;
      (2)   Statement of inspection from the engineer is received;
      (3)   Plan originals with all as-built revisions are received;
      (4)   All permanent easements, rights-of-way and permits in the town's
name and copies filed in the proper offices;
      (5)   All sediment and erosion control structures are removed and site is
clear of debris and equipment; and
      (6)   Any release required by the Director of Public Utilities.
   (F)   Fire flow requirement determination.
      (1)   In order to provide adequate fire protection to the town, the
following criteria for determining fire flow requirements shall apply:
         (a)   National Fire Codes;
         (b)   ANSI standards;
         (c)   Fire insurance regulations from the State Department of
Insurance (I.S.O.);
         (d)   AWWA standards;
         (e)   Town Fire Department experience; and
         (f)   Practices of the Town Department of Public Utilities.
      (2)   Water systems owned by or connected to the town's system shall be
so designed and constructed to meet the above requirements.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
INSTALLATION SPECIFICATIONS AND MATERIALS
§ 50.040 CLEARING.
   Where the lines are to be constructed in wooded areas, permanent easements
shall be fully cleared. Cleared materials shall be disposed of off of the
construction site. Disposal shall be made in accordance with all local and
state laws. Trees cut down on the construction site will be hauled away from
the site for proper disposal. Stumps of all trees cut down outside of the
excavation area shall be removed. Ground surfaces shall be graded so as to
promote proper drainage and allow mowing by vehicular equipment.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.041 SITE GRADING.
   All rough grading shall be completed prior to the installation of the sewers
and appurtenances.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.042 EARTHWORK.
   (A)   Explosives for blasting shall be stored, handled and used in
accordance with the State Department of Transportation Standard Specifications
(latest revision), all local regulations and practices outlined in the Blasters
Handbook, published by E.I. Dupont de Nemours and Company, Inc. Blasting shall
be conducted so as not to endanger persons or property and shall be covered or
otherwise satisfactorily confined. The blaster shall be responsible for and
shall make good, any damage of whatever nature caused by blasting or accidental
explosions.
   (B)   The bottom of all excavations shall be free from water when pipe is
laid in the excavation, when concrete is placed and until work is carried above
the ground water level and is safe from flotation. If any of the subgrade or
underlying materials is disturbed by movement of ground water, surface water or
any other reason, it shall be replaced with crushed stone or gravel.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.043 CLEAN-UP OF SITE.
   At the completion of the work, all debris and excess construction materials
shall be removed and the right-of-way shall be left clean and presentable.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.044 MATERIALS.
   (A)   Select backfill. Select backfill material shall contain no human-made
or organic material or clay pockets and shall be free of rocks, clods or other
materials larger than two inches in nominal diameter. Materials from on-site
excavations may be used for select backfill; provided, they meet the specific
requirements and contain optimum moisture content for proper compaction. Water
saturated material shall not be used as select material. If sufficient on-site
select backfill material is not available, acceptable material from an off-site
borrow area shall be secured.
   (B)   Backfill. Backfill shall be free of all organic materials and shall
not contain any rocks larger than four inches in diameter or be in a water
saturated condition.
   (C)   Crushed stone or screened gravel. Crushed stone or screened gravel
shall meet the requirements of the State Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications (latest revision). Crushed stone or screened gravel shall
conform to standard size No. 5. Any rock excavated on site which meets this
graduation may be used. Specifically, the stone shall meet the following
gradation.
 
Sieve Size Percentage Dry Weight Passing Designated Sieve Size
1-1/2-inch 100
1-inch     90 - 100
3/4-inch   20 - 55
1/2-inch   0 - 10
3/8-inch   0 - 5
No. 200    0 - 0.6
 
   (D)   Pipe bedding. All materials used for pipe bedding shall conform to
State Department of Transportation Standard Specifications (latest revision)
for standard size 67 material. Any rock, run-of-bank sand or gravel excavated
on site which meets the following gradation may be used.
 
Sieve Size Percentage Dry Weight Passing Designated Sieve Size
1-inch     100
3/4-inch   90 - 100
3/8-inch   20 - 55
No. 4      0 - 10
No. 8      0 - 5
No. 200    0 - 0.6
 
   (E)   Riprap. The stone for riprap shall consist of field stone or rough
unhewn quarry stone. The stone shall be sound, tough, dense and resistant to
the action of air and water. The riprap shall be class I as specified in the
NCDOT Standard Specifications (latest revision). The stone shall vary in weight
from five to 200 pounds. At least 30% of the total weight of the riprap shall
be in individual pieces weighing a minimum of 60 pounds each. Not more than 10%
of the total weight of the riprap may be in individual pieces weighing less
than 15 pounds.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.045 EXCAVATION.
   (A)   General. All excavation shall be made in a manner and to the widths as
will give ample room for properly constructing and inspecting the structures
they are to contain and for the sheeting, timbering, pumping and draining as
may be required within the limits shown in Standard NPW-2. Except where
otherwise specified, excavation slopes shall be flat enough to avoid slides
that will cause disturbance of the subgrade or damage to adjacent areas,
intercept and collect surface runoff both at the top and bottom of cut slopes.
All excess excavated material and all excavated material which is unsuitable
shall be removed from the site and replaced with suitable material.
   (B)   Sheeting and bracing. Place and maintain the sheeting and bracing as
may be required to support the sides of the excavation or to protect pipes and
structures from possible damage and to provide safe working conditions. The
contractor shall be responsible for the adequacy of all sheeting and bracing
used and for all damage resulting from sheeting and bracing failure or from
placing, maintaining and removing it. All sheeting and bracing shall be removed
upon completion of work. The town may permit sheeting to be left in place at
the request and expense of others for the purpose of preventing injury to
structures or property. Any sheeting or bracing left in place shall be cut off
at least two feet below the finished ground surface.
   (C)   Rock excavation. All rock encountered within the limits of excavation
shall be excavated. Rock shall be excavated so that generally there will be a
clear space of at least 12 inches from the outside barrel of the pipe to the
side of the trench. Isolated points of rock shall not come nearer than six
inches to the pipe. At the trench bottom, the rock shall not come nearer than
six inches to the pipe. In addition, sufficient rock shall be removed at joints
to facilitate proper installation. Rock shall be fully removed at least 15 feet
in advance of the laying of the pipe.
   (D)   Protection of subgrade for all excavations. To minimize the
disturbance of the bearing materials and provide a firm foundation.
      (1)   Excavation shall be carried out below subgrade in limited areas,
should disturbed soil or material with natural low bearing capacity be
encountered. Stabilizing of these areas shall be done with select backfill or
coarse aggregate as required. Soils disturbed through the operations shall be
excavated and replaced with select backfill or coarse aggregate, as required.
      (2)   Provide positive protection against penetration of frost into
materials below the bearing level during work in winter months.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.046 BACKFILLING.
   (A)   Backfill shall be placed in maximum eight-inch lits and compacted with
tampers to 95% of Standard Proctor AASHTO-99 density, except backfill under
structures, which shall be compacted to 98% of Standard Proctor Density.
Backfill in the roadways shall be tamped to NCDOT requirements.
   (B)   Pipe trenches shall be backfilled as soon as possible after pipe
installation.
   (C)   Where sheeting is used, use all reasonable measures to prevent the
loss of support of the pipe or backfill when the sheeting is removed. If
significant volumes of soil cannot be prevented from clinging to the extracted
sheets, the voids shall be continuously backfilled as rapidly as possible.
Thereafter, limit the depth below subgrade that sheeting will be driven in
similar soil conditions or employ other appropriate means to prevent a loss of
pipe support. Sheeting embedded in granular fill or backfill materials shall be
left in place.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.047 PIPE LAYING.
   Pipe laying shall, in all instances, be accomplished in a workmanlike manner
laid true in line and grade with bell ends facing (up-grade) in the direction
of laying. The various pipes shall be handled, belled-up and laid in accordance
with manufacturer's requirements and good engineering practices.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.048 PIPE BEDDING.
   (A)   Shaped bottom bedding (NPW-1). Shall be so the pipe bears uniformly
upon undisturbed native earth. Soil is then backfilled and tamped by hand
around the pipe (and completely under the pipe haunches) in uniform layers not
exceeding six inches in depth to ten inches above the top of pipe. Each six-
inch layer shall then be placed, then carefully (so as not to disturb or damage
the pipe) and uniformly tamped, eliminating the possibility of lateral
movement.
   (B)   Type II - granular material embedment (NPW-3). Shall be when the
trench bottom is undercut a minimum of six inches below the pipe barrel grade
and filled with an approved stone as shown in the standard details.
   (C)   Type III - granular material embedment (NPW-4). Shall be when the
trench bottom is undercut a minimum of six inches below the pipe barrel grade
and filled with an approved stone to an elevation so that the pipe will be
completely and uniformly bedded.
   (D)   Concrete encasement and cradles (NPW-5). Shall be as shown in the
Standard Details.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.049 INSTALLATION LIMITATIONS.
   The following are limitations and bedding requirements for supportive
strength and shall be adhered to at all times.
   (A)   Six- and eight-inch pipe. Installation of eight-inch PVC pipe with
more than 14 feet of cover use Type II, granular embedment.
   (B)   Ten-inch and 12-inch pipe. Installation of ten-inch and 12-inch PVC
pipe with more than 12 feet of cover, use Type II, granular embedment.
   (C)   Ductile iron pipe. Installation of ductile iron pipe with more than 20
feet of cover, use Type II, granular embedment; more than 30 feet of cover, use
Type III, granular embedment. This is regardless of ground water and/or soil
conditions. In areas having two and one-half feet and less or 18 feet and more
of cover, use ductile iron pipe.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.050 PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE.
   (A)   Acceptance of concrete. The Director of Public Utilities shall require
all and as many tests as he or she deems necessary to insure the concrete
acceptability. The cost of the test shall be at the supplier's or contractor's
expense.
   (B)   Depositing. Concrete will not be used if it cannot be placed within 90
minutes of the dispatch time. Concrete shall be deposited in a manner so as to
prevent contamination by foreign material and segregation due to rehandling or
flowing. Segregated concrete and/or concrete consisting of foreign material
will not be used. Depositing will not be done when temperature has not exceeded
35°F and rising by 10:00 a.m. Concreting shall cease when the descending air
temperature in the shade falls below 40°F. It shall not resume until the
ascending air temperature rises to 35°F. All concrete shall be kept from
freezing. Frozen concrete shall be replaced. Free fall shall not exceed three
feet in any case.
   (C)   Forms. Forms may be made of wood, plywood, metal or any other suitable
material. Forms shall be mortar tight, of material strong enough to resist
noticeable deflection or bulging between supports and the interior dimensions
of the forms shall be such that the finished concrete shall be of the proper
form and dimensions. The design of the forms shall take into account the effect
of vibration of concrete as it is placed and also the rate of speed at which
the forms will be filled. Mechanical vibrators of an approved type and
continuous spading and/or rodding of concrete shall be used to produce proper
contact of concrete with forms and reinforcing steel in piers and with forms
and pipe in monolithic inverts ensuring a compact, dense and impervious
artificial stone of uniform texture.
   (D)   Curing. All concrete shall be cured by one of the following methods:
      (1)   Forms left in place for a period of seven days. Exposed concrete
shall be moist cured;
      (2)   Moist curing performed when forms are removed before seven days.
All construction joints shall be moist cured; and
      (3)   Curing compound used immediately after forms are removed and all
surface water has disappeared.
   (E)   Finishing. The structure shall have a uniform and textured surface.
All form marks exposed to view shall be rubbed off with a stone.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.051 TESTING.
   Testing is required on all lines and shall be done in the presence of the
Director of Public Utilities or his or her representative. A minimum of 48
hours' notice shall be given to the Director of Public Utilities before testing
begins unless other schedules can be arranged. All testing and disinfection
shall be completed prior to connection to any existing line.
   (A)   Water line testing; hydrostatic and leakage tests. On completion of
the line or sections of the lines, connections and appurtenances, the line
shall be filled and hydrostatically tested. The water for this purpose can be
taken from existing lines under the supervision of the Public Utilities
Department; the pressure shall be increased to either 150 psi or 200 psi at the
lowest point in the section being tested as specified by the Director of Public
Utilities. Testing shall be for a minimum of four hours to a maximum of 24
hours. The water added during the testing will be metered. All leaks and any
defective material shall be repaired or replaced to the satisfaction of the
Director of Public Utilities and the tests repeated until the requirements of
this specification are met. Leakage will be allowed on the basis of the formula
set forth in AWWA Specification C-600.
   (B)   Field testing valves. In addition to manufacturer testing and
certification, field tests of all valves as directed by AWWA Specifications C-
500 and C-504 as applicable.
      (1)   During the last stages of the test and without any reduction in
pressure, first the hydrant valves will be closed, then progressing in an
orderly manner from the end opposite from the test pump each main line valve
will be closed and pressure released to determine if it is holding pressure
(minimum 30 minutes).
      (2)   Unless otherwise directed by the Director of Public Utilities, all
butterfly valves will be tested to 150 psi for a minimum of 30 minutes (each)
after the pipeline has been successfully tested.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.052 DISINFECTION OF MAINS.
   All water mains shall be thoroughly flushed and disinfected before being
placed in service. This work shall be done under the direct supervision of the
Director of Public Utilities after a thorough flushing and cleaning out,
sufficient chlorine concentration of at least 50 parts per million. The
chlorine solution shall be retained in the lines for at least 24 hours. At the
ends of this period, the chlorine residual shall be at least ten parts per
million. The lines will then be flushed sufficiently to clear them of chlorine
exceeding one part per million. Samples of water from the mains will then be
taken and analyzed for bacteriological purity. If the mains fail to meet the
bacteriological standard for purity, then disinfecting and flushing will be
repeated until the standards have been met. All analysis for chlorine and
bacteriological purity will be by town personnel.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.053 DRAINAGE OF MAINS.
   (A)   Mains shall be drained through hydrants or blowoffs to natural drains.
Drainage of mains will be accomplished in a manner as to minimize erosion and
siltation to adjoining properties. Water velocity from drainage and/or blowoff
will also be dissipated in an acceptable manner to protect the environment.
   (B)   Hydrants or blowoffs shall not be connected to any sewer, submerged in
any streams or installed in any other manner that will permit back siphonage
into the distribution system.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.054 WATER USE.
   All water used for testing, flushing, disinfection and the like shall be
purchased from the town at prevailing rates. The use of water (time and
quantity) shall be coordinated with the Director of Public Utilities. This
coordination shall be accomplished by submittal of a proposed schedule of water
use for approval by the Director of Public Utilities. The proposed schedule
should be submitted ten working days prior to any water use.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.055 FINAL GRADING AND LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   General. Fertilizing, seeding and mulching of any and all areas
disturbed during construction will follow within ten working days of the
installation of each pipe run (being from manhole to manhole or 300 feet of
water line). All plantings shall be maintained by the installer for a period of
one year after the completion of the work.
   (B)   Materials. 
      (1)   Fertilizer. Lawn fertilizer shall be a complete fertilizer with
components derived from organic sources and shall contain the following
percentages by weight:
         (a)   Type 10-10-10: 10%;
         (b)   Nitrogen (ureaform): 10%; and
         (c)   Phosphoric acid: 10%.
      (2)   Potash. One quarter of the nitrogen shall be in the form of
nitrates, one quarter in the form of ammonia salts and one half in the form of
natural organic nitrogen. Available phosphoric acid to be free from
superphosphate, bone or tankage. Potash shall be sulphate or potash. Elements
shall conform to the standards of the Association of Official Chemists.
      (3)   Storage. Commercial fertilizer shall be stored in weatherproof
storage areas and in a manner that effectiveness will not be impaired.
      (4)   Ground limestone. At least 50% shall pass a No. 200 U.S.S. mesh
sieve. At least 90% shall pass a No. 100 U.S.S. mesh sieve. One hundred percent
shall pass a No. 10 U.S.S. mesh sieve. Total carbonates shall not be less than
80% of 44.8% calcium oxide equivalent; for purposes of calculation, total
carbonates shall be considered as calcium carbonate.
      (5)   Grass seed. Grass seed shall be new crop mechanically mixed seeds
in the following seed mixture proportions:
 
% Mixture Seed Variety       % Purity % Germination
80        Kentucky 31        98       97
20        Kentucky Bluegrass 98       85
 
   (C)   Seed bed preparation. The seed bed shall be prepared by pulverizing
the soil to a depth of three inches. Good surface drainage must be provided,
allowances for settlement made and ground elevations adjusted accordingly.
Visible ponding will not be allowed. All stones, roots, sticks, rubbish and
other objectionable material shall be removed.
   (D)   Soil improvements. Soil additives shall be applied incorporated in an
approved manner into the topsoil at the following rates:
      (1)   Fertilizer: 30 pounds per 1,000 square feet of 10-10-10 fertilizer;
      (2)   Lime: 100 pounds per 100 square feet; and
      (3)   Superphosphate (0.20.0): 12 pounds per 1,000 square feet.
   (E)   Seeding. The seed bed must be in good, friable condition and has not
become muddy or hard at the time seeding is to be performed. Seed shall be
applied at the rate of eight pounds per 1,000 square feet and raked or tilled
into the topsoil with the resulting furroughs running across the natural slope
of the ground.
   (F)   Mulching.
      (1)   Dried straw shall be uniformly spread (approximately one-fourth of
the ground should remain visible to avoid smothering seedlings) over the area
at the rate of 90 pounds per 1,000 square feet. The straw shall be sprayed with
liquid asphalt to bond it together and anchor it in place.
      (2)   Liquid asphalt (thinned with kerosene) used during freezing weather
shall be either rapid or medium curing, applied at a rate of 200 gallons per
ton of straw (approximately nine gallons per 1,000 square feet).
      (3)   Emulsified asphalt (thinned with water) used when temperatures are
less severe shall be rapid curing only, applied at a rate of 150 gallons per
ton of straw (approximately seven gallons per 1,000 square feet).
   (G)   Maintenance. Maintenance shall consist of watering, weed and pest
control (within established lawns), fertilization, erosion repair, reseeding
and all else necessary to establish a vigorous health and uniform stand of
grass. All areas and spots which do not show a uniform stand of grass, for any
reason, shall be treated repeatedly until a uniform stand is attained.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.056 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL MEASURES.
   (A)   All work shall be done in accordance with and subject to the
limitations of the state's rules and regulations for erosion and sediment
control.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the installer of the system to
obtain approval of a sedimentation and erosion control plan from the State
Department of Natural Resources and Community Development prior to land
disturbing activities.
   (C)   All erosion control measures shall be maintained until no longer
required for sediment control, at which time they shall be dismantled and
removed from site.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.057 DUCTILE IRON PIPE.
   (A)   All ductile iron pipe shall be class 50, 51 or 52 designed in
accordance with AWWA Standard C-150. Design shall be done for external and
internal pressures separately, using the larger of the two for the next design
thickness. An additional allowance shall be made for corrosion and casting
tolerances. The thickness design for external and internal pressures shall use
the following conditions:
      (1)   Three feet minimum cover and maximum cover as shown on the plans;
      (2)   Laying condition - type 1;
      (3)   A minimum working pressure of 150 psi; and
      (4)   A surge pressure of an additional 100 psi.
   (B)   The minimum class thickness shall be class 50.
   (C)   The ductile iron pipe shall be manufactured in accordance with all
applicable requirements of AWWA Standard C-151. The ductile iron pipe shall be
supplied in nominal lengths of 18 or 20 feet.
   (D)   The ductile iron pipe shall be cement-mortar lined with a sealcoat in
accordance with AWWA C-104 and bituminous coated in accordance with AWWA C-151.
   (E)   Pipe joints shall be mechanical or push-on manufactured in accordance
with AWWA Standard C-111.
   (F)   Each joint of ductile iron pipe shall be hydrostatically tested of 500
psi at the point of manufacture before the outside coating and inside lining
are applied. Testing may be performed prior to machining bell and spigot.
FAILURE OF DUCTILE IRON PIPE shall be defined as any rupture or leakage of the
pipe wall.
   (G)   All materials used in the production of the pipe are to be tested in
accordance with AWWA Standard C-151 for their adequacy within the design of the
pipe and certified test results are to be provided to the town upon request.
All certified tests, hydrostatic and material, are to be performed by an
independent testing laboratory at the expense of the pipe manufacturer.
   (H)   Push-on and mechanical joint pipe shall be as manufactured by the
American Cast Iron Pipe Company, United States Pipe and Foundry Company,
Griffin Pipe Products Company, McWane Case Iron Pipe Company.
   (I)   Restrained joints shall be TR Flex or Lok Tyte as manufactured by U.S.
Pipe, Lok-Fast or Lok-Ring as manufactured by American Pipe or Super-Lock as
manufactured by Clow. Restrained joints shall be used when the pipe location
excludes the use of thrust blocks for proper support.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.058 DUCTILE IRON OR CAST IRON FITTINGS.
   (A)   All fittings shall be manufactured in accordance with AWWA C-110 or C-
153 for standard fittings and ductile iron compact fittings, respectively. The
fittings shall be tested and the manufacturer shall provide certified test
results when requested by the town. This testing shall include hydrostatic
proof testing of the fittings.
   (B)   All fittings shall be all-bell and of the mechanical joint type.
Mechanical joints shall be manufactured in accordance with AWWA Standard C-111.
   (C)   All fittings shall be cast iron or ductile iron and shall have a
minimum working pressure rating of 250 psi and a minimum iron strength of
25,000 psi.
   (D)   All fitting interiors shall be cement-mortar lined in accordance with
AWWA Standard C-104 and the outside shall be bituminous coated.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.059 POLYVINYL CHLORIDE PIPE (PVC) AND FITTINGS.
   (A)   All PVC pipe is to be in accordance with A.S.T.M. D2241. PVC material
shall conform to A.S.T.M. D1784. Pipe shall have push-on joints with integral
bell and locked in gasket and shall conform to A.S.T.M. D3139. The bell shall
consist of an integral wall section with a locked-in, solid cross-section
elastomeric ring which meets the requirements of A.S.T.M. F-477. Pipe will also
be the type approved by the National Sanitation Foundation and shall bear the
NSF logo.
   (B)   All pipe for six-inch and larger mains shall conform to AWWA Standard
C-900, DR 14, Class 200, rated with a working pressure of 200 psi. All fittings
shall be mechanical joint cast iron, as specified above.
   (C)   PVC pipe will be used only in areas where the highest working pressure
is 125 psi or less. Ductile iron pipe will be required in all locations where
the working pressure exceeds 125 psi, as measured or calculated.
   (D)   All pipes and materials are to be tested according to the requirements
of AWWA Standard C-900. Certified test results are to be provided to the town
when requested. These tests shall be performed by an independent testing
laboratory at the expense of the pipe manufacturer.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.060 GATE VALVES.
   (A)   All gate valves, including tapping valves, shall be Mueller, M&H,
Kennedy or equal in accordance with AWWA C-500 specifications.
   (B)   Gate valves 12 inches in diameter and smaller shall be mechanical
joint or hub-end all-bell. They shall be O ring, open-left valves or the non-
rising stem type. These valves shall be designed for a minimum of 175 psi
working pressure and 300 psi hydrostatic test pressure with a two-inch
operating nut. Valves shall be cast iron or ductile iron.
   (C)   Tapping valves shall be manufactured in accordance with AWWA
specifications. They shall be of the Mueller, M&H, Kennedy or American O ring,
open-left type.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.061 AIR RELEASE VALVES.
   Air release valves shall be two-inch Crispin Pressure Air Valves, Model P20,
with a vacuum check unit, two-inch Val-Matic, Model VM-45, with a vacuum check
unit or equal as approved by the Director of Public Utilities. These valves
shall be suitable for 150 psi working pressure and designed to allow air to
escape automatically while the main is in service and under pressure. The valve
shall be housed in an approved eccentric manhole and shall be installed in
accordance with the Standard Detail of these specifications. Air release valve
locations shall be approved by the Director of Public Utilities and shown on
the plans.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.062 TAPPING SLEEVES AND TAPPING SADDLES.
   (A)   Tapping sleeves shall be Mueller mechanical joint Mueller Outlet Seal,
Ford Stainless Tapping Sleeve Type 304, American Uniseal or Kennedy Square
Seal. All sleeves shall have a minimum of 150 psi working pressure. All sleeves
larger than 12 inches shall be ductile iron. All taps shall be machine drilled;
no burned taps will be allowed.
   (B)   Tapping saddles may be used on mains 16 inches and larger. Tapping
saddles shall be manufactured of ductile iron providing a factor of safety of
two and one-half at a working pressure of 250 psi. Saddles shall be equipped
with a standard AWWA C-110 flange connection on the branch. Sealing gaskets
shall be O ring type, high quality molded rubber having an approximate 70
durometer hardness, placed into a groove on the curved surface of the tapping
saddle. Straps shall be of alloy steel. The American tapping saddle, U.S. pipe
ductile non-tapping saddle or an approved equal shall be used. All taps shall
be machine cut; no burned taps will be allowed. Saddles may be used for taps
one-half the size of the main or less (i.e., eight-inch tapping saddle for use
on a 16-inch main). Sleeves shall be used on taps over one-half the size of the
main.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.063 VALVE BOXES.
   Adjustable valve boxes shall be gray cast iron of the dimensions specified
in the Standard Details of these specifications. The word "Water" shall be cast
into the lid. The valve box shall be Dewey Brothers or approved equal.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.064 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   Fire hydrants shall comply with AWWA C-502 as manufactured for the
town by Kennedy Guardian M&H Model 129 or Mueller A421 Centurion. The Centurion
shall include a center punch mark on the lower stem for identification and
inclusion of a vertical shoe for a four and one-half-inch valve opening.
Nozzles shall have national standard threads and shall consist of the
following: two two and one-half-inch nozzles and one four and one-half-inch
nozzle. All nozzles shall be provided with cap and cap retaining chain. The
hydrant valve opening shall be four and one-half inches. Bronze to bronze
threads shall be provided between the hydrant seat or seat ring and the seat
attaching assembly. All hydrants must include cast or ductile epoxy lined shoe,
rubber drain seals and positive, protective valve stop device.
   (B)   Hydrants shall be open-left type and shall have a six-inch hub-end or
mechanical joint elbow. The hydrant barrel shall be of sufficient length to
provide a minimum of three feet bury and be of the break-away impact type.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.065 TAPS.
   (A)   Taps one inch in diameter and smaller may be made directly into
ductile iron pipe with a corporation stop. For taps two inches in diameter or
less into PVC and taps greater than one inch, but less than two inches in
ductile iron, saddles and corporation stops shall be used.
   (B)   Corporation stops shall be as manufactured by Ford or approved equal,
having AWWA standard tapered threads. Unions shall be three-piece, copper to
copper.
   (C)   Service saddles shall be all bronze with double straps and neoprene O
ring gaskets attached to the body. The clamp shall have corporation stop
threads and be Mueller Series H16100 or approved equal.
   (D)   Taps larger than two inches or greater than one-half inch, the
diameter of the main line shall be made using the appropriate size tapping
sleeve and valve. On a dry line, the connection shall be made with a tee and
valve with brass nipple between tee and valve.
   (E)   The town shall make all taps to existing lines unless otherwise
specifically authorized by the Director of Public Utilities. In the event the
town does not make the tap, the Director of Public Utilities shall be notified
48 hours before any wet line is tapped.
   (F)   Service lines shall be a minimum of three-fourths inch. Lines three-
fourths inch to one inch shall be type K soft copper or red brass pipe.
Fittings shall be flared copper type brass fittings. Lines greater than one
inch up to two inches in diameter shall be type K copper, red brass pipe or PVC
Standard A.S.T.M. D2241 SDR 21 Class 200 PSI (gasket type). Service lines
greater than two inches shall be ductile iron pipe or PVC (gasket type) with
cast or ductile iron fittings.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.066 METERS, METER ASSEMBLIES AND ENCLOSURES.
   (A)   The town shall provide and install all meters, meter assemblies, and
enclosures at the owner's or developer's expense except as provided at division
(C) of this section.
   (B)   Commercial and industrial meters shall be of a size and configuration
as deemed appropriate by a design professional and approved by the town.
   (C)   Taking into account the town's workforce resources and any other
circumstances deemed relevant, the Administrator may require that the developer
install meters, meter assemblies, and enclosures for new development or
redevelopment involving either or both of the following:
      (1)   Multifamily residential use requiring installation or replacement
of more than 12 meters; or
      (2)   Commercial use requiring installation or replacement of meters 1.5
inch or greater in size. Any such installation by a developer must be inspected
by and completed to the satisfaction of the Administrator.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 9-17-2019; Ord. passed 6-28-2023)
§ 50.067 MULTIPLE METER ASSEMBLIES.
   The use of multiple meter assemblies must be approved by the Administrator.
When allowed, meter assemblies shall be as shown in the standard details;
piping shall be provided with unions for easy disassembly; and all pipe shall
be of the same quality as used for individual meters. Meter boxes and setters
must be purchased from the town. Meters must be installed as provide at §
50.066.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 9-17-2019)
§ 50.068 BACKFLOW PREVENTERS.
   (A)   Meters three-fourth inch and smaller shall be supplied with integral
backflow preventers, supplied by the town.
   (B)   For meter services larger than three-fourths inch and up through two
inches, reduced pressure type backflow preventer, Model FRP as manufactured by
Beeco or approved equal, installed in a separate meter box on the customer's
side of the meter shall be furnished and installed by the customer.
   (C)   For meter services larger than two inches, reduced pressure type
backflow preventers, Model 6CM as manufactured by Beeco or approved equal,
shall be installed by the customer in a separate vault on the customers side of
the meter.
   (D)   All backflow preventers shall meet approval of the U.S.C. Cross-
Connection Control Lab.
   (E)   All lines, including fire lines and irrigation lines, shall have
approved backflow preventers.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.069 WATER SYSTEM DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   Minimum main line pipe size shall be six inches.
   (B)   Minimum pressure in system shall be 20 psi at peak demand (fire flow).
   (C)   Minimize dead ends and where they must occur, provide a fire hydrant
per standard detail NPW-12. The fitting required at a dead-end line shall be
determined by the Director of Public Utilities.
   (D)   Minimum cover shall be three feet.
   (E)   Install valves as follows: three at cross; two at a tee; one on a
single hydrant branch.
   (F)   Install valves on loops so a maximum of 600 feet can be taken from
service without affecting other areas.
   (G)   Separate water lines ten feet horizontal distance from sewer lines
(existing or proposed) or keep water line 18 inches clear above sewer line.
Where 18 inches clear vertically cannot be maintained below or above the sewer
line, both lines shall be mechanical joint ductile iron a minimum of ten feet
on either side of the crossing. Center the crossing at the center of the pipe,
both lines.
   (H)   Maximum spacing between fire hydrants shall be 500 feet (250 radius).
   (I)   Backflow preventers shall be supplied for every service connection.
For services up to three- fourths inch, it shall be integral with the meter,
for services larger than three-fourths inch up to two inches in a separate
meter box and for backflow preventers larger than two inches, a vault shall be
provided.
   (J)   Vaults shall have aluminum hatch doors with lift assist and shall be
capable of withstanding expected traffic loads.
   (K)   All bypasses, other than those with locking valves, shall have
detector check valves installed.
   (L)   Reduced pressure principle backflow preventers are to be installed on
all lines to installations involving wet manufacturing processes, sprinkler
systems or any other hazardous location as determined by the Director of Public
Utilities.
   (M)   Water line drawings and specifications shall bear the seal of a
registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the state and the
installation of the system shall be inspected and certified by the engineer in
accordance with N.C.A.C.IOD.0903.
   (N)   Water lines shall have a 25-foot permanent easement (12.5 feet each
side of centerline) in the town's name. A 50-foot temporary construction (25
feet each side of centerline, unless directed otherwise) easement shall be
provided.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.070 WATER PLANS CHECKLIST.
   Water line plans should, at the minimum, show the following information:
   (A)   Location and dimension of all existing and proposed street and
sanitary sewer rights-of-way;
   (B)   Sanitary sewer and storm drain systems dotted in;
   (C)   Invert of storm drains at crossings, storm drains closely paralleled
by water lines;
   (D)   Invert of sanitary sewers at crossings and at upstream and downstream
manholes;
   (E)   Size, lengths (or stationary) and types of lines (water, storm,
sanitary);
   (F)   All tees, gate valves, fire hydrants and blowoffs properly labeled;
   (G)   Legend of symbols;
   (H)   North arrow;
   (I)   Street names;
   (J)   Location(s) of nearest existing valves;
   (K)   Existing pavement and if applicable, width and length of cut;
   (L)   Include "general notes" on all plans;
   (M)   Registered engineer's seal and signature; and
   (N)   Vicinity map, showing location of lines and a visual plan page index.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.071 WATER LINES; GENERAL NOTES.
   (A)   Concrete blocking (3,000 psi) to be placed at all bends or as
required.
   (B)   Standard depth of cover to be three feet, except at valve or hydrant
locations or other special situations. Cover is based on elevation below edge
of pavement or as indicated on the plans.
   (C)   Provide concrete pads (30-inch by 30-inch by six-inch) at all valve
boxes.
   (D)   Extensions for valve boxes, when required, are to be five-inch soil
pipe.
   (E)   All pavement cuts, concrete or asphalt, are to be replaced according
to the Standard Details of the State Department of Transportation.
   (F)   Pavement cuts are to be replaced immediately after backfilling of
initial cut either with permanent replacement or a temporary replacement of one
and one-half inches of I-2 or four inches of H-Binder.
   (G)   Repairs to main breaks:
      (1)   Bell clamps will not be allowed, except in special situations and
as directed by the Director of Public Utilities; and
      (2)   Solid sleeves to be used for connecting spigot ends shall be of the
long pattern type.
   (H)   In any instance where it will be necessary to have the water shut off
on existing mains in order to make a tie-in, the work must be done under the
direct supervision of the Director of Public Utilities and at the time least
inconvenient to the water customers involved.
   (I)   When a water main crosses an existing sewer main, the contractor is to
replace the sewer pipe spanning the ditch with ductile pipe when the following
conditions occur:
      (1)   Any time a water main is installed under a sewer main; and
      (2)   When a water main is over a sewer main and the vertical distance
between the two mains is 18 inches or less.
   (J)   Water mains shall be installed with a minimum of ten feet horizontal
separation from sewer lines. Where this is not possible, as determined by the
Director of Public Utilities, both the water line and the sewer line shall be
ductile iron pipe.
   (K)   Water lines shall be disinfected and hydrostatically tested in
accordance with all state and town requirements.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
UNDERGROUND PACKAGED WATER BOOSTER PUMPING STATION
§ 50.085 SCOPE OF WORK.
   (A)   The contractor shall furnish and install one factory built,
underground water booster pumping station, with all the necessary piping,
controls and appurtenances as shown on the plans and as specified herein. The
station shall be complete with all necessary equipment installed in a
fabricated steel capsule. Entrance to the equipment capsule will be gained
through a rectangular entrance hatch, with an access ladder provided. The
booster station shall be as manufactured by Engineered Fluid, Inc., Centralia,
Illinois.
   (B)   The manufacturer of this equipment shall be one recognized and
established in the design and production of water booster pumping stations. The
booster station manufacturer shall maintain regular production facilities at
its place of business. These facilities shall be open for inspection by a
representative of the owner at any time during construction and testing of this
equipment. Equipment manufactured by a fabricator independent of the firm of
record on the equipment submittal will not be allowed.
   (C)   Where a developer intends to provide other than the specified
equipment, the alternate material or equipment must be approved by the engineer
prior to the bid. In order for the alternate equipment to be considered an
approved equal, prospective suppliers must make a pre-bid submittal as detailed
in division (D) below and make it available to the Director of Public Utilities
14 days prior to the time of bidding. A list of approved equal material or
alternate suppliers will be forthcoming from the engineer five days before bids
are taken.
   (D)   Pre-bid submittals for approval will be bound and in three copies. The
submittals will contain a minimum of two full-size drawings, one each covering
the booster pump station and the electrical control schematic. The booster
station drawing shall illustrate at least three different views, be to scale
and specific to this project. The submittal booklets will be complete with
standard size cut sheets covering all individual items that make up the booster
pump station and the UL file number under which the manufacturer is listed.
   (E)   The submittals for approval must contain an installation list of only
like equipment. The installation list will be complete with the date of
installation, the name and telephone number of the equipment operator and/or
the name and telephone number of the design engineer.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.086 EQUIPMENT CAPSULE.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The plate steel employed throughout the equipment capsule shall
meet or exceed the requirements for A.S.T.M. - 283, Grade D. The structurals
shall meet or exceed the requirements for A-36. The design of all members shall
be in accordance with the recommended practice for design as specified in the
Manual of Steel Construction, published by the American Institute of Steel
Construction, Inc.
      (2)   The equipment capsule shall be one completed unit when delivered.
Field welding to complete the structure or attach the entrance tube will not be
allowed. Steel plate or one-fourth inch minimum thickness will be used
throughout the equipment capsule walls, top and bottom. Layout dimensions shown
are for illustrative purposes and are not intended to limit an innovative
design.
      (3)   The plate forming the top and bottom of the equipment capsule will
be knuckle-radiused prior to assembly so as to form a lap joint with the wall.
The average lap dimension will be one and one- half inches measured from the
center of the internal weld to the center of the exterior continuously welded
on the interior by hand and the exterior by machine to form an airtight seal.
      (4)   All equipment capsule joints shall be welded both inside and
outside. Any ferrous metal device passing through the equipment capsule wall
will be welded fully along its circumference or length on both sides of the
capsule wall.
      (5)   Non-ferrous, PVC, cast iron or ductile iron piping passing through
the equipment capsule wall will be housed in a suitable ferrous metal wall
sleeve. The sleeve will be fully welded, as described herein. The wall sleeve
will be complete with two each mechanical type joints each with adjustable
glands and gaskets, both inside and outside of the equipment capsule. The
piping passing through the capsule wall sleeve will be sealed tightly to assure
completion of the quality control air tests, as stated below.
      (6)   The equipment capsule after installation of all components and
completion of all penetrations shall be subject to an air test to assure the
water-tight integrity of the weld system. A test pressure of three psi shall be
maintained while a soap solution is applied to all welded joints on the
exterior of the equipment capsule. The test pressure shall be measured by means
of a tested and properly calibrated pressure gauge. Openings in the capsule
shall be sealed against leakage.
      (7)   All welds found to be defective shall be repaired and the capsule
shall be retested. Six certified copies of the report covering each test shall
be prepared by the contractor and delivered to the engineer not less than ten
days prior to shipment of the package pumping station, at the engineer's
request.
      (8)   The equipment capsule shall be a vertical, elliptical capsule and
have an end diameter of eight feet and six inches, tangent wall length of eight
feet and six inches and an inside clear height of seven feet three inches. The
tangent wall will be reinforced on the exterior only, on a maximum of 27- inch
centers each way. The vertical reinforcement can be either three-inch channels
or three-inch by two- inch box beams capped at the ends or a combination of
both shapes. The horizontal reinforcement will be three-inch by two-inch
angles.
      (9)   Four lifting plates of three-eighths inch minimum thickness shall
be placed about the perimeter of the equipment capsule to facilitate the
lifting and handling of the station. These lifting plates shall be so located
as to insure proper balance of the entire pumping station during the setting
operation.
      (10)   The equipment capsule entrance manway shall be Bilco Model MNB-50
prefabricated metal roof scuttle, rectangular in shape with a minimum clear
inside opening of 30 inches by 54 inches. The scuttle cover shall be made of 11
gauge aluminum on the exterior with a three-inch beaded, vertical flange,
neatly welded and sized to cover the scuttle riser section. The scuttle cover
shall be insulated with a minimum of one-inch fiberglass insulation, covered
and protected by an 18-gauge aluminum liner. The scuttle riser section shall be
formed with an integral three and one-half inch flange with holes provided for
securing the entrance manway to the angle framing on the top of the equipment
capsule. The scuttle riser shall be provided with an integral metal cap-
flashing of the same gauge and material as the riser, full welded at the
corners for absolute weather-tightness.
      (11)   The scuttle shall be completely assembled with heavy pintle
hinges, compression spring operators, enclosed in telescopic tubes and a full
perimeter, extruded rubber draft seal. The cover shall be equipped with an
automatic hold open arm complete with red vinyl grip handle to permit easy,
one- hand release. When the scuttle cover is in the open position, the hold
open arm will engage a lock-open device to prevent accidental closing of the
scuttle cover. All entrance manway hardware shall be zinc plated with the
exception of the entrance lock which shall be brass.
      (12)   The entrance manway shall be connected to the top of the equipment
capsule by an attachment system. Neither factory, nor field welding, of the
entrance manway will be permitted. The attachment system shall include, but not
be limited to, ten and three-eighths inch diameter flange bolts with nuts and
two flat washers each, bedding compound sealant, 4504 Scotch polyfoam, single
side adhesive coated one-fourth-inch by three-inch gasket material and four
each two-inch by one and one- half-inch by one-eighth-inch flange reinforcement
cap angles.
      (13)   The entrance manway attachment system shall whenever possible be
factory installed. If, because of shipping restrictions, the entrance manway
cannot be factory installed, field attachment is permitted only if performed by
factory personnel.
      (14)   The entrance manway shall be provided with keyed entry. The entry
lock shall be flush mounted, in the scuttle riser, in position to be protected
from the elements by the cover skirt. The lock will be of the pin tumbler type,
dead bolt, with an inside safety release. Two keys will be provided on a key
ring complete with the manufacturer's identification.
      (15)   Data sheets detailing the entrance manway and the attachment
system are to be included in the manufacturer's equipment submittal.
      (16)   An all aluminum access ladder will be provided. The ladder will
meet UL and OSHA approval under the Type I, Heavy Duty Specifications. The
ladder will have one and one-fourth inch diameter, tempered, serrated rungs
with three inches by one and one-eighth inch full I-beam side rails. The
uppermost ends of the side rails will be protected by plastic caps bolted into
place. The complete access ladder will be bolted into place, at a minimum of
two points both top and bottom, so as to be easily removable to facilitate
equipment maintenance.
      (17)   The equipment capsule will be complete with a sump to accommodate
the automatic sump pump specified elsewhere herein. The sump shall be a minimum
of 12 inches in diameter by eight inches deep and shall be fabricated of plate
one-fourth inch minimum thickness. The sump shall be located so as to ensure
proper and complete drainage of the equipment capsule floor.
      (18)   The equipment capsule walkway shall be covered with a Nyracord
industrial safety matting. The mat shall be a heavy duty, one-half inch minimum
thickness Nyracord compound (rubber blend with fiber reinforcement) of open
slot design with a ribbed safety pattern (ribbed in two directions) to promote
sure footing. The underside of the safety mat shall also be ribbed (in one
direction only) to permit aeration and drainage. The safety mat shall not be
glued to the floor surface.
   (B)   Corrosion protection.
      (1)   After all welding is entirely completed, all surfaces of the entire
structure shall be sandblasted to a bright metal appearance, equal to
commercial blast cleaning (SSPC-SP6), including a removal of all rust, mil
scale and other foreign or interference materials and then thoroughly wiped
clean with a dry, clean cloth prior to the application of the protective
coating system.
      (2)   The protective coating shall take place immediately after surface
preparation. The protective coating shall be Tnemec Series 66 Hi-Build
Epoxoline two component, high solids, amide-cured epoxy system formulated for
high build application having excellent chemical and corrosion resistant
properties. The epoxy system shall be self priming and require no intermediate
coatings. The protective coating shall provide in two applications a high film
build over welds, joints, bolts and sharp angles. The protective coating shall
be applied at a wet film mil thickness of no less than six mils per application
to assure a dry film yield of no less than four mils per application, with a
total dry mil thickness of eight mils.
      (3)   The station manufacturer shall furnish four 17-pound packaged
magnesium anodes for cathodic protection. The anodes shall be buried equally
spaced around the station and connected by heavy copper wire to lugs on the
station provided for that purpose.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.087 BOOSTER PUMP SYSTEM.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The booster pumps employed within the packaged water booster
pumping station shall meet the hydraulic and driver data as set forth in the
specification section titled, Operating Conditions. The booster pumps must be
installed prior to the station delivery. The installation of the booster pumps
shall be as shown on the plans covering this project.
      (2)   Prior to acceptance of an equipment proposal covering the packaged
water booster pumping station, detailed data shall be furnished by the engineer
or the owner and shall include the following booster pump information:
         (a)   Performance curve showing expected performance at points other
than the design conditions. Curve shall show head, capacity, efficiency and
horsepower based on performance and shall cover the complete operating range of
the pump from zero capacity to the maximum capacity. The curve is to also
include a net positive suction head required curve; and
         (b)   Drawings of the proposed equipment giving general dimensions
sufficient to determine how the equipment is to be supported and if it will fit
within the space available.
   (B)   Operating conditions. The pump station shall be capable of delivering
the fluid medium at the following capacities and heads when operating at zero
feet minimum suction pressure. Pumps 1 and 2 shall be designed to deliver
adequate domestic flow to all areas of the subdivision or development. Pump 3
shall deliver adequate fire flow to all areas of the subdivision or
development. The pump driver shall be of the type as specified for Pumps 1 and
2 and shall be 15 h.p., 1,750 rpm and suitable for three-phase, 60-cycle, 460-
volt electrical service.
   (C)   Horizontal end suction, centrifugal type. The booster pump shall be of
the horizontal end suction, centrifugal type. The pumps shall be of close grain
cast iron construction complete with bronze trim.
      (1)   Casing. Volute type, bolted to adapter, with recessed lock fit to
ensure alignment. Discharge nozzle can be swivelled to any one of three
positions. Separate suction cover bolted to casing through machined lock joint.
No stud or bolt holes are tapped through casing to liquid ways. Tapping
openings shall be provided for priming, venting, draining and suction and
discharge gauge connections. Piping connection to be as shown on plans and as
per pump data sheets, NPT threaded nozzles integral with casing or 125 pounds
ANSI flat face standard drilled flanges.
      (2)   Impeller. Enclosed, single suction type, cast in one piece. All
impellers are to be statically balanced to ensure smooth operation, also
hydraulically balanced, except in some small sizes where end thrust is but a
minor factor. Impeller is mounted directly on the extended motor shaft, is
keyed to shaft and held in lateral position between shaft sleeve and impeller
washer. A self-locking cap nut will hold a compression seal washer securely
against hub and prevent leakage or liquid between shaft sleeve and shaft.
      (3)   Wearing rings. Renewable type; maintain proper running clearance
with impeller hubs to minimize leakage between suction and discharge.
      (4)   Shaft sleeves. To be shouldered on shaft near impeller and covers
full length of shaft from impeller hub to motor end bracket. Seals by
compression between shaft sleeve and impeller hub, also between sleeve and
shoulder on shaft, protecting shaft from contact with liquid. Shaft sleeve is
free to expand or contract with temperature changes.
      (5)   Stuffing box.
         (a)   The stuffing box shall be cast integral with the pump casing and
will be complete with tapped openings for sealed liquid or a flushing
connection. The stuffing box shall be suitable for conversion to use standard
packing. The stuffing box hardware shall be non-corrosive.
         (b)   The stuffing box shall contain a face type mechanical seal. The
seal shall have a carbon rotating head against a Ni-Resist stationary face and
be complete with a Buna-N boot with stainless steel spring and spring retainer.
      (6)   Adapter. Maintains rigid assembly between motor and casing.
Machined lock between adapter and motor end bracket keeps adapter and casing in
permanent alignment with motor and extended motor shaft. Sides of adapter are
fully open for ready access to stuffing box and gland.
      (7)   Motor. Assembled as integral part of the complete units. End
bracket is machined to match recessed lock fit on adapter to ensure permanent
alignment. Shaft carries impeller and sleeve. Motor bearings are ball bearing
type, designed to carry all radial and thrust loads and are installed in sealed
housings which retain lubricant and exclude dirt and moisture. Motors are drip
protected type, having splash proof bracket on outboard end.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.088 PIPING.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   All internal transmission piping shall conform to A.S.T.M. A-53
(CW) for nominal pipe size four-inch and smaller and A.S.T.M. A-53 (ERW) Grade
B for nominal pipe size five-inch and larger. Butt welded fittings shall
conform to A.S.T.M. A-106. Forged steel flanges shall conform to A.S.T.M.
specification A-181, Grade 1 and ASA B16.5.
         (a)   Size ten-inch and below: Schedule 40; and
         (b)   Size 12-inch and above: standard weight (.375-inch wall).
      (2)   The piping configuration shown is for illustrative purposes,
however, the piping sizes below are the minimum allowable:
         (a)   Suction inlet: eight inches;
         (b)   Suction header: eight inches;
         (c)   Suction piping: six inches;
         (d)   Discharge piping: six inches;
         (e)   Discharge header: eight inches; and
         (f)   Discharge outlet: eight inches.
   (B)   Butterfly valves.
      (1)   The isolating valves used throughout the equipment capsule will be
of the wafer design. The body of each isolating valve will be constructed of
cast iron A.S.T.M.-126 and be equipped with a minimum of four alignment holes
with which to pass mating flange studs so as to assure proper butterfly
alignment within the piping system. The valve disc will be constructed of
bronze A.S.T.M.-B148-9C and be machined to close tolerances on both the flats
and O.D. to assure drop tight shut off and reduce operating torque. The valve
stems will be constructed of phosphate coated carbon steel A.S.T.M.-108 Grade
1040 and the stem bushings will be non-metallic. The disc will be affixed to
the shaft by a pair of taper pins. The valve seat will be phenolic backed EPDM
resilient seat designed to be easily field replaceable.
      (2)   Valve sized six inches and smaller shall be equipped with lever
operator and ten-degree increment throttling plate. Valve sized eight inches
and larger shall be equipped with a weatherproof, heavy duty, gear operator
complete with a position indicator.
      (3)   The butterfly valves for Pump 3 are to be included in the piping.
   (C)   Compression couplings.
      (1)   Each pump suction and discharge pipe shall include a compression
type, flexible coupling to prevent binding of the pump, pump suction or control
valve. Each coupling shall consist of two follower rings, a flared middle ring
with end flares generous enough to provide adequate gasket seat areas, two
resilient rubber gaskets and steel bolts. The coupling when installed shall
provide a permanent, leak-proof, flexible installation.
      (2)   In lieu of a compression coupling, a restrained, removable flange
such as Uni-Flange or a flanged coupling adapter (FCA) may be used to relieve
strain on a pump or control valve. The flanged coupling adapter will be of the
same manufacturer as the compression couplings used elsewhere in the equipment
capsule and shall be a regular product of that manufacturer. Flanged coupling
adapters shall be complete on the flanged end with an integral rubber flange
gasket and on the open end with a triangular section rubber follower gasket and
follower ring. Bolts for the flanged coupling adapter will be individual to the
FCA and be supplied with the FCA.
   (D)   Pressure gauges.
      (1)   All pressure gauges within the booster pumping station shall have
four and one-half inch minimum diameter faces. The case shall be black, flanged
back type with close type ring and clear glass face. The gauge connections
shall be at the bottom of the gauge and will be one-fourth inch NPT. The gauge
internal construction shall include phosphor bronze bourbon tube with a brass
movement, bronze bushed independently mounted. Pressure gauge range and scale
graduations shall be in feet of water and psi as follows:
         (a)   Inlet pressure: zero to 100 psi, ten psi figure intervals, with
graduating marks every one psi; and
         (b)   Outlet pressure: zero to 160 psi, 20 psi figure intervals, with
graduating marks every two psi.
      (2)   All gauges will be panel mounted or fixture mounted off the
pipeline or sensing point and be flexible connected to their respective sensing
point. Gauges may be mounted singularly in tandem or in any organized
combination. The gauge trim tubing shall be complete with both isolating and
vent valves and the tubing shall be so arranged as to easily vent air and
facilitate gauge removal. Gauges mounted directly to the pipeline or sensing
point will not be accepted.
   (E)   Automatic pump check valves.
      (1)   The automatic pump check valves shall be of the electrical, double
cushioned type and shall have a cast iron body and cover, angle pattern, with
all bronze trim. The valves shall be faced, flanged and drilled to conform to
125# ANSI standards and shall be sized as shown in the plans.
      (2)   The valves shall be of either the piston or diaphragm type. If the
piston type, the valve shall have an all bronze liner with V-port openings. The
piston shall also be of bronze and be equipped with an indicating rod. If of
the diaphragm type, the diaphragm assembly shall be fully guided top and
bottom. The valve shall be spring-loaded to assure operating differential.
      (3)   The design of the valve shall be such as to provide air and water
cushioning to prevent hammer and shock. Speed of valve opening/closing shall be
adjustable by hand-operated regulating valves. Wear on the valve moving parts
shall be absorbed by renewable leather or rubber cups and seat. The valve shall
be designed to provide full pipe line flow when in the open position and shall
shut off drop tight, when closed.
      (4)   The automatic pump check valves shall provide normal automatic
opening and closing function, plus emergency closing on electrical outage. The
valve will also provide a manual control to open the main valve.
      (5)   The automatic pump check valves will be provided with an all bronze
sustaining pilot. This pilot will be of the diaphragm operated, spring loaded,
balanced type, providing an adjustable spring range of minimum of 70 psi. The
pilot device will sense suction header pressure and throttle the main valve to
maintain suction pressure. Should suction header pressure drop below minimum
value, the sustaining pilot shall override the electrical controls and close
the automatic pump check valve.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.089 ELECTRICAL APPARATUS; DESIGN, ASSEMBLY AND TEST.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   The electrical apparatus control panel design, assembly and
installation and the integration of component parts will be the responsibility
of the manufacturer of record for this booster pumping equipment. The
manufacturer shall maintain, at his or her regular place of business, a
complete electrical design, assembly and test facility to assure continuity of
electrical design with equipment application. Control panels designed,
assembled or tested at other than the regular production facilities or by other
than the regular production employees of the manufacturer of record for this
booster pumping equipment will not be approved. These facilities must be open
for inspection at any time during the design and assembly of the specified
equipment.
      (2)   The switchgear and supervisory controls will be tested by one or
more technicians independent of the equipment assembly. The test procedure
shall be a complete function test. All control functions will be tested, a
minimum of four times hourly, for a consecutive trouble-free period of 48
hours. At the request of the consulting engineer, the booster station
manufacturer shall supply documentation of the test results. The documentation
will include a chart from an event recorder certifying the four time hourly
test cycle and the 48-hour trouble-free duration. The event recorder chart will
be attested to by a company officer of the booster station manufacturer.
   (B)   UL listing.
      (1)   The manufacturer of the booster station shall be an Underwriters
Laboratories listed manufacturer of Industrial Control Panels. As such, the
manufacturer shall provide UL listing of the control panel for the station. In
accordance with UL procedures, an authorized UL label, verifying the UL
listing, shall be affixed to the back pan of the control panel. Additionally,
the manufacturer shall provide certification of the listing. The manufacturer's
certification of UL listing shall consist of a signed statement of a corporate
office attesting to the following:
         (a)   The subject control panel has been UL listed;
         (b)   The UL file number of the manufacturer under which the listing
has been made; and
         (c)   The identification number or a listing mark of the specific UL
label affixed to the back pan of the control panel to verify listing.
      (2)   Control panel equipment shall not be accepted where any of the
following occur:
         (a)   The control panel is not UL listed;
         (b)   Certification of the control panels UL listing is not provided;
         (c)   The manufacturer is not a UL listed manufacturer of Industrial
Control Panels; or
         (d)   The manufacturer of record for the booster pumping equipment is
not also the manufacturer of the control panel.
   (C)   Switchgear.
      (1)   The electrical apparatus shall consist of all equipment associated
with motor control and motor starting, including the equipment used to protect
the electrical facilities. All circuit breakers, motor starters, time delay
relays and control relays shall be incorporated to one NEMA I control panel.
Space shall be provided in the control panel for the motor breaker, motor
starter and controls for future Pump 3. Conduit from the control panel to the
location of the future motor shall be complete in place. The electrical service
provided for this station will be 460 volt, three-phase, 60 cycle three-wire.
There shall be provided, thermal-magnetic trip circuit breakers as follows:
         (a)   Two branch breakers, one each per pump, 40 amps; and
         (b)   One transformer breaker, primary side, 40 amps.
      (2)   There shall be provided seven auxiliary circuit breakers as
follows:
         (a)   Controls;
         (b)   Lights;
         (c)   Heater;
         (d)   Area light;
         (e)   Sump pump - dehumidifier;
         (f)   Exhaust fan; and
         (g)   Convenience outlets.
      (3)   Pump starting equipment shall be three-phase, full voltage magnetic
starters connecting the pump motor directly across the line, complete with
overload relay with correctly sized heater elements on each line.
      (4)   Balanced 240/120 single-phase power for the auxiliary circuits
within the scope of the booster station shall be obtained by use of a ten KVA
dry, step down transformer. The transformer shall be wall mounting type, dust-
tight and operate with low noise level. Transformer insulation shall be class
H. The unit shall be UL approved for indoor application.
   (D)   Suction pressure control.
      (1)   Suction control of the pumping operation shall be provided by a
rugged snap action pressure switch. The switch action shall be actuated by a
single brass bellow. Each switch assembly will feature straight in-line and
relatively friction free construction and be complete with a single pole,
double throw contact block with silver, five-amp rated contacts at 120 volts.
The set points of the on/off cycle shall be independently adjustable through
the full range of switch differential.
         (a)   Low suction cut-out: zero to 150 psi range; and
         (b)   Adjustable differential: two to 25 psi range.
      (2)   A single four and one-half inch dial, flanged back pressure gauge
shall be sub-panel mounted adjacent to the low suction pressure switch. The
gauge and switch shall be so plumbed with the suction header sensing line that
a common blowoff valve can relieve pressure in both simultaneously for purposes
of checking and calibrating the low suction lock-out.
   (E)   Local pressure control.
      (1)   Control of the pumping operation shall be provided by bellows type,
snap action switches. The switch action shall be actuated by a single brass
bellows. Each complete switch assembly will be complete with two internal
switches, one each to cover the start and the stop cycle. Each internal switch
shall be independently adjustable so as to provide from two psi to full scale
control differential. Switches are to be provided to control the following
functions:
         (a)   Start lead pump: zero to 200 psi control range; and
         (b)   Start back-up pump: zero to 200 psi control range.
      (2)   A single four and one-half inch dial, flanged back pressure gauge
shall be sub-panel mounted adjacent to the discharge pressure switches. The
gauge and switches shall be so plumbed with the discharge header sensing line
that a common blow off valve can relieve pressure in all simultaneously for
purposes of checking and calibrating the start-stop functions of the pumps.
      (3)   Pressure switches and gauges shall be mounted in tandem, on a
plate, as near to their respective pressure source as is practical. Switches
and gauges will not be allowed within the electrical control panel.
   (F)   Devices.
      (1)   Five solid state time delay relays shall be provided to perform the
following functions:
         (a)   Low suction timer;
         (b)   Start control timer pump 1;
         (c)   Stop control timer pump 1;
         (d)   Start control timer pump 2; and
         (e)   Stop control timer pump 2.
      (2)   The solid state time delay relay shall have three dial selected
timing ranges (one, ten and 100 minutes). Nominally, the timer will be factory
set on the ten-minute range. The timers shall be constructed to use a standard
octal eight pin plug-in base. All timer wiring shall be made to the plug-in
base so that timers can be interchanged or replaced without disturbing timer
wiring. The timer will be complete with a light emitting diode (LED) which will
be on during the time cycle and off at the end of timing.
      (3)   Hand-off automatic switches shall be oil-tight, three-position
maintained and be located on the main control panel door and control the
following circuits:
         (a)   Pump 1;
         (b)   Pump 2; and
         (c)   Exhaust fan.
      (4)   Indicating lights to indicate equipment operation shall be oil-
tight, with a full voltage pilot light. Indicating lights shall be provided in
the colors and functions as follows:
         (a)   Red: low suction pressure;
         (b)   Green: pump 1 in operation; and
         (c)   Green: pump 2 in operation.
      (5)   Nameplates shall be furnished on all panel front mounted switches
and lights. Name tags shall also indicate proper nomenclature of control panel
internal parts.
      (6)   The control panel door shall include a plastic pocket on the
interior to hold one copy of the panel wiring diagram. The wiring diagram shall
be corrected as-built copy and contain individual wire numbers, circuit breaker
numbers, switch designations and control function explanations.
   (G)   Wiring and lighting.
      (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the installing electrician to
furnish and install the correct size service wires from the service pole
outside of the equipment capsule to the connection terminals inside the power
or control panel designated for that purpose. No splice will be allowed in the
service wires. It shall also be the responsibility of the installing
electrician to furnish and install, if required, any exterior disconnects or
other switching mechanisms and seal the incoming conduit to prevent potential
ground water intrusion into station.
      (2)   Rigid conduit, sized to adequately accept the inbound service
connectors, shall be installed from the main power or control panel through the
equipment capsule. The service entrance conduit connection shall be plugged for
shipment.
      (3)   All wiring within the equipment capsule and outside of the control
panel or panels shall be run in conduit except for the water-tight flexible
conduit and fittings properly used to connect pump drivers, fan motors,
solenoid valves, limit switches and the like, where flexible connections are
best utilized. Accessories as the sump pump and dehumidifier, when furnished by
the original manufacturer with a UL approved rubber cord and plug, may be
plugged into polarized receptacles designated for that purpose. All internal
equipment conduit and wire will meet or exceed the conduit, wiring schedule and
electrical codes set forth as follows:
         (a)   Service entrance. Rigid, heavy wall, steel conduit with threaded
water-tight connections adequately sized to handle the type, number and size of
the incoming service conductors - in compliance with Article 346 of the
National Electrical Code;
         (b)   Equipment capsule conduit. Rigid, heavy wall, Schedule 40 PVC
with solvent weld moisture-proof connections adequately sized to handle the
type, number and size of equipment conductors to be carried, in compliance with
Article 347 of the National Electrical Code and NEMA TC-2, Federal WC-1094A and
UL 651 Underwriters Laboratory Specifications;
         (c)   Flexible connections. Where flexible conduit connections are
necessary the conduit used shall be liquid-tight flexible totally non-metallic,
corrosion resistant, non-conductive, UL listed conduit with a sunlight
resistant jacket over an inner flexible core, sized to handle the type, number
and size of equipment conductors to be carried, in compliance with Article 351
of the National Electrical Code;
         (d)   Motor circuit conductors; sized for load. All branch circuit
conductors supplying a single motor of one horsepower or more shall have an
ampacity of not less than 125% of the motor full load current rating, dual
rated type THHN/THWN, as set forth in Articles 30 and 430-B of the National
Electrical Code, Schedule 310-13 for flame retardant, heat resistant
thermoplastic, copper conductors in a nylon or equivalent outer covering;
         (e)   Control and accessory wiring. Sized for load, type MTW/AWM
(machine tool wire/appliance wiring material) as set forth in Articles 310 and
670 of the National Electrical Code, Schedule 310-13 and NFPA Standard 79 for
flame retardant, moisture, heat and oil resistant thermoplastic, copper
conductors in compliance with NMTBA and as listed by Underwriters Laboratories
(AWM), except where accessories are furnished with a manufacturer supplied UL
approved rubber cord and plug. Four duplex, grounding type, three wire,
polarized convenience receptacles shall be furnished about the periphery of the
equipment capsule. One duplex receptacle shall be adjacent to the main control
panel. The equipment ground wire from each equipment ground post of the
polarized receptacles shall be affixed at the main control panel terminal board
solely designated for that purpose and separate from the neutral bus; and
         (f)   Lighting. There shall be three two-tube, 40 watt per tube, rapid
start, enclosed and gasketed fluorescent light fixture installed within the
equipment capsule. One light fixture shall be located directly over the main
control panel and be 48-inch minimum length. The light switch shall be of the
night glow type and be located in the entrance manway, conveniently adjacent to
the equipment capsule entrance ladder. Open or incandescent fixtures without
OSHA approval will not be accepted.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.090 HVAC.
   (A)   Exhaust fans.
      (1)   There shall be included in the equipment capsule two exhaust fans,
flange mounted to the exhaust air piping as near the equipment capsule roof as
is practical. Each fan capacity shall be 232 cfm at 0.2-inch static pressure
(inches of water). Each fan shall feature a shaded pole motor with a squirrel
cage blower. Each blower wheel shall be statically balanced to assure quiet
performance and maximum air delivery. The fan motor will be complete with a
conduit box. The exhaust fan shall operate on an independent 120-volt, single
phase A.C. power source with single pole, 15-amp circuit breaker protection.
Automatic control of the exhaust fan shall be by thermostat, air conditioning
type (make on the rise) wired in parallel with a three-position maintained (H-
O-A) selector switch located on the face of the main control panel. The exhaust
fan control equipment shall be wall mounted in a receptacle box expressly
designated for that purpose and in a location convenient for the use intended.
      (2)   The exhaust air piping system shall be size three inches and be
welded through the roof and terminate at a point 16 inches above the roof. The
cold air return piping system shall also be size three inches and on the
exterior begin 16 inches above the capsule roof and terminate on the interior
as near the equipment capsule floor as is practical. Both exterior air system
pipes will be complete with white, PVC 180-degree return bends that are
equipped with removable aluminum wire mesh insect screening. Exhaust and return
air piping must be rigid and permanently fixed. Flexible, spiral wound or cloth
ducts will not be accepted.
   (B)   Dehumidifier. A packaged dehumidifier with a sealed refrigeration type
compressor rated at one- fifth horsepower, 4.7 full load amps and 430 watts
shall be wall mounted within the equipment capsule in a manner that the
condensate shall discharge to the sump through tubing provided for that
purpose. The dehumidifier shall operate on a 120-volt, single phase A.C. power
source and be provided with a safety protected power cord of UL approved three-
wire construction with three-spade plug. The dehumidifier shall be capable of
removing 27 pints of water in 24 hours when the room temperature is 80°F and at
60% relative humidity. (AHAM) Standard DH-1). The dehumidifier shall be
actuated by a dial-controlled adjustable humidistat which will automatically
cycle the unit at pre-selected moisture levels. The humidistat shall also have
off and continuous run positions. The dehumidifier shall be listed by
Underwriters Laboratories.
   (C)   Heater.
      (1)   The equipment capsule will be provided with an electric heater. The
heater will have a rating of 3,000 watts, 10,240 BTU/HR output when operating
on a 240-volt, single phase A.C. power source. The heater will be equipped with
a 600 rpm low speed axial vane blower designed to deliver 175 cfm of down flow
air and be driven by a four-pole motor. The heating element shall be of the
sealed tubular type with a large parallel steel fins for quick heat transfer.
The heater will be complete with a thermal overload cut-off and a built-in
thermostat calibrated to provide a range of 55°F to 85°F.
      (2)   The heater shall be wall mounted, hard wired and complete with an
individual 240-volt circuit, protected by a two-pole, 15-amp circuit breaker.
The heater will be listed with Underwriters Laboratories, NEMA Standard 3-9-
1967, HE2-2-02 Type I.
   (D)   Sump pump.
      (1)   One automatic submersible sump pump, with a rated capacity of ten
gpm at 15 feet TDH shall be installed in the equipment capsule sump. The sump
pump shall be complete with fractional horsepower motor, oil filled and
hermetically sealed, designed to operate at 3,450 rpm, on a 120-volt, single-
phase, A.C. power source and draw no more than 4.2 amps. A Buna-N shaft seal
shall prohibit the pumped fluid from entering the motor housing. The pump body
shall be constructed of aluminum and polypropylene and the motor casing shall
be cast aluminum. The impeller shall be made of polypropylene plastic and
affixed to a 304 grade stainless steel shaft. The sump pump will be clog-proof
energy efficient design with built-in thermal protection. There shall also be
included as an integral component of the pump a built-in check valve on the
discharge. The sump pump shall operate within an approximate two and one-half-
inch range turning on at approximately five inches and off at approximately two
and one-half inches of depth in the sump. Therefore, the sump pump will
initiate a pumping cycle before sump is filled.
      (2)   The sump pump discharge piping within the equipment capsule shall
be size one and one- fourth inch to the coupling in the equipment capsule
Schedule 40 PVC with solvent weld connections. The discharge piping system will
be complete with a union connecting upper and lower halves of the discharge
line. An optional dewatering drain system for freeze protection shall be
designed into the sump pump discharge piping system. The dewatering line shall
be included with the equipment and will be field installed, if required, by the
start-up technician.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.091 FACTORY START-UP SERVICE.
   (A)   After the packaged water booster pump station has been completely
installed, including the electrical service, and has been put under pressure by
the installer, then a factory service representative will be scheduled to visit
the jobsite and put the booster station into trouble free, automatic operation.
The service representative will be a regular employee of the booster pump
station manufacturer.
   (B)   The service representative will spend one full day at the jobsite. In
addition to his or her start-up duties, he or she shall explain and demonstrate
the operation of the booster pump station to a representative of the owner. The
service representative at this time shall pass over to the owner's
representative two bound copies of the booster pump station maintenance and
operation manual.
   (C)   A complete service report shall be made out and signed by the factory
service representative and a representative of either the owner or project
engineer. Copies of the start-up report will be distributed as follows: one
copy each to the manufacturers project file, consulting engineer's project
file, contractor's project file and the owner's equipment file.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM REGULATIONS
§ 50.105 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE AND PAYMENT OF INITIAL FEES AND DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Water or sewer service shall only be supplied to a person, whether as
a customer or as an adjunct customer, who has fully completed an application
for service and who has met all other requirements of the town for service,
including the payment of the fees and deposits as may be required.
   (B)   Applicants for service, as either a customer or adjunct customer,
shall apply, in person, at the designated office of the town. All applications
for service must be made in the name of a natural person or other legal entity.
In the case of legal entities, such as corporations, limited liability
companies and general partnerships, the applicant must be duly registered to do
business in the state and be in good standing with the Secretary of State. Any
application for service by an entity other than a natural person must be
personally guaranteed by a natural person residing in the county or the
applicant must pay a deposit twice the normal deposit for service of the kind
applied for, based on the rates established in §§
50.460 through
50.462.
   (C)   Any person filing an application for service must provide satisfactory
proof of identity and if filing an application on behalf of another person or
non-human legal entity, must provide the town with proof that the applicant is
authorized to establish an account in the name of the entity. In addition, the
applicant must provide satisfactory evidence, such as, but not limited to, a
tax bill, deed or lease, that the entity in whose name the account is
established is either the owner of the property in question or has the legal
right to possession of the property.
   (D)   An applicant for water or sewer service for a property, residential
unit or commercial unit not previously provided water and/or sewer service by
the town or where the use of the property has changed, must pay all required
system development fees and tap-on fees before service will be provided. An
applicant for service as an adjunct customer must pay any required system
development availability fee before service is provided, and every adjunct
customer must provide both the written approval of the customer in whose name
service is currently maintained and written permission of the owner of the
property to apply for service as an adjunct customer. No applicant may be
approved by any town department for occupancy of the property or unit in
question until all required system development fees have been paid.
   (E)   The town may reject any application for service which involves
excessive service cost or which may adversely affect the supply of service to
other customers or for other good and sufficient reason.
   (F)   The town may reject any application for service when the applicant is
delinquent in the payment of either water or sewer bills or associated fees
incurred for service previously supplied by the town at any location.
Furthermore, when the owner of the premises has received water or sewer service
and has not paid for the same, the town shall not be required to provide
service to anyone at that premises until all delinquent water or sewer bills or
associated fees have been paid.
   (G)   The town shall refuse service if the customer’s lines or piping are
installed in a manner that they may not prevent cross-connections or backflow.
   (H)   The town will only provide service outside the corporate limits of the
town to new applicants in accordance with §
50.290 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 7-17-2012; Ord. passed 6-19-2018)
§ 50.106 CLASSIFICATION OF SERVICE.
   All services are classified under two categories, residential and
commercial.
   (A)   Residential service shall be service to any residential customer or
unit with a meter size up to one inch.
   (B)   Commercial service shall be service to any non-residential customer,
unit(s) or building regardless of meter size, including a school or church, or
to any single-family or multi-family residential property or unit(s) with a
meter size greater than one inch.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 7-17-2012)
§ 50.107 RATE SCHEDULE AND DEPOSITS.
   (A)   All customers will be charged a deposit and billed at the rates
currently in effect and approved by the Town Council, with adjustments as
appropriate in compliance with the provisions herein relating to adjunct
customers. The rates and deposits are subject to change at any time.
   (B)   The schedule for deposits and monthly service rates is set out in §§
50.460 through
50.462.
   (C)   A property owner who has a water and/or sewer account with the town
may sign a “waiver of deposit and personal guarantee” to establish residential
service without payment of a deposit if the property owner has had an account
with the town for at least two years and has timely paid the bill every month
for the previous 24 months. To be eligible to sign a waiver, an applicant must
provide satisfactory proof of identity and if acting on behalf of another
person or non-human legal entity, the applicant must also provide the town with
proof that the applicant is authorized to act in the name of the other person
or entity. In addition, the applicant must provide satisfactory evidence, such
as, but not limited to, a tax bill, deed or lease, that the person or entity in
whose name the person is acting is the owner of the property in question. By
signing a waiver of deposit and personal guarantee, the property owner
authorizes the Administrator to add to his or her account any unpaid, past due
charges incurred by the user of the residential service. By signing the waiver
of deposit and personal guarantee, the property owner/guarantor agrees that in
the event that the user of the residential service fails to pay any bill in
full when due, the delinquent account balance owed to the town will be
automatically added to the guarantor’s account.
   (D)   A separate deposit is required for each customer and adjunct customer.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 7-17-2012)
§ 50.108 MINIMUM MONTHLY CHARGES.
   (A)   A minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall be assessed
to a customer for each meter installed, as well as for each adjunct customer.
   (B)   Service furnished for a given property shall be used on that property
and for that unit only unless approval is obtained to establish service as an
adjunct customer.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 7-17-2012)
§ 50.109 INDIVIDUAL METERING REQUIRED; EXCEPTION FOR MASTER METERS FOR
MULTIFAMILY RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Policy statement. To ensure a fair distribution of system costs among
its customers, it is the general policy of the town to require that every
customer have its own meter and that each customer represent an individual
water user, consisting of a single commercial unit or a single residential
living unit. Since the town recognizes that certain current customers’ water
connections may not conform to this policy, the following rules seek to balance
the need for implementation of this policy with the costs which might result if
immediate and full compliance were required, while ensuring that customers are
treated in a fair and uniform way in sharing the costs of the town’s water
system.
   (B)   Meters for commercial developments.  In accordance with the following
rules and at the times specified herein, each commercial unit shall have a
separate meter installed, and each commercial customer’s service must be
separately metered at a single delivery and metering point. For purposes of
this section, a commercial “unit” consists of each commercial use separately
classified under the North Carolina Rate Discharge Schedule. For example, each
separate bay, retail store, office, restaurant, and the like, within a shopping
center or mall, and every such unit existing on a single parcel of property, is
considered a separate commercial unit. A commercial “development” consists of
each separate parcel of land upon which there is one or more commercial units,
excluding mixed-use developments as defined herein.
      (1)   New water service will only be provided to a commercial unit
constructed, erected or relocated at or to a location where no prior commercial
unit existed if the unit is individually metered for water service. Each new
unit constructed, erected or relocated is required to have its own individual
meter.
      (2)   Before any new water service will be provided or current service
maintained to an existing commercial development which has been repaired,
replaced, renovated, or reconstructed, in which the total cost of all repair,
replacement, renovation or reconstruction exceeds 50% of the value of the
existing development, each and every commercial unit within the commercial
development shall be separately metered. However, if the Administrator
determines that the configuration of the existing commercial development is
such that the costs involved in installing individual meters is so excessive as
to significantly outweigh the interests of the town in individual metering, he
may waive this requirement in whole or in part.
         (a)   For purposes of this section, “the total cost of all repair,
replacement, renovation or reconstruction” shall be the actual cost of the
repair, replacement, renovation or reconstruction. “Actual cost” includes the
cost of all materials and services utilized to accomplish the repair,
replacement, renovation or reconstruction, including, but not limited to sales
tax, the costs of design, engineering fees, and all construction costs, whether
undertaken at one time or in stages extending over a period of up to two years
or such longer period as is authorized by any single special use permit,
special use permit modification, building permit, or conditional zoning
district approval or modification, as applicable.
         (b)   For purposes of this section, the “value of the existing
development” shall be considered the value of the property, as determined by
the Watauga County Tax Administrator and reflected in the tax rolls of Watauga
County, North Carolina, at the time the repair, replacement, renovation or
reconstruction is commenced.
      (3)   Although an existing, non-conforming, commercial development in
which separate commercial units receive water service through a single meter
may continue to receive water service until such time, if any, that the
development must install individual meters in accordance with this section, the
minimum water and sewer fees for each meter which serves multiple commercial
units shall be the amount of the minimum fees which would apply if each
separate commercial unit had its own meter, sized according to the size of the
water line actually serving each separate commercial unit.
   (C)   Meters for mixed-use developments. Mixed use developments are
individual parcels of land upon which both one or more commercial units and one
or more residential units exist. For purposes of this section, a “residential
unit” is each separate dwelling unit, consisting of a room or group of rooms
within a structure forming a single independent habitable unit and containing
independent kitchen, sanitary, and sleeping facilities. Except as provided at
division (E) below for buildings containing five or more residential units, and
in accordance with the following rules and at the times specified herein, each
commercial unit and each residential unit within a mixed-use development shall
have a separate meter installed and must be separately metered at a single
delivery and metering point.
      (1)   New water service will only be provided to a commercial or
residential unit constructed, erected or relocated in a mixed unit development
at or to a location where no prior like (commercial to commercial; residential
to residential) commercial or residential unit existed, if the unit is
individually metered for water service. Each new unit constructed, erected or
relocated is required to have its own individual meter.
      (2)   Before any new water service will be provided or current service
maintained to an existing mixed use development in which each separate
commercial and residential unit not individually metered for water service is
repaired, replaced, renovated, or reconstructed, and the total cost of all
repair, replacement, renovation or reconstruction of the commercial portion of
the development exceeds 50% of the value of the existing commercial
development, each and every commercial unit within the commercial development
must be separately metered. When an existing mixed use development in which
each separate commercial and residential unit not individually metered for
water service is repaired, replaced, renovated, or reconstructed, and the total
cost of all repair, replacement, renovation or reconstruction of the
residential portion of the development exceeds 50% of the value of the existing
residential development, each and every residential unit within the mixed use
development shall be separately metered before any new water service will be
provided or current service maintained. However, if the Administrator
determines that the configuration of the existing commercial or residential
portion of the development is such that the costs involved in installing
individual meters is so excessive as to significantly outweigh the interests of
the town in individual metering, he or she may waive this requirement in whole
or in part.
         (a)   For purposes of this section, “the total cost of all repair,
replacement, renovation or reconstruction” shall be the actual cost of the
repair, replacement, renovation or reconstruction. “Actual cost” includes the
cost of all materials and services utilized to accomplish the repair,
replacement, renovation or reconstruction, including, but not limited to sales
tax, the costs of design, engineering fees, and all construction costs, whether
undertaken at one time or in stages extending over a period of up to two years
or such longer period as is authorized by any single special use permit,
special use permit modification, building permit, or conditional zoning
district approval or modification, as applicable.
         (b)   For purposes of this sub-section, the “value of the existing . .
. development,” whether referring to the commercial portion or residential
portion of the mixed use development, shall be considered the value of that
particular portion of the property, as determined by the Watauga County Tax
Administrator and reflected in the tax rolls of Watauga County, North Carolina,
at the time the repair, replacement, renovation or reconstruction is commenced,
or if the Tax Administrator has not assigned separate values to the commercial
and residential portions of the property, the appraised value of the individual
portions, as provided by the customer. Should the Tax Administrator not have
assigned separate values and no appraisal be provided, the Administrator will
pro-rate the value of each portion based upon the square footage of each
portion compared to the whole development to calculate the applicable value.
      (3)   Although an existing, non-conforming mixed use development in which
separate commercial and/or residential units receive water service through a
single meter may continue to receive water service until such time, if any,
that the development must install individual meters in accordance with this
section, the minimum water and sewer fees for each meter which serves multiple
commercial and/or residential units shall be the amount of the minimum fees
which would apply if each separate commercial and/or residential unit had its
own meter, sized according to the size of the water line actually serving each
separate commercial and/or residential unit.
   (D)   Meters for residential developments. In accordance with the following
rules and at the time specified herein, each residential unit shall have
installed a separate meter, and each residential customer’s service must be
separately metered at a single delivery and metering point. For purposes of
this section, a “residential unit” is each separate dwelling unit, consisting
of a room or group of rooms within a structure forming a single independent
habitable unit containing independent kitchen, sanitary, and sleeping
facilities.
      (1)   New water service will only be provided to a residential unit
constructed, erected or relocated at or to a location where no prior
residential unit existed if the unit is individually metered for water service.
Each new unit constructed, erected or relocated is required to have its own
individual meter.
      (2)   Before any new water service will be provided or current service
maintained to an existing residential development in which each separate
residential unit not individually metered for water service is repaired,
replaced, renovated, or reconstructed, and the total cost of all repair,
replacement, renovation or reconstruction exceeds 50% of the value of the
existing development, each and every residential unit within the residential
development shall be separately metered. However, if the Administrator
determines that the configuration of the existing residential development is
such that the costs involved in installing individual meters is so excessive as
to significantly outweigh the interests of the Town in individual metering, he
may waive this requirement in whole or in part.
         (a)   For purposes of this section, “the total cost of all repair,
replacement, renovation or reconstruction” shall be the actual cost of the
repair, replacement, renovation or reconstruction. “Actual cost” includes the
cost of all materials and services utilized to accomplish the repair,
replacement, renovation or reconstruction, including, but not limited to sales
tax, the costs of design, engineering fees, and all construction costs, whether
undertaken at one time or in stages extending over a period of up to two years
or such longer period as is authorized by any single special use permit,
special use permit modification, building permit, or conditional zoning
district approval or modification, as applicable.
         (b)   For purposes of this section, the “value of the existing
development” shall be considered the value of the property, as determined by
the Watauga County Tax Administrator and reflected in the tax rolls of Watauga
County, North Carolina, at the time the repair, replacement, renovation or
reconstruction is commenced.
      (3)   Although an existing, non-conforming residential development in
which separate residential units receive water service through a single meter
may continue to receive water service until such time, if any, that the
development must install individual meters in accordance with this section, the
minimum water and sewer fees for each meter which serves multiple residential
units shall be the amount of the minimum fees which would apply if each
separate residential unit had its own 3/4" meter.
   (E)   Divisions (C) and (D) above shall not apply, and individual meters
shall not be required where there are five or more residential units in an
existing building or proposed new building. In any such building, a single
master meter may be installed and used for the residential units; provided:
      (1)   Each such master meter arrangement shall be specifically approved
in writing by the Public Works Director or his or her designee. Once a master
meter arrangement is established for any property, it may be changed to
separate metering only by agreement of the public works director or his or her
designee, on a time schedule convenient to the town, and only if the owner or
other party responsible for the master meter bill shall cover the full cost to
the town of any such change.
      (2)   In addition to the regular utility rate based on water and sewer
usage through such master meter, the minimum water and sewer fees for each
meter which serves multiple residential units shall be the amount of the
minimum fees which would apply if each separate residential unit had its own
meter, sized according to the size of the water line actually serving each
separate residential unit.
      (3)   Total tap fees, installation fees, system development fees, and
other town charges and fees relating to or arising from installation of new
service or for improvements or any other installations relating to existing
service shall be assessed at the same rates as would apply if all residential
units in the building were each separately metered.
(Ord. passed 7-17-2012; Ord. passed 5-28-2025)
§ 50.110 LOCATION OF METERS.
   (A)   All water meters must be located so that, as determined by the
Administrator, they may be easily accessed by the town for measuring water
usage, for repair and for replacement, and the requirements of this section and
§
50.114 regarding the customer’s responsibilities relative to the meter must be
met at all times.
   (B)   No new water meter may be installed in a publicly owned sidewalk
unless there is neither available and suitable public right-of-way nor suitable
location on the property to be served upon which to install the meter. When
five or more water meters must be installed to serve any one location, they may
not be installed in public right of way unless, as determined by the
Administrator, there is no suitable location on the property to be served upon
which to install them.
   (C)   A new water meter may only be installed on the property to be served
at a location agreed upon by the Administrator and the property owner, and
prior to the installation of the meter, the property owner must execute and
deliver to the Administrator an easement, in a form acceptable to the
Administrator and suitable for recording, conveying all rights necessary for
the town to install, read, service, and replace the meter, and to maintain all
appurtenant equipment, lines and facilities between the public water main and
the meter.
(Ord. passed 7-17-2012)
§ 50.111 CONNECTION OF SERVICE BY TOWN.
   (A)   The town shall only be required to run a service line from the town’s
distribution line to the agreed upon location for the customer’s meter if the
customer’s nearest property line is adjacent to a public right-of-way. When the
customer’s nearest property line is not adjacent to a public right-of-way, the
customer is solely responsible for installing and maintaining all piping and
other required facilities and for acquiring and providing proof of all
necessary easements from the customer’s property to the appropriate public
right-of-way. In every case it is the customer’s responsibility to connect and
maintain all piping and facilities from the meter to the customer’s plumbing
system.
   (B)   When the town installs two or more meters on the same property for
different customers, they shall be closely grouped, but shall be labeled so as
to identify to which customer each meter applies.
(Ord. passed 7-17-2012)
§ 50.112 TOWN NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR CERTAIN MATTERS OR DAMAGES.
   The town shall not be responsible for the following matters or damages. The
failure to mention a particular type of claim or damage in the following
paragraphs shall not authorize liability on the part of the town, does not
constitute a waiver of governmental or sovereign immunity, and no
responsibility or liability may be inferred by its exclusion. Among others:
   (A)   Although the town shall make a good faith effort to notify affected
customers before service is discontinued or interrupted, the customer or
adjunct customer, by making application for service, a customer or adjunct
customer agrees to hold the town harmless from liability for any damages that
may occur due to discontinuance or interruption of service.
   (B)   The town is not responsible for inspecting the customer’s or adjunct
customer’s piping or plumbing apparatus and facilities and is not responsible
for the condition of that piping, plumbing or facilities. A customer’s piping
or plumbing apparatus and facilities consists of all piping or apparatus from
the customer’s side of the meter on the customer’s property or on property the
customer has crossed.
   (C)   The town is not liable for damage of any kind whatsoever resulting
from water or the use of water on the customer’s or adjunct customer’s
premises, unless the damage results directly from negligence on the part of the
town and is covered by the town’s liability insurance coverage. The town is not
responsible for damage done by or resulting from any defect in the piping,
facilities, fixtures or appliances on the customer’s or adjunct customer’s side
of the water meter. The town is not responsible for damage caused, wholly or in
part, by the negligence of the customer, adjunct customer, or third parties or
damage caused by forces beyond the control of the town.
   (D)   To the extent practicable, the town will notify the customer of any
anticipated interruption of service, but any failure on the part of the town to
give the notice will not create any liability on the part of the town.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 7-17-2012)
§ 50.113 SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT FEES.
   (A)   (1)   System development fees shall be charged with respect to new
development to fund costs of capital improvements necessitated by and
attributable to such new development, to recoup costs of existing facilities
which serve such new development, or a combination of those costs. System
development fees shall be charged consistent with the requirements of G. S. Ch.
162A, Art. 8, as such may be amended from time to time. Terms used in this
section shall have the same meanings as set forth at G.S. Ch. 162A, Art. 8.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, NEW DEVELOPMENT includes any of the
following occurring after August 23, 2017 (the date the town began the written
analysis process required by G.S. § 162A-205) that increases the water and/or
sewer capacity necessary to serve that development:
         (a)   The subdivision of land;
         (b)   The construction, reconstruction, redevelopment, conversion,
structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure which
increases the number of service units; or
         (c)   Any use or extension of the use of land which increases the
number of service units.
   (B)   Beginning on the effective date of this section, system development
fees shall apply to all new development except for fire line connections.
   (C)   System development fees shall not include and separate charges may be
assessed for:
      (1)   A charge or fee to pay administrative, plan review, or inspection
costs associated with permits required for development.
      (2)   Tap or hookup charges for the purpose of reimbursing the town for
the actual costs of connecting the service unit to the system.
      (3)   Availability charges.
      (4)   Dedication of capital improvements onsite, adjacent, or ancillary
to a development absent a written agreement providing credit or reimbursement
to the developer pursuant to G.S. §§ 160A-320, 160A-499 or G.S. Ch. 160A, Art.
19, Part 3D as the same may be amended from time to time.
      (5)   Reimbursement to the town for its expenses in constructing or
providing for water or sewer utility capital improvements adjacent or ancillary
to the development if the owner or developer has agreed to be financially
responsible for such expenses; however, such reimbursement shall be credited to
any system development fee charged per division (K) below, as required per G.S
§ 162-207(c).
   (D)   System development fees will not be charged on buildings or other
improvements constructed to replace like buildings provided that the
replacement will not result in any increased capacity requirements over that
required to serve the replaced building. System development fees are
transferable between locations on different parcels of property as long as the
parcels are contiguous or separated only by a street or alley and part of a
single or multi-phased project shown on an approved site plan at the time of
issuance of a building permit.
   (E)   No system development fee shall be charged or assessed with respect to
any new development for which a system development fee under this subchapter
has been collected at the time of plat recordation involving the subdivision of
land and the amount of capacity associated with that payment of the system
development fee has not increased at the time of application for the building
permit. If the amount of capacity is increased at the time of application for a
building permit, then a system development fee may be charged for the
difference in the amount of the increased capacity minus the system development
fee previously paid under this section.
   (F)   (1)   For new development involving the subdivision of land, the
system development fee shall be collected at the later of the time of
application for a building permit, or when water or sewer service is committed
by the town.
      (2)   For all other new development, system development fees are due at
the earlier of the time of application for connection of the individual unit of
development to the service or facilities, or when water or sewer service is
committed by the town.
      (3)   For purposes of this section, water and/or sewer service shall be
deemed committed by the town at such time as the Public Works Department has
approved the connection. Fees shall be assessed based on the schedule of fees
in effect at the time the fees are collected.
   (G)   System development fees for connections for uses not listed in 15A
NCAC 2T.0114 shall be established by the Town Manager after consultation with
town staff based upon the considerations set forth at division (J)(2) below.
System development fees established in this manner may be appealed to the Town
Council.
   (H)   Additions, alterations to or replacements or change in use of existing
buildings shall be required to pay a system development fee based on the rates
applicable at the time of connection or at the time such addition, alteration,
replacement or change in use is placed into service. When a change in use
occurs, the new use will pay the difference calculated between the existing use
and the proposed use.
   (I)   Buildings that contain more than one use shall have the system
development fee calculated from the sum of each use in the building.
   (J)   (1)   The following system development fee shall be paid for
connections to the town municipal water and sewer systems based on the
customer's calculated anticipated daily flow rate converted to Equivalent
Residential Units (ERUs). The system development fee shall be the same
regardless of the customer's location inside or outside the municipal limits of
the town.
TABLE 1
15A NCAC 02T .0114 WASTEWATER DESIGN FLOW RATES
         (a)   This rule shall be used to determine wastewater flow rates for
all systems covered by this section unless alternate criteria are provided by a
program specific rule and for flow used for the purposes of 15A NCAC 02H.0105.
These are minimum design daily flow rates for normal use and occupancy
situations. Higher flow rates may be required where usage and occupancy are
atypical, including, those in paragraph (e) of this rule. Wastewater flow
calculations must take hours of operation and anticipated maximum occupancies/
usage into account when calculating peak flows for design.
         (b)   In determining the volume of sewage from residential dwelling
units, the flow rate shall be as provided pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.1(f3)
(currently 75 gallons per day per bedroom and 75 gallons per day per each
additional bedroom). Each bedroom or any other room or addition that can
reasonably be expected to function as a bedroom shall be considered a bedroom
for design purposes.
         (c)   The wastewater design flow ratesset forth at 15A NCAC 02T .0114
(as such may be amended from time to time), provided below, shall be used to
determine the minimum allowable design daily flow of non-residential wastewater
facilities. It is recognized that the design flow figures in 15A NCAC 02T.0114
may be questioned for any given establishment/use; however, these are the
figures developed by the state and are the figures the town must use in seeking
permits from the state. Design flow rates for establishments not identified
below shall be determined using available flow data, water-using fixtures,
occupancy or operation patterns, and other measured data.
Type of Establishments (Uses) Daily Flow for Design
Type of Establishments (Uses)                                    Daily Flow for
                                                                 Design
Barber and beauty shops                                           
   Barber shops                                               50 gal/chair
   Beauty shops                                               125 gal/booth
                                                                 or bowl
Businesses, offices and factories
   General business and office facilities                     25 gal/
                                                                 employee/shift
   Factories, excluding industrial waste                      25 gal/
                                                                 employee/shift
   Factories or businesses with showers or food preparation   35 gal/
                                                                 employee/shift
   Warehouse                                                  100 gal/
                                                                 loading bay
   Warehouse - self storage (not including caretaker residence1 gal/unit
Churches
   Churches without kitchens, day care or camps               3 gal/seat
   Churches with kitchen                                      5 gal/seat
   Churches providing day care or camps                       25 gal/person
Fire, rescue and emergency response facilities
   Fire or rescue stations without on-site staff              25 gal/person
   Fire or rescue stations with on-site staff                 50 gal/person/
                                                                 shift
Food and drink facilities
   Banquet, dining hall                                       30 gal/seat
   Bars, cocktail lounges                                     20 gal/seat
   Caterers                                                   50 gal/100 sq
                                                                 ft floor space
   Restaurant, full service                                   40 gal/seat
   Restaurant, single service articles                        20 gal/seat
   Restaurant, drive-in                                       50 gal/car
                                                                 space
   Restaurant, carry out only                                 50 gal/100 sq
                                                                 ft floor space
   Institutions, dining halls                                 5 gal/meal
   Deli                                                       40 gal/100 sq
                                                                 ft floor space
   Bakery                                                     10 gal/100 sq
                                                                 ft floor space
   Meat department, butcher shop or fish market               75 gal/100 sq
                                                                 ft floor space
   Specialty food stand or kiosk                              50 gal/100 sq
                                                                 ft floor space
Hotels and motels
   Hotels, motels and bed & breakfast facilities, without in- 120 gal/room
room
   Hotels and motels, with in-room cookingfacilities          175 gal/room
   Resort hotels                                              200 gal/room
   Cottages, cabins                                           200 gal/unit
Laundry facilities, self-service                                 500 gal/
                                                                 machine
Medical, dental, veterinary facilities
                                                                 250 gal/
   Medical or dental offices                                  practitioner/
                                                                 shift
                                                                 250 gal/
   Veterinary offices (not including boarding)                practitioner/
                                                                 shift
                                                                 20 gal/pen,
   Veterinary hospitals, kennels, animal boarding facilities  cage, kennel
                                                                 or stall
   Hospitals, medical                                         300 gal/bed
   Hospitals, mental                                          150 gal/bed
   Convalescent, nursing, rest homes without laundry facilitie60 gal/bed
   Convalescent, nursing, rest homes with laundry facilities  120 gal/bed
   Residential care facilities                                60 gal/person
Park, recreation, campgrounds, R-V parks and other outdoor
activity
   Campground with comfort station, without water or sewer    75 gal/
                                                                 campsite
   Campground with water and sewer hookups                    100 gal/
                                                                 campsite
   Campground dump station facility                           50 gal/space
   Construction, hunting or work camps with flush toilets     60 gal/person
   Construction, hunting or work camps with chemical or portab40 gal/person
                                                                 250 gal/
   Parks with restroom facilities                             plumbing
                                                                 fixtures
   Summer camps without food preparation or laundry facility  30 gal/person
   Summer camps with food preparation and laundry facilities  60 gal/person
   Swimming pools, bathhouses and spas                        10 gal/person
                                                                 325 gal/
Public access restrooms                                          plumbing
                                                                 fixture
Schools, preschools and day care
   Day care and preschool facilities                          25 gal/person
                                                                 (child and)
   Schools with cafeteria, gym and showers                    15 gal/student
   Schools with cafeteria                                     12 gal/student
   Schools without cafeteria, gym or showers                  10 gal/student
   Boarding schools                                           60 gal/person
                                                                 (student)
Service stations, car wash facilities
                                                                 250 gal/
   Service stations, gas stations                             plumbing
                                                                 fixtures
   Car wash facilities (if recycling water see Rule .0235)    1,200 gal/bay
Sports centers
   Bowling center                                             50 gal/lane
   Fitness exercise, karate or dance center                   50 gal/100 sq
                                                                 ft
   Tennis, racquet ball                                       50 gal/court
   Gymnasium                                                  50 gal/100 sq
                                                                 ft
                                                                 250 gal/
   Golf course with only minimal food service                 plumbing
                                                                 fixture
   Country clubs                                              60 gal/member
                                                                 or patron
                                                                 250 gal/
   Mini golf, putt-putt                                       plumbing
                                                                 fixture
                                                                 250 gal/
   Go-kart, motocross                                         plumbing
                                                                 fixture
                                                                 250 gal/
   Batting cages, driving ranges                              plumbing
                                                                 fixture
   Marinas without bathhouse                                  10 gal/slip
   Marinas with boathouse                                     30 gal/slip
                                                                 250 gal/
   Video game arcades, pool halls                             plumbing
                                                                 fixtures
Stadiums, auditoriums, theaters, community  centers             5 gal/seat
Stores, shopping centers, malls and flea markets
                                                                 125 gal/
   Auto, boat recreational vehicle dealerships/ showrooms withplumbing
                                                                 fixture
   Convenience stores, with food preparation                  60 gal/100 sq
                                                                 ft
                                                                 250 gal/
   Convenience stores, without food preparation               plumbing
                                                                 fixtures
   Flea market                                                30 gal/stall
   Shopping centers and malls with food service               130 gal/1,000
                                                                 sq ft
   Stores and shopping centers without food service           100 gal/1,000
                                                                 sq ft
Transportation terminals - air, bus, train, ferry, port and dock 5 gal/
                                                                 passenger
 
   (K)   In calculating system development fees with respect to new
development, the town will credit the value of costs in excess of the
development's proportionate share of connecting facilities required to be
oversized for use of others outside of the development. No credit shall be
applied, however, for water or sewer capital improvements on-site or to connect
new development to water or sewer facilities.
   (L)   All system development fees collected by the town shall be deposited
to the town's water and/or sewer capital reserve funds and expended as provided
by G.S. § 162A-211, as such may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. passed 6-19-2018; Ord. passed 7-17-2018; Ord. passed - - ; Ord. passed
11-8-2023)
§ 50.114 CUSTOMER’S AND ADJUNCT CUSTOMER’S RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Every customer and adjunct customer shall arrange for piping on the
premises to be installed so that the connections to the town’s meter, lines or
mains are conveniently located.
   (B)   When a meter is installed on the premises of a customer, the customer
shall provide and maintain a suitable place to locate the meter so that it is
unobstructed and accessible at all times to the meter reader.
   (C)   Every customer and adjunct customer shall furnish and maintain a
private cut-off valve on the customer’s side of the meter.
   (D)   Every customer and adjunct customer shall maintain all town piping,
apparatus and facilities within the customer’s control in proper condition.
   (E)   Every customer and adjunct customer shall protect any town property
placed on the customer’s or adjunct customer’s property and shall only permit
access to it by authorized representatives of the town.
   (F)   Every customer and adjunct customer shall provide the town’s
representatives access to his or her property, as necessary for the town to
maintain the town’s water and/or sewer lines, to install or remove town
property, to read or test the customer’s water and/or sewer meter(s) and for
any other purpose reasonably necessary for the town to efficiently provide
service to the customer and adjunct customer, and to maintain and protect its
system.
   (G)   If so requested, every customer and adjunct customer shall grant or
convey to the town a perpetual easement and right-of-way across the customer’s
property wherever the perpetual easement and right-of-way is reasonably needed
by the town to effectively furnish and maintain service to the customer. The
refusal of a customer, adjunct customer, or applicant for service as either to
grant or convey the town an easement is a basis for denying or discontinuing
service to a customer or adjunct customer .
   (H)   The customer is responsible for keeping the town informed at all times
of the customer’s current billing address. An adjunct customer must likewise
provide the town with a contact address and telephone number, and must keep
such information current.
   (I)   In the event that any loss or damage to the property of the town is
caused by the customer, adjunct customer, their invitees, agents or employees,
or in the event the negligence or any wrongful act by the customer, adjunct
customer, their invitees agents or employees results in any accident or injury
to persons or property for which the town is held responsible, the customer
must pay the cost of the necessary repairs or replacements to the town; and the
customer shall assume any liability otherwise resulting from the customer’s or
adjunct customer’s wrongful actions or omissions. The actual amount of such
loss or damage and/or the actual cost to the town of repairs shall be added to
the customer’s bill; and if not timely paid, service to the customer and any
adjunct customer may be discontinued by the town.
   (J)   By applying for and accepting service from the town, the customer and
adjunct customer agree to hold the town harmless from liability for any damages
that may occur due to a temporary discontinuance or interruption of service by
the town for emergency reasons, whether or not the customer or adjunct customer
receives prior notification of the discontinuance or interruption.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 7-17-2012)
§ 50.115 METER READING; BILLING; COLLECTING.
   (A)   Meters will be read, weather and other considerations permitting and
bills shall be rendered monthly, but the town reserves the right to vary the
dates or length of the period between meter readings and covered in the
customer’s bill.
   (B)   Charges for water and sewer will be figured in accordance with the
town’s published rate schedule then in effect, in §
50.460, based on the amount of water consumed or estimated and actual or
estimated sewer use for the period covered by the meter readings.
   (C)   Charges for service commence when the meter is installed and the
connection made, whether any water is immediately used or not.
   (D)   A separate bill, including appropriate base charges, will be issued
for each separate meter even if more than one meter is in the same customer’s
name.
   (E)   Bills are due when rendered and become delinquent 20 days following
the date of the bill. Bills not paid prior to the delinquent date are subject
to the late fee currently in effect and subject the customer and any adjunct
customer to an immediate termination of service.
   (F)   A claimed failure to receive a bill does not prevent a bill from
becoming delinquent or relieve the customer from timely payment, late charges
or the other town remedies contained in this subchapter.
   (G)   At the request of a customer and deposit of the actual cost of
testing, the town will test a customer’s meter. If the meter is found to
register use more than 10% higher than the correct volume, no charge for the
testing will be made and the customer’s deposit for the test will be refunded.
If testing indicates that the meter registers use within 10% higher of the
actual use or less, the deposit shall be retained.
   (H)   If the seal of a meter is broken, other than by the town’s
representative, or if the meter fails to register correctly or is stopped for
any cause, the customer shall be required to pay a bill for each period for
which no reliable meter reading was made in an amount estimated from the record
of the customer’s previous 12 bills for which use was reliably measured, if
available, and/or from other appropriate data.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 7-17-2012)
§ 50.116 INVOLUNTARY DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   (A)   The town reserves the right to discontinue or interrupt service
temporarily to make emergency repairs, due to an insufficient supply of water
or treatment capacity or due to any other cause which threatens the safe and
effective delivery of service to the town’s customers. In that event, the town
will make a good faith effort, as practical, to notify affected customers
before service is discontinued or interrupted. A customer has the
responsibility to notify adjunct customers using the customer’s meter of such
discontinuation or interruption.
   (B)   The town will discontinue residential service in which the water and/
or sewer bill is delinquent. The town may lock or remove the meter any time
service is discontinued.
   (C)   The town will discontinue service to any commercial establishment,
unit or property in which the water and sewer bill is delinquent. The town may
lock or remove the meter any time service is discontinued.
   (D)   In addition to discontinuance of service for non-payment, the town may
suspend service to prevent fraud or abuse by a customer or adjunct customer or
for any violation by the customer or adjunct customer to comply with the
provisions of this code.
   (E)   The town reserves the right, upon action by the Town Council, to
discontinue its water and/or sewer service to any customer whose property is
outside the corporate limits of the town, upon giving a minimum 60-day written
notice of its intent to terminate water and/or sewer service.
   (F)   Upon discontinuance of service for non-payment, any deposit made by
the customer or adjunct customer on the unpaid account or any other account
shall be applied by the town to the account relating to the discontinued
service. If the deposit on the account in question exceeds the arrearage, any
surplus will be refunded to the customer or adjunct customer, whichever has
made the deposit, and if there are multiple deposits, any refund shall be
prorated in proportion to the relative amounts of the deposits which have been
applied. If the deposit(s) is not sufficient to pay the arrearage in full, the
town may proceed to collect the balance from the customer or any other user of
the system in the usual way provided by law for the collection of debts. If a
deposit from a second account is applied to the delinquency on an unpaid
account, the customer will be required to supplement the deposit on the second
account to the level required by §
50.460 in order to maintain service on the second account.
   (G)   The town shall make a good faith effort to notify affected customers
before service is discontinued or interrupted as provided in division (A).
However, every customer and every adjunct customer, by making application for
service, agrees to hold the town harmless from liability for any damages that
may occur due to discontinuance or interruption of service for any of the above
mentioned causes.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 7-17-2012)
§ 50.117 PROCEDURES FOR DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE OR DENIAL OF SERVICE AND
CUSTOMER’S APPEAL RIGHTS.
   (A)   Before the town cuts off a customer’s or adjunct customer’s water or
sewer service, the town will send the customer or adjunct customer a notice
explaining the basis for the action, the date service will be terminated and
the customer’s or adjunct customer’s appeal rights. The notice to a customer
may be included in the monthly bill for water or sewer service. If an applicant
for service as a customer or adjunct customer is denied service, the applicant
may request a hearing in righting within five days and these procedures shall
apply. An adjunct customer shall have no appeal rights under this section to
challenge a threatened disconnection of a customer’s service, even if the
adjunct customer’s services will also be terminated as a result of the action.
   (B)   Within five days of the date of mailing of a disconnection notice or
within ten days of the date of mailing of the bill containing the stated
disconnection information, if the information is included with the normal
monthly bill, the customer or adjunct customer may request in writing a hearing
to either dispute the circumstances for which disconnection is threatened or,
if the customer believes the bill is in error, the customer can request a
hearing to dispute the amount of the bill.
   (C)   If the customer or adjunct customer files a timely request for a
hearing, prior to disconnecting service, the town will conduct a hearing on the
request, presided over by a town employee or other disinterested person, as
designated by the Town Manager, who was not involved in the original decision
to discontinue service.
   (D)   The hearing will be conducted within three business days of the town’s
receipt of the request and may be held by telephone or at the request of the
customer and option of the town, in person. The hearing may not be delayed in
the case of non-payment of a bill or a dispute as to the amount of a bill
unless the customer pays the town a deposit equal to the amount of the disputed
bill.
   (E)   At the hearing, the customer or adjunct customer will be given an
opportunity to present the facts and other matters which the customer or
adjunct customer maintains should prevent the disconnection of service. The
customer or adjunct customer may be represented by an attorney, shall have the
opportunity to examine any documents relied upon by the town in disconnecting
service and shall be given the opportunity to cross-examine any witnesses who
testify against the customer or adjunct customer. Within 24 hours following the
hearing, the town employee or other disinterested person conducting the hearing
will issue a decision affirming the action by the town, reversing the action by
the town or modifying the action by the town by allowing any past due amount to
be paid in monthly payments totally no more than four. The decision may be
communicated to the customer or adjunct customer verbally or in writing, but,
if verbally, will be followed within five days by a written communication
setting out the decision.
   (F)   The decision by the town employee or other disinterested person
conducting the hearing shall constitute the final decision by the town.
      (1)   If the decision upholds the town’s determination that facts exist
which justify the discontinuation of service, unless the customer or adjunct
customer makes immediate payment of all amounts for service incurred through
the date of the decision, service may be disconnected as soon as the decision
is made and an attempt to communicate the decision to the customer or adjunct
customer is made by contacting the customer or adjunct customer at the
telephone number or e-mail address provided by the customer for that purpose at
the hearing.
      (2)   If the employee or other disinterested person conducting the
hearing concludes that the discontinuation of service is justified, but
circumstances beyond the control of the customer or adjunct customer exist
which make unfair a demand for immediate full payment of all amounts for
service incurred through the date of the decision and that the customer should
be entitled to pay the delinquent or disputed amount in monthly payments
totaling no more than four, should any monthly payment be themselves
delinquent, discontinuation of service may occur without further process.
      (3)   If the employee or other disinterested person conducting the
hearing determines that the town’s action or charges were in error, the
customer’s account shall be adjusted appropriately.
   (G)   Pursuit of the aforesaid appeal shall not prevent a customer from
seeking an adjustment in a bill by the Town Manager or Town Council in amounts
authorized by this chapter, but the requests shall not stay a discontinuation
of services unless they are requested prior to the hearing provided in this
section.
   (H)   The procedures provided by this section are available to an adjunct
customer only with regard to a discontinuation of service or denial of
application which is specific to the adjunct customer and not to actions
relating to the customer whose meter through which the adjunct customer
receives service, even if the result of a discontinuation of service to the
customer or denial of an application for service by a customer affects the
ability of the adjunct customer to receive service.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 7-17-2012)
§ 50.118 SERVICE TERMINATION.
   Disconnection of water or sewer service shall be effected only by authorized
agents of the town or by persons specifically authorized to do so.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 7-17-2012)
§ 50.119 REINSTATEMENT OF SERVICE.
   (A)   No person other than a duly authorized agent or employee of the town
may cause or allow a reconnection of water and/or sewer service.
   (B)   (1)   Before service will be reinstated after it has been disconnected
for non-payment of outstanding charges, the customer shall be required to make
full payment of all charges owing the town.
      (2)   In addition, the customer shall also increase the deposit with the
town to an amount equal to two times the average monthly bill in the previous
12 months or the average monthly bill for the full period of service if service
has been in effect for less than 12 months.
      (3)   If a customer with a delinquent account files for bankruptcy
protection and duly notifies the town of the filing, pending final action by
the bankruptcy court, no demand will be made for payment of delinquencies
incurred prior to the bankruptcy filing.
      (4)   However, any delinquencies for service provided after the
bankruptcy filing shall result in a discontinuation of service and the town
shall require a deposit equal to two times the average monthly bill in the
previous 12 months or the average monthly bill for the full period of service
if service has been in effect for less than 12 months, before service will be
reinstated.
   (C)   Service will not be reinstated after it has been disconnected for
fraud or misconduct on the part of the customer or adjunct customer, such as
engaging in one or more of the acts identified in §
50.122, without the approval of the Town Council.
   (D)   Service to a customer or adjunct customer whose service has been
discontinued will not be reinstated until the customer pays the reconnection
fee authorized in §
50.460.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 7-17-2012)
§ 50.120 TERMINATION OF SERVICE AT CUSTOMER’S REQUEST.
   (A)   A request that service be terminated, for a change in occupancy or
other reason, shall be submitted to the town utility billing and collections,
in writing or in person, at least three days before the requested termination
date.
   (B)   The customer shall be responsible for all water consumed and sewer
usage and for the pro-rated monthly service charge up to the time service is
terminated or until three days following receipt of the request for
termination, whichever occurs sooner.
   (C)   When all charges for service and usage are paid in full, the
customer’s deposit shall be refunded in due course.
   (D)   If all charges for service and usage are not paid in full, the
customer’s deposit may be applied, to the extent needed, toward those charges.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.121 COMPLAINTS.
   Any customer who disputes the amount of a deposit refund shall be entitled
to a hearing, following the procedures outlined in §
50.117.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.122 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   Neither a customer, nor any other person, shall:
   (A)   Supply or sell water from the town’s system to other persons or carry
water away from any hydrant, public water fountain or other public outlet
without specific authorization from the town;
   (B)   Manipulate, tamper with or harm, in any manner whatsoever, any water
line, sewer line, main or appurtenance or any other part of the water or sewer
system, including, but not limited to, any testing or inspection device used to
measure the character or concentration of wastes discharged into the sanitary
sewer system;
   (C)   Tamper with a meter so as to alter the true reading for the amount of
water consumed;
   (D)   Attach, cause to be attached or allow to be attached any connection to
the town’s water or sewer line, at a location where use is not measured by a
meter; and
   (E)   Intentionally make any false statement, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained under this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.123 COLLECTION OF DAMAGES DUE THE TOWN; OTHER REMEDIES.
   (A)   The town may initiate collection actions to recover unpaid charges for
service, damages for services improperly obtained, damage for loss or injury to
any personal or real property utilized in the treatment or delivery of water or
sewer services to the public or for any other reason authorized by the Town
Council.
   (B)   (1)   Upon approval of the Town Council, the town may initiate a civil
action to recover unpaid charges for service, damages for services improperly
obtained, damage for loss or injury to any personal or real property utilized
in the treatment or delivery of water or sewer services to the public or for
any other reason authorized by the Town Council.
      (2)   In the action, the town is authorized to seek the recovery of its
costs and expenses in pursuing the civil action, including its reasonable
attorney’s fees.
   (C)   The town may initiate criminal prosecution against any person who
tampers with a meter or other measuring device or commits any other criminal
act relating to the town’s water and/or sewer system.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.124 ABRIDGMENT OR MODIFICATION OF RULES.
   (A)   No promise, agreement or representation of any employee of the town
shall be binding upon the town, except as it shall have been agreed upon in
writing, signed and accepted by the Town Manager.
   (B)   No modification of rates or any of the rules and regulations shall be
made by any agent of the town, except as authorized by the Town Council.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.125 REQUESTS FOR ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   Adjustments may be made to customer water and/or sewer bills in the
event of extenuating circumstances due to leaks or pipe breaks (collectively,
“leaks”) as follows:
      (1)   When a customer receives a utility bill that reflects extraordinary
charges for a billing period, he or she shall present his or her claim for an
adjustment in person or in writing to the town no more than 30 days after
receiving the bill.
      (2)   A claim for an adjustment shall not prevent discontinuance of
services for delinquency in payment as heretofore provided. Customers are
responsible to pay the entire amount due within the normal payment period or
enter into payment arrangements for the billed amount in order to remain in
good standing on all current billings. The customer’s payment of a bill
reflecting extraordinary charges shall not prejudice his or her claim for an
adjustment.
      (3)   Where the customer demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of
the town that a leak on the customer’s side of the meter was the cause of the
extraordinary charges, an adjustment may be made to the customer’s water bill
in accordance with the provisions of this section. The customer must also
present proof, such as a plumber’s invoice and receipt, that the leak was
repaired.
   (B)   An adjustment may be made to the utility bill if no leak adjustment
has been made within the previous 12 month period for the same account, and:
      (1)   There is a concealed leak in the customer’s piping, and the
customer submits a statement from a licensed plumber, or a signed statement
from the property owner or his/her legal representative, that the leak has been
repaired and that the repair meets or exceeds the plumbing codes of the town;
or
      (2)   There are other circumstances, such as theft of water, where the
evidence indicates a leak or other loss of water that is not the fault of the
owner such that an adjustment is appropriate under the circumstances and
consistent with the purpose and spirit of this section.
   (C)   If an adjustment is granted, it shall be made for the following
amounts:
      (1)   On the water portion of the utility bill, an adjustment of up to
75% of the portion of the bill that exceeds the customer’s average consumption;
      (2)   On the sewer portion of the utility bill, where the excess water
from the break or leak did not enter the sanitary sewer system, an adjustment
of up to the total amount of the bill that exceeds the customer's average sewer
bill;
      (3)   On the sewer portion of the utility bill, where the excess water
from the break or leak entered the sanitary sewer system, an adjustment of up
to 75% of the portion of the bill that exceeds the customer's average
consumption.
      (4)   “Average consumption” shall be calculated as the prior 12-month
average monthly consumption at the premises, not including months that do not
have readings, that have readings for less than a full month, or that have zero
usage readings.
      (5)   No adjustment shall be made unless the gallons billed are at least
10,000 gallons more than the average billing (on a monthly basis).
      (6)   The adjustment may not cover more than two consecutive months.
   (D)   To be eligible for an adjustment under this policy, the leak must be a
concealed leak. Leaks that are or should be known to the customer shall not be
considered concealed leaks, and include but are not limited to the following:
leaking or running toilets; treatment systems; air-conditioning cooling towers;
leaking faucets, whether inside or outside; water heaters; exposed piping;
washing machine hoses; hose bibs; water fountains; dishwashers; swimming pools;
and exposed pressure reducing valves and backflow preventers.
   (E)   Vacant homes and buildings do not qualify for leak adjustments.
   (F)   No adjustment will be allowed where the break or leak occurred during
a period when the premises was left vacant or unattended by the customer for a
period in excess of two weeks and the customer failed to turn the water off at
the meter. This provision shall not apply, though, to the sewer portion of the
utility bill where the excess water did not enter the sanitary sewer system.
   (G)   Upon being notified by Water Department personnel or otherwise
discovering that a leak exists the customer shall take immediate steps to
correct the situation. Undue delay by the customer shall cause forfeiture of
any benefits from this adjustment policy.
   (H)   The Public Works Director, or his or her designee, shall consider and
have authority to grant a requested adjustment of up to $3,000. A request for
any adjustment exceeding $3,000 shall be considered and decided by the Town
Manager. The decision of the Public Works Director or Town Manager, as
applicable, shall be final.
   (I)   The town may enter into appropriate payment plans with customers
unable to pay extraordinarily high bills. Customers may inquire of the Public
Utilities Department for alternative payment options.
(Ord. passed 9-15-2016)
SEWER USE REGULATIONS
§ 50.135 FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   The Town Council hereby finds that the requirements for the issuance of
federal grants and the acceptance of the grants by the town under:
   (A)   Title II of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, as amended, (Pub. Law No. 92-500, as amended); and
   (B)   The regulations of the United States Environmental Protection Agency,
as promulgated in the 9-27-1978 Federal Register, Volume 43, Number 188, Part
III, for the construction of waste treatment works to improve the quality of
effluent discharges from the town established:
      (1)   The necessity of adopting a user charge system that would be
proportionate to all classes of users and produce the revenue required to
sustain the wastewater collection and wastewater treatment system; and
      (2)   The necessity of enacting regulations that control the user and
inflow into the wastewater treatment works.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.136 APPLICATION TO SEWER SERVICE.
   (A)   All provisions of this subchapter regarding water service also apply
to sewer service, unless contravened by this subchapter, in which case, the
provisions of §§
50.135 through
50.162,
50.175 through
50.182,
50.195 through
50.208,
50.220 through
50.225,
50.240 through
50.243 and
50.255 through
50.259 control.
   (B)   However, the town will not accept any new accounts for private water
system discharge into its sanitary sewer system unless specifically authorized
by the Town Council.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.137 UNLAWFUL TO DEPOSIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town any human or animal
excrement, garbage or objectionable waste.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.138 UNLAWFUL TO DISCHARGE.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the town or
in any area under the jurisdiction of the town any wastewater or other polluted
waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with
subsequent provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.139 UNLAWFUL TO CONSTRUCT.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.140 REQUIRED FACILITIES.
   The owners of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the town and abutting
on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in
the future be located, a public sanitary sewer of the town, are hereby
required, at the owner's expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein
and to connect the facilities directly with proper public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after date of official
notice to do so; provided that, the public sewer is within 100 feet (30.5
meters) of the property line.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.141 RAINWATER HARVESTING AND REUSE SYSTEMS.
   Rainwater harvesting and reuse systems with a capacity less than 500 gallons
may directly or indirectly connect to the sanitary sewer system only with
written approval of the Superintendent. Rainwater harvesting and reuse systems
with a capacity of 500 gallons or more may directly or indirectly connect to
the sanitary sewer system if they met the following criteria.
   (A)   The system must include a meter provided by the town, at the
consumer's expense, which allows the town to accurately monitor the flow of
water into the public sanitary sewer system.
   (B)   The system user timely pays for the consequent use of the public
sanitary sewer system at rates established by the Town Council.
   (C)   The system must use the water for the limited purposes of flushable
fixtures only.
   (D)   The system user must obtain written approval from the Superintendent
prior to installation of the system.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.142 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of §
50.140, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal
system complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.143 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system,
the owner(s) shall first obtain a written permit signed by the Superintendent.
The application for the permit shall be made on a form furnished by the local
government which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications
and other information as are deemed necessary by the Superintendent. A permit
and inspection fee of the rate then in effect shall be paid to the local
government at the time the application is filed.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.144 EFFECTIVE DATE OF PERMIT.
   A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent.
The Superintendent shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of
construction; and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the work is ready for final inspection and before any
underground portions are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours
of the receipt of the notice by the Superintendent.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.145 COMPLIANCE OF PRIVATE WASTEWATER SYSTEMS.
   (A)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private wastewater
disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of
Public Health of the state. No permit shall be issued for any private
wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities
where the area of the lot is less than 20,000 square feet.
   (B)   No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any
natural outlet.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.146 REQUIRED CONNECTION.
   At the time a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private wastewater disposal system, as provided in §
50.142, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days in
compliance with this chapter and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar
private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of sludge and filled
with clean bank-run gravel or dirt.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.147 SANITARY MANNER.
   The owner(s) shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the local
government.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.148 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.149 USE OF GREY WATER PROHIBITED.
   The use of grey water is prohibited.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.150 UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS.
   No unauthorized person(s) shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.151 BUILDING SEWER PERMITS.
   (A)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
      (1)   For residential and commercial service; and
      (2)   For service to establishments producing industrial wastes.
   (B)   In either case, the owner(s) or his or her agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the local government. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other
information considered pertinent in the judgment of the Superintendent. A
permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit
and for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the local
government at the time the application is filed according to the most recent
fee schedule as prescribed by the local government and on file in the office of
the Clerk. This fee may be waived in whole or in part at the discretion of the
local government.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.152 COSTS OF INSTALLATION.
   (A)   All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection
of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner(s).
   (B)   The owner(s) shall indemnify the local government from any loss or
damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer; provided, however, that, the indemnification shall not extend
to loss or damage due solely to willful misconduct or negligence on the part of
the local government.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.153 SEPARATE SEWERS REQUIRED.
   Excluding industrial plant sites or other sites which have written approval
from the Superintendent for single discharge points, a separate and independent
building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one building
stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is
available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining
alley, courtyard or driveway, the front building may be extended to the rear
building and the whole considered as one building sewer; but the local
government does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for
damage caused by or resulting from any single connection aforementioned. The
town, upon action by Council, may waive the requirements of this section, but
shall never be obligated to, when the following conditions are met:
   (A)   The waiver is temporary and shall be no more than two years and shall
end on a date certain;
   (B)   The customer signs a written agreement with the town agreeing to abide
by all the terms and conditions of the agreement; and
   (C)   The customer provides the town with all easements that may be
necessary to terminate the service.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.154 SEWER BILLS FOR DISCHARGE FROM PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Sewer bills for all private water systems shall be computed by either
meter or the owner may accept the NRCD flow chart used to figure water and
sewer availability fees as a means of obtaining discharge averages.
   (B)   All private water systems must, within 60 days of notice, inform the
town as to which method of measurement they wish the town to use for their
sewer bill. If, at the end of 60 days, the town has not heard from the owner,
the service will be disconnected from the town's system.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.155 OLD BUILDING AND EXISTING BUILDING SEWERS.
   Old building and existing building sewers may be kept in service if, in the
opinion of the Superintendent, they are in acceptable structural condition and
operate satisfactorily. All new building sewers, including any necessary
replacement of old building and existing building sewers, must comply with the
following conditions.
   (A)   The building sewer shall be PVC SDR 35 A.S.T.M. D3034 (gasket type),
Ductile Iron Class 50 ANSI/AWWA C104/A21.4, Schedule 40 Sewer and Drain
A.S.T.M. 2729, Schedule 80 PVC A.S.T.M. D1785 or other suitable material
approved by the Superintendent. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. Any part
of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe
shall be constructed of ductile iron pipe. Ductile iron pipe may be required by
the Superintendent where the building sewer is exposed to damage by tree roots.
If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be ductile
iron pipe, except that non-metallic material may be accepted if laid on a
suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the Superintendent.
   (B)   The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the
approval of the Superintendent. Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be
brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all
buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the
public sewer, sanitary wastewater carried by the building drain shall be lifted
by a means approved by the Superintendent and discharged to the building sewer.
No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within five feet of any bearing
wall, which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford
protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in
straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only
with properly curved pipe and fittings.
   (C)   All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer
shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the Superintendent. Pipe
laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with A.S.T.M.
Specification C12-19; except that, no backfill shall be placed until the work
has been inspected.
   (D)   All joints and connections shall be made gas-tight and water-tight.
   (E)   Other jointing materials and methods may be used if approved by the
Superintendent subject to the State Building Code, Volume II - Plumbing.
   (F)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sanitary sewer
shall be made at the Y branch, if the branch is available at a suitable
location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less and no properly
located Y branch is available, the owner shall, at his or her expense, install
a Y branch in the public sewer at the location specified by the Superintendent.
   (G)   Where the public sewer is greater than 12 inches in diameter and no
properly located Y branch is available, a neat hole may be cut into the public
sewer to receive the building sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at
an angle of about 45 degrees. A 45-degree ell may be used to make the
connection, with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface
of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of
connection shall be at the same or at a higher elevation than the invert of the
public sewer. A smooth, neat joint shall be made and the connection made secure
and water-tight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the
connection only when approved by the Superintendent.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.156 STANDARDS GENERALLY.
   Sections
50.175 through
50.182,
50.195 through
50.208 and
50.220 through
50.225 shall be used as a standard for design and construction of a sewer
system connected to the town's system. Failure to follow these standards shall
be sufficient grounds for the town to deny service.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.157 UNAUTHORIZED CONNECTIONS.
   No person(s) shall connect roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway
drains or other sources of surface runoff or ground water directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer without specific written approval from
the Superintendent.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.158 REQUIREMENTS OF CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Building and Plumbing Code or other
applicable rules and regulations of the state.
   (B)   Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be
approved by the Superintendent before installation.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.159 INSPECTION OF SEWER.
   (A)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the
Superintendent when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection
to the public sewer.
   (B)   The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent or his or her representative.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.160 EXCAVATIONS.
   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the local government.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.161 OWNER MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to keep and
maintain the building sewer connected to the public sewer in good repair.
   (B)   The owner shall be responsible for making necessary repairs, at his or
her own expense, to the building sewer when notified in writing by the local
government that repairs are necessary.
   (C)   Should the owner fail to repair the building sewer within 60 days
after receiving written notification by the local government that the repairs
are necessary, the local government may make the necessary repairs to the
building sewer and shall assess the owner for the cost of the repairs.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.162 VANDALISM OF WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
   (A)   No person(s) shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or
equipment which is a part of the wastewater disposal system.
   (B)   Any person(s) violating this provision shall be subject to immediate
arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
SEWER SYSTEM SPECIFICATIONS
§ 50.175 DUCTILE IRON PIPE.
   All ductile iron pipe shall be in accordance with AWWA C-151 latest revision
(ANSI A21.51) and shall be in 18- to 20-foot lengths with single rubber gasket
(push on) joints in accordance with AWWA C-111 latest revision (ANSI A21.11).
All eight-inch pipe will be minimum class 50 in accordance with AWWA C-150
latest revision (ANSI A21.50).
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.176 POLYVINYL CHLORIDE GRAVITY SEWER PIPE (PVC).
   PVC gravity sanitary sewer pipe and related fittings shall be manufactured
in accordance with all requirements of A.S.T.M. C3034, SDR 35, Type PSM
polyvinyl chloride sewer pipe and fittings. PVC gravity sewer pipe shall be
used for eight-, ten-, 12- or 15-inch mains and shall be supplied in 12.5-foot
lengths with bell-and-spigot joints. All fittings shall use rubber gaskets
which conform to the requirements of A.S.T.M. F477.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.177 STEEL PIPE.
   (A)   Steel pipe for aerial creek crossings or boring installations (without
encasement and carrier pipe) shall be high strength steel, spiral welded or
smooth-wall seamless manufactured in accordance with A.S.T.M. A139 and A283 and
consisting of grade B steel with a minimum yield strength of 35,000 psi. On
eight- and ten-inch pipe, the minimum wall thickness shall be 0.375 inches.
   (B)   The outside of the pipe shall have one coat of zinc chromate primer
conforming to Federal Specification TT-86a and afterwards painted with a
compatible black paint.
   (C)   Pipe ends shall be right-angled and shall be compatible to receive a
dresser style 62 - type I or approved equal mechanical transition coupler.
   (D)   Steel encasement pipe shall be spiral welded or smooth-wall seamless,
consisting of grade B steel with a minimum yield strength of 35,000 psi and
manufactured in accordance with A.S.T.M. A139 and A283.
   (E)   The pipe thickness shall be as required by the encroachment agreement
obtained from the controlling agency, but in no case be less than 0.250 inches
and the ends shall be beveled and prepared for field welding at the
circumferential joints. Thicker encasement pipe may be required by the State
Department of Transportation, Railroads or other agencies.
   (F)   The pipe shall be coated inside and outside, in accordance with AWWA
C-203 or the State Department of Transportation or the American Railway
Engineering Associations specifications. All encasement pipe must be approved
by the appropriate controlling agency (i.e., NCDOT, RR and the like) prior to
ordering the materials.
   (G)   If the encasement pipe is used to carry a sewer main, then a vent pipe
shall be installed. The vent pipe shall be made from A.S.T.M. A139 and A283,
grade B steel, with a minimum yield strength of 35,000 psi and coated as
described above. The vent pipe location shall be approved by the appropriate
agency prior to installation.
   (H)   All carrier piping shall be slip joint ductile iron and the minimum
inside diameter casing shall be eight inches greater than the outside dimension
of the carrier pipe as follows:
 
Carrier Pipe Inside Diameter Steel Casing Pipe Minimum Inside Diameter
4-inch                       12-inch
6-inch                       12-inch
8-inch                       16-inch
12-inch                      24-inch
16-inch                      30-inch
 
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.178 MANHOLES.
   (A)   Manholes shall be manufactured in accordance with A.S.T.M. C478 and
shall be precast with monolithic base and eccentric cone. All manholes will be
a 40-inch inside diameter with five-inch walls or 50 inches with six-inch thick
walls and have a six-inch minimum base.
   (B)   All manholes over 100 inches deep (top rim to lowest point) shall be
50 inches in diameter. All manholes with 21-inch or larger pipes will be 50
inches. The standard joint shall be sealed with plastic cement putty meeting
Federal Specifications SS-C-153. O ring joints shall conform to the
requirements of A.S.T.M. C443. A rubber water stop shall be supplied with the
manholes to tie the pipe to the barrel section. These gaskets and clamps shall
meet the requirements of A.S.T.M. C923.
   (C)   Manholes deeper than 30 inches shall have steps. Manhole steps will be
press set plastic or approved equal. Steps will also be provided on the outside
of raised manholes when the top elevation is greater than three feet above the
existing ground elevation.
   (D)   All commercial and industrial discharges shall provide a monitoring
manhole easily accessible and in accordance herewith. All discharge from the
property must pass through one monitoring manhole before entering the public
sewer system.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.179 MANHOLE RINGS AND COVERS.
   (A)   Manhole rings and covers will be Dewey Brothers MHRCR-2001 for all
off-street locations and Dewey Brothers MHRCR-2001-EC for all in-street
locations. All covers will be perforated and marked "SEWER" unless otherwise
required by the Director of Public Utilities or these specifications.
   (B)   Manholes located in off-street locations shall be extended one foot
above finished grade. Manholes in flood plains shall extend two feet above the
100-year flood elevation or be provided with sealed covers and vented.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.180 SERVICE CONNECTIONS TO SEWER SYSTEM.
   Where sewer lines are already in place, the town will tap the sewer line.
Where taps are made at the time of installation of the sewer, the following
shall apply.
   (A)   Where feasible, service connections shall be made into the nearest
manhole. Connections into manholes shall be by cored holes into the manhole and
the lateral shall be grouted water-tight.
   (B)   Where making a service connection directly to the main line, the
following shall apply:
      (1)   On PVC, provide wye fittings at location of service connection; and
      (2)   On PVC, cut hole in pipe using appropriate saw, glue and clamp
service saddle over hole.
   (C)   The lateral shall be installed from the main line to the edge of the
right-of-way or beyond the limits of pavement. The location of the end of the
lateral shall be marked with a steel post painted yellow for easy
identification.
   (D)   The service connection shall be located by distances from manhole to
manhole. The distances shall be recorded on a reproducible medium and submitted
to the town for their records.
   (E)   Sewer laterals shall be a minimum of four-inch diameter PVC SDR35.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.181 SANITARY SEWER DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   Sanitary sewer plans and specifications shall be sealed by a
professional engineer, licensed to practice in the state.
   (B)   Minimum manhole depth shall be four feet.
   (C)   Minimum pipe size shall be eight-inch diameter.
   (D)   Minimum slope on an eight-inch pipe shall be 0.5%. Maximum slope shall
be 15%.
   (E)   Minimum velocity shall be two fps.
   (F)   Minimum cover shall be three feet, unless ductile iron pipe is used.
   (G)   Maximum cover shall be 18 feet, unless ductile iron pipe is used.
   (H)   Manholes in off-street locations shall be extended one foot minimum
above finished grade.
   (I)   (1)   Manholes shall extend two feet above the 100-year flood plain
elevation or be sealed cover and vented two feet above the 100-year flood
elevation.
      (2)   If the 100-year flood elevation cannot be readily established, the
Director of Public Utilities shall establish the elevation to which the manhole
rims or stack shall be extended.
   (J)   Horizontal and vertical alignment between manholes shall be straight.
   (K)   Provide a 0.2-foot drop through a manhole.
   (L)   Maximum distance between manholes shall be 400 feet.
   (M)   Use drop manhole where difference between incoming and outgoing pipe
inverts is 24 inches or greater.
   (N)   Provide wye with lateral to the property line and plug for each lot in
a subdivision. Provide metal post painted yellow extending at least three feet
above ground to mark end of lateral.
   (O)   Separate water lines ten feet horizontal distance from sewer lines
(existing or proposed) or keep water line 18 inches clear above sewer line.
Where 18 inches clear vertically cannot be maintained below or above the sewer
line, both lines shall be mechanical joint ductile iron a minimum of ten feet
on either side of the crossing. Center the crossing at the center of the pipe,
both lines.
   (P)   Sewer lines shall have a 25-foot permanent easement (12.5 feet each
side of centerline) in the town's name. A 50-foot construction easement (25
feet each side of centerline, unless directed otherwise) shall be provided.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.182 SANITARY SEWER PLANS CHECKLIST.
   Sanitary sewer plans shall contain the following minimum information:
   (A)   Plan and profile on 24-inch by 36-inch page;
   (B)   Vertical sea level elevation scale on left of profile and station
numbers along bottom of profile;
   (C)   North arrow, all sheets;
   (D)   Plan and profile both run left to right;
   (E)   Centerline intersections of line crossings with sewer noted on
profile;
   (F)   Street names above or below corresponding profile, when more than one
street is on a page;
   (G)   Identify location of drop manholes in both plan and profile;
   (H)   Invent elevations of all proposed and all existing pipes and pipe
sizes entering and leaving all manholes to 0.01 foot on profile;
   (I)   Rim elevation and vent elevation to one-tenth foot on profile;
existing and proposed grades;
   (J)   Pipe grade to 0.01% and size and type of pipe between manholes;
   (K)   Size and type of existing pipe and direction of flow between each
manhole on plan;
   (L)   Station numbers and designation of existing or new on each manhole on
plan and profile;
   (M)   Indication of identical manholes where profile is broken;
   (N)   Location and size of all existing and proposed street and sewer
rights-of-way;
   (O)   Existing pavement on plan, indicate width and any portion to be cut;
   (P)   Where a line is to be bored, indicate location and length of casing
and type of pipe on plan and profile;
   (Q)   All existing underground utilities in the area;
   (R)   Where ductile iron is to be used, indicate limits on plan and profile.
Show shaded on profile;
   (S)   Use ductile iron where storm drain and sewer have less than two feet
vertical clearance;
   (T)   On aerial crossings, use concrete piers at 18-foot intervals, indicate
on plans and profile, include details of design for the piers and anchorage;
   (U)   Total distance between existing manholes or proposed manholes on the
plan and the bearing if the line is not within the street right-of-way;
   (V)   All lot lines;
   (W)   All street names on plan;
   (X)   Flood plain elevation in all flood plain areas;
   (Y)   Creek flow line;
   (Z)   All railroad crossings must be accompanied by a separate encroachment
map showing plan and profile and all other information required by the railroad
in accordance with their standards;
   (AA)   Registered engineer's seal and signature; and
   (BB)   Vicinity map showing the location of lines and a visual index of plan
sheets.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
SEWER INSTALLATION SPECIFICATIONS
§ 50.195 CLEARING.
   Where the lines are to be constructed in wooded areas, permanent easements
shall be fully cleared. Cleared materials shall be disposed of off of the
construction site. Disposal shall be made in accordance with all local and
state laws. Trees cut down on the construction site will be hauled away from
the site for proper disposal. Stumps of all trees cut down outside of the
excavation area shall be removed. Ground surfaces shall be graded so as to
promote proper drainage and allow mowing by vehicular equipment.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.196 SITE GRADING.
   All rough grading shall be completed prior to the installation of the sewers
and appurtenances.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.197 EARTHWORK.
   (A)   Explosives for blasting shall be stored, handled and used in
accordance with the State Department of Transportation Standard Specifications
(latest revision), all local regulations and practices outlined in the Blasters
Handbook, published by E.I. Dupont de Nemours and Company, Inc. Blasting shall
be conducted so as not to endanger persons or property and shall be covered or
otherwise satisfactorily confined. The blaster shall be responsible for and
shall make good any damage of whatever nature caused by blasting or accidental
explosions.
   (B)   The bottom of all excavations shall be free from water when pipe is
laid in the excavation, when concrete is placed and until work is carried above
the ground water level and is safe from flotation. If any of the subgrade or
underlying materials is disturbed by movement of ground water, surface water or
any other reason, it shall be replaced with crushed stone or gravel.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.198 CLEAN-UP OF SITE.
   At the completion of the work, all debris and excess construction materials
shall be removed and the right-of-way shall be left clean and presentable.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.199 MATERIALS.
   (A)   Select backfill. Select backfill material shall contain no human-made
or organic material or clay pockets and shall be free of rocks, clods or other
materials larger than two inches in nominal diameter. Materials from on-site
excavations may be used for select backfill provided they meet the specific
requirements and contain optimum moisture content for proper compaction. Water
saturated material shall not be used as select material. If sufficient on-site
select backfill material is not available, acceptable material from an off-site
borrow area shall be secured.
   (B)   Backfill. Backfill shall be free of all organic materials and shall
not contain any rocks larger than four inches in diameter or be in a water
saturated condition.
   (C)   Crushed stone or screened gravel. Crushed stone or screened gravel
shall meet the requirements of the State Department of Transportation Standard
Specifications (latest revision). Crushed stone or screened gravel shall
conform to standard size No. 5. Any rock excavated on site which meets this
graduation may be used. Specifically, the stone shall meet the following
gradation.
 
Sieve Size Percentage Dry Weight Passing Designated Sieve Size
1-1/2-inch 100
1-inch     90 - 100
3/4-inch   20 - 55
1/2-inch   0 - 10
3/8-inch   0 - 5
No. 200    0 - 0.6
 
   (D)   Pipe bedding. All materials used for pipe bedding shall conform to
State Department of Transportation Standard Specifications (latest revision)
for standard size 67 material. Any rock, run-of-bank sand or gravel excavated
on site which meets the following gradation may be used.
 
Sieve Size Percentage Dry Weight Passing Designated Sieve Size
1-inch     100
3/4-inch   90 - 100
3/8-inch   20 - 55
No. 4      0 - 10
No. 8      0 - 5
No. 200    0 - 0.6
 
   (E)   Riprap. The stone for riprap shall consist of field stone or rough
unhewn quarry stone. The stone shall be sound, tough, dense and resistant to
the action of air and water. The riprap shall be class I as specified in the
NCDOT Standard Specifications (latest revision). The stone shall vary in weight
from five to 200 pounds. At least 30% of the total weight of the riprap shall
be in individual pieces weighing a minimum of 60 pounds each. Not more than 10%
of the total weight of the riprap may be in individual pieces weighing less
than 15 pounds.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.200 EXCAVATION.
   (A)   General. All excavation shall be made in a manner and to the widths,
as will give ample room for properly constructing and inspecting the structures
they are to contain and for the sheeting, timbering, pumping and draining as
may be required within the limits shown in Standard NPW-2. Except where
otherwise specified, excavation slopes shall be flat enough to avoid slides
that will cause disturbance of the subgrade or damage to adjacent areas.
Intercept and collect surface runoff both at the top and bottom of cut slopes.
All excess excavated material and all excavated material which is unsuitable
shall be removed from the site and replaced with suitable material.
   (B)   Sheeting and bracing. Place and maintain the sheeting and bracing as
may be required to support the sides of the excavation or to protect pipes and
structures from possible damage and to provide safe working conditions. The
contractor shall be responsible for the adequacy of all sheeting and bracing
used and for all damage resulting from sheeting and bracing failure or from
placing, maintaining and removing it. All sheeting and bracing shall be removed
upon completion of work. The town may permit sheeting to be left in place at
the request and expense of others for the purpose of preventing injury to
structures or property. Any sheeting or bracing left in place shall be cut off
at least two feet below the finished ground surface.
   (C)   Rock excavation. All rock encountered within the limits of excavation
shall be excavated. Rock shall be excavated so that generally there will be a
clear space of at least 12 inches from the outside barrel of the pipe to the
side of the trench. Isolated points of rock shall not come nearer than six
inches to the pipe. At the trench bottom, the rock shall not come nearer than
six inches to the pipe. In addition, sufficient rock shall be removed at joints
to facilitate proper installation. Rock shall be fully removed at least 15 feet
in advance of the laying of the pipe.
   (D)   Protection of subgrade for all excavations. To minimize the
disturbance of the bearing materials and provide a firm foundation.
      (1)   Excavation shall be carried out below subgrade in limited areas,
should disturbed soil or material with natural low bearing capacity be
encountered. Stabilizing of these areas shall be done with select backfill or
coarse aggregate as required. Soils disturbed through the operations shall be
excavated and replaced with select backfill or coarse aggregate, as required.
      (2)   Provide positive protection against penetration of frost into
materials below the bearing level during work in winter months.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.201 BACKFILLING.
   (A)   Backfill shall be placed in maximum eight-inch lits and compacted with
tampers to 95% of Standard Proctor AASHTO-99 density, except backfill under
structures, which shall be compacted to 98% of Standard Proctor density.
Backfill in the roadways shall be tamped to NCDOT requirements.
   (B)   Pipe trenches shall be backfilled as soon as possible after pipe
installation.
   (C)   Where sheeting is used, use all reasonable measures to prevent the
loss of support of the pipe or backfill when the sheeting is removed. If
significant volumes of soil cannot be prevented from clinging to the extracted
sheets, the voids shall be continuously backfilled as rapidly as possible.
Thereafter, limit the depth below subgrade that sheeting will be driven in
similar soil conditions or employ other appropriate means to prevent a loss of
pipe support. Sheeting embedded in granular fill or backfill materials shall be
left in place.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.202 PIPE LAYING.
   Pipe laying shall in all instances be accomplished in a workmanlike manner
laid true in line and grade with bell ends facing (up-grade) in the direction
of laying. The various pipes shall be handled, belled-up and laid in accordance
with manufacturer's requirements and good engineering practices.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.203 PIPE BEDDING.
   (A)   Shaped bottom bedding (NPW-1). Shall be so the pipe bears uniformly
upon undisturbed native earth. Soil is then backfilled and tamped by hand
around the pipe (and completely under the pipe haunches) in uniform layers not
exceeding six inches in depth to ten inches above the top of pipe. Each six-
inch layer shall then be placed, then carefully (so as not to disturb or damage
the pipe) and uniformly tamped, eliminating the possibility of lateral
movement.
   (B)   Type II - granular material embedment (NPW-3). Shall be when the
trench bottom is undercut a minimum of six inches below the pipe barrel grade
and filled with an approved stone as shown in the standard details.
   (C)   Type III - granular material embedment (NPW-4). Shall be when the
trench bottom is undercut a minimum of six inches below the pipe barrel grade
and filled with an approved stone to an elevation such that the pipe will be
completely and uniformly bedded.
   (D)   Concrete encasement and cradles (NPW-5). Shall be as shown in the
Standard Details.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.204 INSTALLATION LIMITATIONS.
   The following are limitations and bedding requirements for supportive
strength and shall be adhered to at all times.
   (A)   Six- and eight-inch pipe. Installation of eight-inch PVC pipe with
more than 14 feet of cover use Type II, granular embedment.
   (B)   Ten-inch and 12-inch pipe. Installation of ten-inch and 12-inch PVC
pipe with more than 12 feet of cover, use Type II, granular embedment.
   (C)   Ductile iron pipe. Installation of ductile iron pipe with more than 20
feet of cover, use Type II, granular embedment; more than 30 feet of cover, use
Type III, granular embedment. This is regardless of ground water and/or soil
conditions. In areas having two and one-half feet and less or 18 feet and more
of cover, use ductile iron pipe.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.205 PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE.
   (A)   Acceptance of concrete. The Director of Public Utilities shall require
all and as many tests as he or she deems necessary to ensure the concrete
acceptability. The cost of the test shall be at the supplier's or contractor's
expense.
   (B)   Depositing. Concrete will not be used if it cannot be placed within 90
minutes of the dispatch time. Concrete shall be deposited in a manner so as to
prevent contamination by foreign material and segregation due to rehandling or
flowing. Segregated concrete and/or concrete consisting of foreign material
will not be used. Depositing will not be done when temperature has not exceeded
35°F and rising by 10:00 a.m. Concreting shall cease when the descending air
temperature in the shade falls below 40°F. It shall not resume until the
ascending air temperature rises to 35°F. All concrete shall be kept from
freezing. Frozen concrete shall be replaced. Free fall shall not exceed three
feet in any case.
   (C)   Forms. Forms may be made of wood, plywood, metal or any other suitable
material. Forms shall be mortar tight, of material strong enough to resist
noticeable deflection or bulging between supports and the interior dimensions
of the forms shall be such that the finished concrete shall be of the proper
form and dimensions. The design of the forms shall take into account the effect
of vibration of concrete as it is placed and also the rate of speed at which
the forms will be filled. Mechanical vibrators of an approved type and
continuous spading and/or rodding of concrete shall be used to produce proper
contact of concrete with forms and reinforcing steel in piers and with forms
and pipe in monolithic inverts ensuring a compact, dense and impervious
artificial stone of uniform texture.
   (D)   Curing. All concrete shall be cured by one of the following methods:
      (1)   Forms left in place for a period of seven days. Exposed concrete
shall be moist cured;
      (2)   Moist curing performed when forms are removed before seven days.
All construction joints shall be moist cured; and
      (3)   Curing compound used immediately after forms are removed and all
surface water has disappeared.
   (E)   Finishing. The structure shall have a uniform and textured surface.
All form marks exposed to view shall be rubbed off with a stone.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.206 TESTING.
   (A)   Testing is required on all lines and shall be done in the presence of
the Director of Public Utilities or his or her representative. A minimum of 48
hours' notice shall be given to the Director of Public Utilities before testing
begins unless other schedules can be arranged. All testing and disinfection
shall be completed prior to connection to any existing line.
   (B)   The installer of the sewer line shall check the lines for infiltration
or exfiltration before they are put in service. Infiltration in excess of 200
gallons per day per inch-mile of sewer will result in having the contractor go
over the lines, ascertain where the leakage exists and repair the lines to the
extend necessary to bring the infiltration down within acceptable limits. If
exfiltration testing is required or necessary, an allowance of an additional
10% of gallonage shall be permitted for each additional two feet head over a
basic two-foot minimum internal head. The contractor shall test only pipe of
the same diameter and maximum length of one mile at a time. All testing herein
shall be satisfactorily completed prior to connecting to the existing sewer
system. In lieu of the infiltration or exfiltration testing, an air test can be
conducted. Air testing shall be in accordance with the latest revisions of the
A.S.T.M. standards.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.207 FINAL GRADING AND LANDSCAPING.
   (A)   General. Fertilizing, seeding and mulching of any and all areas
disturbed during construction will follow within ten working days of the
installation of each pipe run (being from manhole to manhole or 300 feet of
water line). All plantings shall be maintained by the installer for a period of
one year after the completion of the work.
   (B)   Materials.
      (1)   Fertilizer. Lawn fertilizer shall be a complete fertilizer with
components derived from organic sources and shall contain the following
percentages by weight:
         (a)   Type 10-10-10: 10%;
         (b)   Nitrogen (ureaform): 10%; and
         (c)   Phosphoric acid: 10%.
      (2)   Potash. One-quarter of the nitrogen shall be in the form of
nitrates, one-quarter in the form of ammonia salts and one-half in the form of
natural organic nitrogen. Available phosphoric acid to be free from
superphosphate, bone or tankage. Potash shall be sulphate or potash. Elements
shall conform to the standards of the Association of Official Chemists.
      (3)   Storage. Commercial fertilizer shall be stored in weatherproof
storage areas and in a manner that effectiveness will not be impaired.
      (4)   Ground limestone. At least 50% shall pass a No. 200 U.S.S. mesh
sieve. At least 90% shall pass a No. 100 U.S.S. mesh sieve. One hundred percent
shall pass a No. 10 U.S.S. mesh sieve. Total carbonates shall not be less than
80% of 44.8% calcium oxide equivalent; for purposes of calculation, total
carbonates shall be considered as calcium carbonate.
      (5)   Grass seed. Grass seed shall be new crop mechanically mixed seeds
in the following seed mixture proportions:
 
% Mixture Seed Variety       %Purity %Germination
80        Kentucky 31        98      97
20        Kentucky Bluegrass 98      85
 
   (C)   Seed bed preparation. The seed bed shall be prepared by pulverizing
the soil to a depth of three inches. Good surface drainage must be provided,
allowances for settlement made and ground elevations adjusted accordingly.
Visible ponding will not be allowed. All stones, roots, sticks, rubbish and
other objectionable material shall be removed.
   (D)   Soil improvements. Soil additives shall be applied incorporated in an
approved manner into the topsoil at the following rates:
      (1)   Fertilizer: 30 pounds per 1,000 square feet of 10-10-10 fertilizer;
      (2)   Lime: 100 pounds per 100 square feet; and
      (3)   Superphosphate (0.20.0): 12 pounds per 1,000 square feet.
   (E)   Seeding. The seed bed must be in good, friable condition and has not
become muddy or hard at the time seeding is to be performed. Seed shall be
applied at the rate of eight pounds per 1,000 square feet and raked or tilled
into the topsoil with the resulting furrows running across the natural slope of
the ground.
   (F)   Mulching.
      (1)   Dried straw shall be uniformly spread (approximately one-fourth of
the ground should remain visible to avoid smothering seedlings) over the area
at the rate of 90 pounds per 1,000 square feet. The straw shall be sprayed with
liquid asphalt to bond it together and anchor it in place.
      (2)   Liquid asphalt (thinned with kerosene) used during freezing weather
shall be either rapid or medium curing, applied at a rate of 200 gallons per
ton of straw (approximately nine gallons per 1,000 square feet).
      (3)   Emulsified asphalt (thinned with water) used when temperatures are
less severe shall be rapid curing only, applied at a rate of 150 gallons per
ton of straw (approximately seven gallons per 1,000 square feet).
   (G)   Maintenance.
      (1)   Maintenance shall consist of watering, weed and pest control
(within established lawns), fertilization, erosion repair, reseeding and all
else necessary to establish a vigorous health and uniform stand of grass.
      (2)   All areas and spots which do not show a uniform stand of grass, for
any reason, shall be treated repeatedly until a uniform stand is attained.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.208 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL MEASURES.
   (A)   All work shall be done in accordance with and subject to the
limitations of the state's rules and regulations for erosion and sediment
control.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the installer of the system to
obtain approval of a sedimentation and erosion control plan from the State
Department of Natural Resources and Community Development prior to land
disturbing activities.
   (C)   All erosion control measures shall be maintained until no longer
required for sediment control; at which time, they shall be dismantled and
removed from site.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
PUMP STATIONS
§ 50.220 GENERAL.
   (A)   The developer shall furnish and install two submersible non-clog
sewage pumps to deliver adequate GPM against a total head to be determined by
an engineering firm.
   (B)   The pump discharge size shall be four inches.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.221 PUMPS.
   Two effluent pumps shall be furnished with the system. The pumps shall have
a TDH, to be determined by an engineering firm, to deliver adequate GPM. The
pumps shall be complete with power cable and pump removal system.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.222 CONTROLS.
   (A)   A weatherproof NEMA 3R control panel shall be mounted in the location
shown on the plans. Mounted in the cover of the panel shall be H-O-A switches,
run lights and elapsed time counters for pumps No. 1 and 2 and a high water
alarm light and audible alarm. The panel shall be situated so that the alarm
light can be easily observed. The alarms shall be powered on a separate circuit
from that providing power to the pumps. A 115-VAC ground fault weatherproof
receptacle shall be provided outside the control panel. A 20-amp breaker shall
be supplied in the panel for this receptacle. An adequately sized 115-VAC
transformer shall be supplied for all control receptacle voltage.
   (B)   The control panel shall contain all the necessary equipment to control
and alternate the two pumps. The pumps will be operated using the wastewater
level in the wet well. Three mercury float switches shall be utilized in the
wet well: pump off, lead pump on, lag pump on and high water alarm.
   (C)   The panel and all control equipment shall be properly protected
against damage resulting from lightning and intense solar heating. Wiring from
the control panel to the pumps shall be contained in water-proof, gas-proof
conduits with no splices inside the pump chamber. No junction boxes will be
allowed inside the wet well. Wiring for the pumps and level controls will be
continuous with no splices from the floats to the control panel. Electric
cables will be supported in wet well by clamps and a cable holder attached to
the opening.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.223 GUIDE RAIL INSTALLATION.
   (A)   A lift-out rail assembly shall permit easy removal and installation of
the pump and lower check valve without the necessity of personnel entering the
basin. Cast iron guide brackets with guide yokes of sufficient bearing strength
to prevent binding shall bolt to the pump. The yokes shall mate over guide
rails of a minimum of one-inch galvanized pipe running between an upper rail
support casting. A lower discharge nozzle, downstream from the check valve,
shall be guided into a chambered cavity in the discharge casing. A shoulder on
the nozzle shall bottom on the discharge casting when the pump is properly
located and shims shall not be required to insure alignment for a leak tight
seal. Dual O rings shall effect a hydraulic seal around the nozzle when it is
in its operating position. A brace, easily removable from the top of each
basin, shall be provided to lock the parts together, preventing line surges
from breaking the seal and allowing leakage. The discharge case shall have a
tapped discharge opening with piping to a coupling through the basin wall.
   (B)   The discharge case shall be securely bolted to the basin floor and
arranged in a way that slight deflection caused by the discharge pipe will not
cause the quick-connect pump flange to leak.
   (C)   A lifting chain shall be securely fastened to the top of the pump and
to the top of the basin to facilitate removal of the pump. The chain shall be a
minimum of one-fourth-inch welded link type or of adequate strength required to
effectively support the weight of the pump assembly while removing and
installing.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.224 WET WELL.
   (A)   Each wet well shall be constructed of precast concrete and shall meet
the dimension requirements noted on the plans. Each precast wet well shall be
furnished and installed as specified herein.
   (B)   Excavation shall be made to the required depth and the foundation on
which the wet well is to be set shall be approved by the engineer. The
excavation shall include the removal of obstructions and unsuitable materials
for a good foundation. The excavation shall allow for a minimum of 12-inch
thick bedding of crushed stone under the wet well to a width one foot wider
than the outside wall of the wet well.
   (C)   (1)   The base, barrel and flat top slab of the wet well shall be
constructed from precast, reinforced sections, staked to form the wet well and
manufactured according to the latest revision of A.S.T.M. C-478 and AASHTO M-
199.
      (2)   Sections shall be joined with mastic material and grouted to
provide a water-tight connection.
      (3)   Penetrations for the piping shall be made by using flexible
connectors made of high quality rubber or synthetic rubber which is precast
into the sections; or provide a water-tight connection by applying a waterproof
grout to all sections disturbed in the installation process.
      (4)   All work in the wet well shall be inspected and approved by the
Engineer.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.225 BASKETS.
   Baskets shall meet the outlines and specifications as noted in Standard TOB
- 26.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS
§ 50.240 GENERAL.
   The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the local
government bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation measurement,
sampling and testing pertinent to discharge to the public sewer in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter upon due notice.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.241 OBTAINING INFORMATION.
   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees are authorized to
obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing
on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater disposal system. The
industry may withhold information considered confidential. The industry must
establish that the revelation to the public of the information in question
might result in an advantage to competitors.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.242 SAFETY RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   While performing the necessary work on private properties, the
Superintendent or duly authorized employees of the local government shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises establishment by the
company; and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to local
government employees; and the local government shall indemnify the company
against loss or damage to its property by local government employees and
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the company and growing out of the gauging and sampling
operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company
to maintain safe conditions.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.243 ENTRANCE PERMITTED.
   The Superintendent or other duly authorized employees of the local
government bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter, upon due notice, all private properties through which the local
government holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair and
maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within the
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement, shall be done
in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement pertaining to
the private property involved.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
ESTABLISHMENT OF REVENUE SYSTEM
§ 50.255 GENERAL.
   A user charge shall be assessed to all users by the local government in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Previous unit charges levied by
ordinance for the operation, maintenance and replacement of the wastewater
disposal system are hereby repealed. The local government may, under applicable
statutes of the state and town ordinances, levy ad valorem taxes for the
general obligation bond principal and interest payment and any other provided
by law not related to the operation, maintenance and replacement of the works
of the system.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.256 USER CHARGE SYSTEM BIANNUAL REVIEW.
   The local government shall, not less frequently than biannually, prepare an
estimate of anticipated costs for each category of user charge for the
forthcoming fiscal year(s). These estimates shall be made in the form of a rate
ordinance and shall be proposed to the local government for enactment.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.257 USER CHARGE PREEMPTS.
   The user charge system shall take precedence over any terms or conditions of
agreements or contracts which are inconsistent with the requirements of § 204
(b)(1)(A) of the Clean Water Act.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.258 BASIS OF USER CHARGE
   (A)   The unit charges for debt service, operation, maintenance and routine
replacement shall consist of a fixed monthly capacity charge and a variable
charge based on usage. The fixed monthly capacity charge shall include an
allowance for operation and maintenance costs resulting from extraneous flows
(i.e., inflow and infiltration).
   (B)   User rates in effect shall be those established and approved by the
Town Council.
   (C)   All users shall be notified, at least annually and in conjunction with
their regular bill, of the rate for the user charge which is attributable to
the wastewater treatment services.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.259 SEWER FINANCIAL CONTROLS.
   The user charge system shall include financial control methodology adequate
to accurately account for all revenues generated and expenditures incurred as a
result of operation of the POTW. Surcharges will be assessed to each user
discharging excessive strength wastewater or toxic wastewater which causes an
increase in the cost of managing the effluent or sludge from the POTW.
Surcharges shall be established in accordance with §
50.338. (See also §
50.462.) Decreasing block rates will not be used, nor will customers outside
the corporate limits be charged higher rates, without identifying the costs
used to justify the higher rates.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
USER PENALTIES FOR SEWER SYSTEM
§ 50.270 FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   The Town Council hereby finds that this chapter which provides for a system
of charges for users of the sewage collection and treatment works, requires the
adoption of an ordinance not less frequently than biannually to establish unit
charges under the user charge system and the industrial cost recovery system.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.271 RATES IN EFFECT.
   The unit charges for debt service, operation, maintenance and routine
replacement shall consist of a fixed monthly capacity charge and a variable
charge based on usage. The rates currently in effect and approved by the Town
Council shall be applied to all users.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.272 EXCESSIVE STRENGTH WASTEWATER.
   The unit charge for wastewater of excessive strength shall be:
   (A)   $0.0376 per pound of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) in excess of that
contained in the volume of wastewater with a BOD concentration of 400 mg/l; and
   (B)   $0.0433 per pound of total suspended solids (TSS) in excess of that
contained in the volume of wastewater with a TSS concentration of 400 mg/l.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.273 TOXIC RATES.
   The unit charge for toxics shall be developed by the Town Manager for each
specific applicable user.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.274 MONITORING RATE.
   The unit charge for monitoring shall be developed by the Town Manager for
each specific applicable user.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
WATER AND SEWER EXTENSIONS
§ 50.285 GENERAL.
   The intent of this subchapter is to set forth standard procedures whereby
water and sewer connections may be made, and whereby mains may be extended
where no mains are presently laid. An EXTENSION refers to the continuation of a
water main beyond its currently existing limits, while a CONNECTION is defined
as the linking of pipes serving a single customer to an existing water main.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 1-15-2019)
§ 50.286 CONNECTIONS TO PROPERTIES WITHIN THE TOWN LIMITS.
   (A)   Except in the case of connections in the secondary pressure zone
(which are governed by §
50.292 below), and consistent with the requirements of §§
50.105 through
50.124 herein, the town will make a water or sewer connection to a property
wholly within the corporate limits upon the request of the property owner. The
property owner shall bear the cost of such connection.
   (B)   In the event a property is not wholly within the corporate town
limits, the town shall provide a connection upon the owner agreeing to pursue
voluntary annexation of the part of the property not in the town limits, and
executing a petition to annex or such agreement to annex in the future as the
town may at its option require.
(Ord. passed 1-15-2019)
§ 50.287 EXTENSIONS OF SERVICE TO DEVELOPED PROPERTY WITHIN THE TOWN.
   Consistent with the requirements of §§
50.105 through
50.124 herein, upon the request of a property owner whose in-town property is
not served by a water or sewer line, the town shall extend, at its expense, its
water and sewer mains to serve already developed property, unless it determines
that the extension is unreasonable for the following reasons:
   (A)   The cost of service extensions is excessive in terms of the number of
customers to be served or because of topographical engineering, technical or
other problems;
   (B)   The provision of service will adversely affect the supply of water to
other customers; and/or
   (C)   Other good and sufficient reason.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 1-15-2019)
§ 50.288 EXTENSIONS TO AND WITHIN NEW SUBDIVISIONS AND OTHER NEW DEVELOPMENTS
WITHIN THE TOWN LIMITS.
   (A)   The responsibility for extending water and sewer mains to and within
new subdivisions or to and within other new developments lies with the
subdivider or developer.
   (B)   Water distribution mains to serve undeveloped subdivisions generally
will be handled as follows.
      (1)   The developer will submit plans for review and approval by the
town, its engineer, the State Department of Human Resources and the State
Department of Natural Resources and Community Development.
      (2)   Mains will be installed in accordance with the approved plans.
   (C)   Extensions of water mains to other new development within the town’s
service area generally will be handled as follows.
      (1)   The plans for the extension will be submitted for review and
approval by the town, its engineer, the State Department of Human Resources,
and the State Department of Natural Resources and Community Development.
      (2)   The mains will be installed in accordance with the approved plans.
   (D)   The cost of extending water or sewer mains within new subdivisions or
other new developments shall be borne by the subdivider or developer; except
that, if the town requires water mains within a subdivision or other new
development that are larger than those necessary to serve the project and are
so located to serve other properties, the town shall reimburse the developer
for any additional costs incurred as a result of installing the oversized
mains. The reimbursements shall be paid or credited, at the town’s option, at
the time the mains are connected to the town’s system.
   (E)   The subdivider or developer shall provide all necessary utility
easements to the town, which easements shall include a minimum-25-foot-wide
easement area for maintenance, repair or improvements, and access for the same,
and such additional easement area as may be required by the Administrator, in
the Administrator’s discretion, in light of topography or other relevant
circumstances.
   (F)   All costs required to be borne by the subdivider or developer shall be
paid before service is initiated by the town.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 1-15-2019)
§ 50.289 REPLACEMENT OF WATER AND/OR SEWER MAINS.
   Where it is necessary or desirable to replace or improve water and/or sewer
mains currently maintained by the town, benefitting property owners shall be
assessed according to G.S. §§ 160A-216 through 160A-239. If the town chooses to
replace water or sewer mains with mains larger than those previously in place,
benefitting property owners shall only be assessed the cost of replacing the
original-sized mains.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 1-15-2019)
§ 50.290 HARDSHIP CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE OF THE TOWN LIMITS FOR SINGLE-FAMILY AND
DUPLEX RESIDENTIAL DWELLINGS EXISTING AS OF JANUARY 1, 2018.
   (A)   No obligation to provide or continue to provide service.
      (1)   The town has no responsibility to provide water or sewer service to
property located outside the corporate limits, nor any continuing obligation to
provide water or sewer service after having voluntarily provided such service.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any grant of water or
sewer service to a property outside the town limits creates no property rights
for the property owner or such owner’s assignees or transferees, and may be
revoked at any time by the town for any or no reason.
      (2)   The town may allow new connections for hardship cases outside the
town limits as follows in this section.
   (B)   Hardship connections outside of the town limits for single-family and
duplex residential dwellings existing as of January 1, 2018. Where a service
connection is available, the Administrator may authorize a service connection
for water or sewer services to a habitable, single-family or duplex,
residential dwelling already existing as of January 1, 2018, subject to all
other relevant provisions of this code, under the following circumstances:
      (1)   As to a request for a water connection, when the applicant has been
approved for a hardship sewer connection per division (B)(2) below, or when the
applicant has shown a hardship as follows:
         (a)   The applicant has established, through clear and convincing
evidence, the current contamination of a residential well by toxins in amounts
determined by the North Carolina Department of Natural Resources or the United
States Environmental Protection Agency as harmful to human life or health; or
         (b)   The applicant has established, through clear and convincing
evidence, that an existing well cannot supply an adequate amount of water; and
that:
            1.   The lack of adequate water could not have been reasonably
predicted and was not reasonably foreseeable at the time the well was installed
or development of the property served was last undertaken;
            2.   No reasonable alternative exists for the provision of the
water to the property, including that no alternative well can be established
that will adequately provide water; and
            3.   The amount of water requested is limited to that needed for
the current use of the property served.
      (2)   As to a request for a sewer connection, when the applicant has been
approved for a water connection hardship per division (B)(1) above, or when the
applicant has shown a hardship by establishing through clear and convincing
evidence that:
         (a)   An existing septic or other wastewater system has or will soon
fail;
         (b)   Due to lot size or other feature of the property outside the
control of the applicant, not caused by the applicant and unknown to the
applicant at the time of the acquisition of the property, the system cannot be
repaired or an alternative wastewater system installed (e.g., if the unsuitable
lot size has been caused by the applicant or an entity related to the applicant
having subdivided the property originally served by the septic system, the
applicant shall not be entitled to claim a connection hardship);
         (c)   The lack of an adequate septic system or other wastewater system
could not have been reasonably predicted and was not reasonably foreseeable at
the time the current wastewater system was installed or development of the
property served was last undertaken;
         (d)   No other reasonable alternative exists for the provision of a
private wastewater system to the property; and
         (e)   No change in use of the property is planned or anticipated.
   (C)   Hardship connections for vacant lots and existing single-family
dwellings located in single-family neighborhoods previously connected to town
service. A vacant (undeveloped) lot or single-family dwelling located outside
the town limits may be approved for connection to an existing water or sewer
main in the following circumstances:
      (1)   The vacant lot or dwelling is located in a neighborhood of at least
ten single-family lots and as of January 1, 2018 (i) at least of one-half of
the lots in the neighborhood are already developed with single-family
dwellings; and (ii) at least one-half of existing dwellings in the neighborhood
are already connected to an existing water or sewer main;
      (2)   The vacant lot or dwelling is subject to deed restrictions and/or
conditions, covenants and restrictions as of title record that limit the use of
the lot to one single-family home.
      (3)   The property owner voluntarily agrees to develop the vacant lot in
compliance with the Town's current development regulations relating to (i) soil
erosion and sediment control; (ii) stormwater control; (iii) viewshed
protection; and (iv) steep slope development. For these purposes, a lot will be
deemed subject to regulations just as it would be if it was within the
corporate limits of the town and zoned in the R-A district. The Director of the
Town's Planning Department shall make all determinations with respect to the
applicability and requirements of the town's development regulations, in the
Director's sole discretion, and no appeal shall lie from any such
determination.
      (4)   As used in this division (C), the term "neighborhood" shall mean a
defined area of lots laid out on a recorded plat and sharing the same access
road(s).
   (D)   Conditions of approval. If a connection is allowed under this section,
such approval shall only be granted upon the following additional conditions:
      (1)   The property owner shall agree to the conditions set forth in this
division (D) and any other conditions provided in this section, in writing in
whatever form and at whatever date such agreement is requested by the town. The
agreement may be recorded as of record with the County Register of Deeds as the
town deems advisable in its sole discretion.
      (2)   In the town's discretion and upon its request, a property owner
granted a water connection shall also connect to the town's sewer, if a sewer
connection is available, and vice versa. Further, the owner shall commit in
writing to connect into the town's water system or sewer system should the town
request at any time that such a connection be made.
      (3)   The town shall provide the connection only upon the property owner
agreeing to voluntary annexation of the property.
         (a)   The property owner shall petition for annexation if requested to
do so by town staff. A complete petition shall be filed no more than 90 days
after a hardship connection has been approved or, in the case of a vacant lot,
prior to approval of the connection.
         (b)   In the event the town does not request immediate filing of a
petition for annexation, the property owner shall execute such agreement to
annex in the future as the town may require within 30 days of being approved
for service or at such later time as the town may require or request.
         (c)   Whether or not an agreement to annex such as is contemplated in
the immediately foregoing division is executed, the property owner agrees to
petition for annexation within 30 days of receiving a written request by the
town that the owner make such petition. The town may make such a request at any
time of its choosing, in its sole discretion, and may repeat such a request
however many times it sees fit; provided, however, that a property owner shall
not be responsible to pay more than one annexation petition fee.
      (4)   Any connection is granted only as to the structures existing on the
property as of the date the connection is approved or, in the case of a vacant
lot, for one single family home. Following the making of a connection, service
automatically shall be terminated upon 90 days advance written notice in the
event a substantial change is planned for or made to the property. For purposes
of this provision, "substantial change" shall mean any remodeling,
redevelopment, change of use or other modification resulting in:
         (a)   An increase of more than 500 square feet of the footprint of the
structure(s) on the property;
         (b)   An increase of more than 50% of the gross floor area of the
structure(s) on the property; or
         (c)   A change in the use or occupancy of the dwelling resulting in a
materially different or more intense use (e.g., from single-family to duplex,
multi-family or commercial).
      (5)   The owner shall sign a statement affirming the owner's
understanding and agreement that the owner has no right to service, that the
town is providing the service without any commitment to maintain the service in
the future, and that the town may terminate service at any time should the
owner fail to abide by any of the conditions set forth in this section or for
any other reason considered good and sufficient by the Town Council in its sole
discretion.
      (6)   The conditions and restrictions set forth in this section and any
additional covenants, conditions and restrictions set forth in any agreement
between the owner and the town regarding a water or sewer connection approved
under this section run with the real property at issue, and are binding on the
owner and the owner's successors and assigns and on all those claiming an
interest in the real property by, through, or under such owner, in perpetuity.
   (E)   Procedures.
      (1)   An application shall be submitted on such forms and with such
accompanying information and documentation as the Administrator deems
appropriate. The Administrator may require additional information or
documentation as the Administrator deems necessary, and may deny an application
that is determined to be incomplete. A decision by the Administrator that an
application is incomplete is final and unappealable, but a new application may
be submitted.
      (2)   The Administrator may decline to make a decision on a complete
application, in which event the application shall be heard by the Town Council
as provided at division(E)(4) below.
      (3)   Except for a denial based on the incompleteness of an application,
a decision by the Administrator to deny or terminate a hardship service
connection may be appealed to the Town Council. The appeal must be filed with
the Administrator, on such form as the Administrator may provide, no more than
ten calendar days following the applicant’s receipt of written notice of the
denial or termination. The applicant shall be conclusively presumed to have
received written notice of the denial or termination three days after such
notice was mailed to the applicant’s address provided on the application or
(for terminations) used for billing purposes.
      (4)   The Town Council shall hear and determine an appeal of a denial or
termination, or an application not decided by the Administrator, on a de novo
basis, according to such quasi-judicial procedures as it may adopt, and its
decision shall not be subject to further appeal. Any hardship connection
permitted by Town Council shall be approved, subject to the conditions set
forth at division (D) of this section.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed --2017; Ord. passed --; Ord. passed --;
Ord. passed 1-15-2019; Ord. passed - -)
§ 50.291 EXTENSIONS AND NON-HARDSHIP CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE OF THE TOWN LIMITS
PROHIBITED EXCEPT UPON APPROVAL OF ANNEXATION AND ZONING; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Except in cases of hardship connections approved pursuant to §
50.290, no water or sewer connection or extension will be allowed until the
property owner has petitioned and been approved for annexation and the property
has been zoned.
   (B)   Exceptions for certain government-owned properties. In its discretion
based upon its weighing of the public interests, and upon such additional
conditions as it may choose to impose, Town Council may authorize a water or
sewer connection of property located outside the town corporate limits if the
property is owned by the State of North Carolina, the town, or Watauga County
and either:
      (1)   The property is to be used for public utility purposes as
authorized per G.S. § 116-35 (regarding university utilities); or
      (2)   The property is to be developed with the financial assistance of
Watauga County and/or the town pursuant to the authority granted by G.S. § 158-
7.1 for local government support of economic and industrial development. For
purposes of this division, “financial assistance” is intended to include the
provision of a leasehold interest in real estate, but is not intended to
include the mere provision of water or sewer or other utility infrastructure
itself. This exception is not intended to include any residential housing
project of any nature.
   (C)   In order to proceed with an application under division (B), the
applicant must present to the Town Council a general development plan setting
forth planned uses, siting of structures, sketch drawings of buildings/
elevations, and any such additional information, drawings, or plans as may be
required by Council. However, the foregoing provisions is not intended to limit
the Council’s discretion as to what information, drawings, or plans it may
require. For example, in its discretion, the Council may require documentation
sufficient to meet the requirements for site-specific plan approval under the
town’s development ordinance.
   (D)   Any water or sewer connection granted under division (B) is limited to
the use of development site as presented in the general development plan
presented to Council. In the event the use of the site is substantially changed
or the property sold to a non-governmental entity, the Director shall provide
30 days written notice and disconnect the water/sewer connection.
(Ord. passed 1-15-2019; Ord. passed 8-9-2023)
§ 50.292 EXTENSIONS AND CONNECTIONS IN THE SECONDARY PRESSURE ZONE.
   In general, the SECONDARY PRESSURE ZONE includes all areas at an altitude
above 3,400 feet above sea level. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, requests for extensions and connections into the secondary pressure
zone may only be approved if the following additional criteria are satisfied.
   (A)   Requests for extensions into the secondary pressure zone. No service
extensions into the secondary pressure zone shall be considered for approval
unless:
      (1)   The property for which service is requested was located inside the
town limits on or before March 8, 2007; and
      (2)   The applicant agrees to adhere to town secondary pressure zone
specifications, and among other things, agrees at its expense to:
         (a)   Use minimum-eight-inch pipe diameter;
         (b)   Provide all needed booster pumping station(s) of EFI design with
fire pumping capabilities;
         (c)   Provide a minimum-100,000-gallon, welded-joint, steel storage
tank;
         (d)   Install pressure protection for each individual water service;
and
         (e)   Install dataflow systems radio telemetry compatible with
existing town system; and
      (3)   All portions of a proposed extension are below 3,620 feet in
elevation.
   (B)   Request for connections into the secondary pressure zone. A connection
to an existing water main in a secondary pressure zone may be approved in cases
in which such connection:
      (1)   Creates no negative impact on the town’s distribution system;
      (2)   Allows adequate pressure to be maintained as may be necessary to
comply with the requirements of the Fire Department and applicable fire codes;
      (3)   Results in no additional costs to the town; and
      (4)   Otherwise complies with the requirements of the town water and
sewer code for connection to the town’s water system.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 11-16-2017; Ord. passed --; Ord. passed --;
Ord. passed 1-15-2019)
§ 50.293 EXTENSIONS AND CONNECTIONS MADE BY OTHER THAN TOWN FORCES.
   (A)   All additions to the town’s water or sewer system installed by other
than town forces, whether inside or outside the town, shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, as well as other town
specifications and requirements. Among other matters, the specifications shall
govern the size of all mains, their location, grade, materials used, manner of
installation and provision for future extensions.
   (B)   (1)   No construction on any addition to the town’s water or sewer
system shall commence until detailed plans have been reviewed and approved by
the Administrator.
      (2)   The plans shall include whatever information the Administrator
deems reasonably necessary to determine whether the proposed extension complies
with all applicable town specifications and requirements.
   (C)   To avoid excessive utility cuts and to protect street surfaces, the
town may require that whenever extensions of water or sewer mains are to be
made to properties or within new subdivisions, laterals be extended to all
properties expected to tap onto the water or sewer mains.
   (D)   By making application for extension to the town’s water or sewer
system, the person responsible for the extension agrees to indemnify and hold
the town harmless for all loss, cost, damage, liability or expense resulting
from injury to any person or property arising out of the extension of the
service mains.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 1-15-2019)
§ 50.294 INSPECTION BY TOWN OF WORK DONE BY OTHERS.
   (A)   All work on the extension of water or sewer mains not performed by
town forces (whether inside or outside the town) shall be subject to inspection
by the town, and must be completed in conformance with the town’s
specifications and requirements as determined by the Administrator.
   (B)   If, in the judgment of the Administrator, there is a demonstrated lack
of competent supervision by a contractor, the Administrator may, at his or her
option:
      (1)   Halt work until approved supervision is obtained and the work done
in accordance with the town’s specifications and requirements; or
      (2)   Provide constant inspection by town personnel at the expense of the
applicant.
   (C)   Inspection of a project by the town does not consist of or imply
supervision. The person requesting the extension is solely responsible for
ensuring that the project is completed according to town specifications.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 1-15-2019)
§ 50.295 EASEMENTS NECESSARY FOR LINE EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   Service mains shall be extended only within the rights-of-way of
public streets; except that extensions may be made within private streets or
property when the town is furnished with the necessary easements.
   (B)   Whenever easements are required under this section, the responsibility
for obtaining and furnishing the town with the easements (including all costs
associated with easement acquisition) shall lie with the person seeking the
line extension.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 1-15-2019)
§ 50.296 DEDICATION OF WATER AND SEWER LINE EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   All water and sewer extensions constructed and connected with the
facilities of the town shall be dedicated to and become the property of the
town upon completion and acceptance by the town. Connection to the town’s
facilities shall constitute dedication of an extension. The property owner
dedicating the extension shall demonstrate the legal authority to do so.
   (B)    Following dedication and acceptance by the town, the town shall have
exclusive control of all water or sewer extensions and shall be responsible for
their maintenance, repair and operation. However, the dedicator of the
extension shall guarantee the entire project against any failure or deficiency,
including but not limited to, defective material and workmanship, for a period
of 12 months from the date of acceptance, and shall be responsible for the
costs of repair and replacement, associated engineering costs, and all damages
to persons or property which result from any such failure or deficiency. The
town shall require security for such guarantee as allowed by law.
   (C)   A property owner dedicating water or sewer extension infrastructure in
connection with the dedication of street infrastructure shall comply with Town
Code §§
96.045 through
96.047.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 1-15-2019; Ord. passed 9-14-2021)
WATER CONSERVATION REGULATIONS
§ 50.305 APPLICABILITY.
   Whenever the conditions described in §
50.311 are met, a water shortage stage at the level indicated shall be declared
in accordance the procedures and regulations of this subchapter. Recognizing
that there may be situations in which those "triggers" do not fully reflect the
threat to the town's water supply, however, even if the conditions have not
been strictly met, in the event it appears to the Director of Public Utilities
that outflow from the town water system may exceed its raw water supply or
transmission capabilities, the Director of Public Utilities shall notify the
Town Manager. The Town Manager, following consultation with the Town Council,
may declare a Stage I Water Shortage requesting voluntary water conservation by
customers. If voluntary conservation measures fail to adequately decrease
outflow from the system or if conditions exist that make it likely in the
opinion of the Town Manager that voluntary measures will be inadequate; the
Town Manager may, after consultation with the Director of Public Utilities or
following consultation with the Town Council, declare a Stage II or Stage III
Water Shortage. In exercising this authority, the Town Manager shall consider
water shortage levels and available sources or supply, draw-patterns and
availability of water from other sources. However, this subchapter is not
intended to supersede or amend the town's responsibilities under another
interconnect agreement with another water system.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.306 ANNOUNCEMENT OF WATER SHORTAGE.
   (A)   If a water shortage is declared, the Director of Public Utilities
shall initiate an extensive publicity campaign, using public media and other
measures to the public's knowledge about an impending or existing water
shortage. All publicity campaigns shall at a minimum inform the public of the
existing or anticipated level of the shortage and the implications of a
shortage, in terms of voluntary and involuntary restrictions on the use of
water and the campaign shall encourage and recommend specific conservation
measures.
   (B)   The Director of Public Utilities shall also inform all employees of
the Public Utilities Department and town of the impending or existing shortage.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.307 GOALS FOR EACH WATER SHORTAGE.
   (A)   The water use reduction goal for a Stage I Water Shortage is 10%
average daily demand for the same calendar month each of the previous three
calendar years.
   (B)   The water use reduction goal for a Stage II Water Shortage is 25%
average daily demand for the same calendar month each of the previous three
calendar years.
   (C)   The water use reduction goal for a Stage III Water Shortage is 50%
average daily demand for the same calendar month each of the previous three
calendar years.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.308 SPECIFIC CONSERVATION METHODS AND RECOMMENDATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL
WATER SHORTAGES.
   (A)   During Stage I Water Shortage each method shall be voluntary unless it
is superceded explicitly by the mandatory provisions of §§
50.309 or
50.310:
      (1)   Reusing water whenever possible unless the reuse is prohibited
under this code (e.g., black water or grey water);
      (2)   Minimizing vehicle washing;
      (3)   Limiting lawn, garden and plant watering to the minimum necessary
for the vegetation to survive;
      (4)   Minimizing use of potable water to wash down outside areas such as
sidewalks, patios, parking lots, service bays or aprons and the like;
      (5)   Refraining from allowing faucets to run while shaving or rinsing
dishes;
      (6)   Limiting the use of washing machines and dishwashers and when used,
operating only fully loaded;
      (7)   Taking showers instead of baths and limiting showers to no more
than four minutes;
      (8)   Avoiding flushing toilets with each single use;
      (9)   Using flow restrictive and water saving devices as much as
possible;
      (10)   Limiting hours of operation of water-cooled air conditioners; and
      (11)   Taking all other measures which the customer or Director
recognizes will conserve water use.
   (B)   During Stage I, Stage II and Stage III Water Shortages, the above non-
exclusive conservation methods shall be encouraged or required.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.309 STAGE II WATER SHORTAGE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   During Stage II Water Shortage, it shall be unlawful and prohibited
for any town customer, including residential, commercial and institutional
users or any other entity, to use or permit the use of water from the town
water system for the following purposes:
      (1)   Watering an athletic field, golf course, park, lawn, grass,
shrubbery, tree, flower, outside plant or garden, except in accordance with a
schedule approved by the Director of Public Utilities, who, in the Director's
sole discretion, shall ordinarily only allow the watering by hand-held hose or
container or by drip irrigation system, but may prohibit the activities
entirely;
      (2)   Delaying new landscape work until the water shortage has ended; and
utilize Xeri-Scaping and/or water efficient landscaping wherever landscaping
work is installed; (Xeri-Scaping is the use of native plants.)
      (3)   Filling or refilling a swimming pool or wading pool, hot tub or
spa;
      (4)   Washing an automobile, truck, trailer, boat, airplane or any other
type of mobile equipment or motor vehicle unless a permitted water reclamation
or reuse system is used;
      (5)   Washing down an outside area, including, but not limited to, a
street, driveway, service station apron, parking lot, office building, exterior
of existing or newly-constructed home or other building, sidewalk or patio,
except pursuant to specific authorization by the town;
      (6)   Using water from a public or private fire hydrant for any purpose
other than fire suppression, testing, maintaining water quality or similar
public emergency;
      (7)   Operating or inducing water into any ornamental fountain, pool or
pond or other structure making similar use of water;
      (8)   Serving drinking water in a restaurant, cafeteria or other food
establishment, except upon request;
      (9)   Operating a water-cooled air conditioner or other equipment that
does not recycle cooling water, except when the user has a diagnosed and
legitimate health need for the equipment;
      (10)   Using, in commercial eating establishments, utensils and plates
that must be washed if disposable or biodegradable utensils and plates can be
effectively used;
      (11)   Using water for any unnecessary purpose after being warned by the
Director or designee to discontinue the use; and
      (12)   Wasting water intentionally.
   (B)   During a Stage II Water Shortage:
      (1)   All commercial and institutional customers are encourage to undergo
a water audit by the Director or his or her designee and, following the audit,
come into full compliance with the audit recommendations; and
      (2)   Total water consumption may be limited and a surcharge imposed upon
water system customers by specific action of the Town Council.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.310 STAGE III WATER SHORTAGE RESTRICTIONS AND MEASURES.
   (A)   During a Stage III Water Shortage, medical facilities shall be the
highest priority for available water. To protect the water supply for that and
other essential purposes, it shall be unlawful and prohibited for any town
customer, including residential, commercial and institutional users or any
other entity, to use or permit the use of water from the town water system for
the following purposes:
      (1)   Using water in a way prohibited by §
50.309, supra, unless superseded by this section;
      (2)   Using water for any outdoor use other than in an emergency; or
      (3)   Using in commercial eating establishments utensils and plates that
must be washed.
   (B)   During a Stage III Water Shortage:
      (1)   All commercial and industrial customers must fully cooperate with a
water audit requested and scheduled by the Director or his or her designee.
Following the audit or if the customer has been previously audited, the
customer must come into full compliance with the audit recommendations within
ten days of the declaration of the water shortage or the audit, whichever is
later, unless due to the cost of full compliance the Director, in writing,
extends the time for full compliance to another date certain; and
      (2)   Total water consumption may be limited and a surcharge imposed upon
water system customers by specific action of the Town Council.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.311 RIVER OPERATING CONDITIONS.
 
Stage River Operating Conditions
      Water level reading of >8.0, but <7.85 at intake in South-Fork and/or
1     discharge at U.S.G.S. gage 03161000 is <300 cfs for >14 days and/or >80%
      of production capacity for 3 consecutive days or, at any time as
      recommended by Public Utilities staff
      Water level reading of <7.85, but >7.6 at intake in South-Fork and/or
2     discharge at U.S.G.S. gage 03161000 is <150 cfs for >10 days and/or >90%
      of production capacity for 3 consecutive days at any time as recommended
      by Public Utilities staff
      Water level reading of <7.6 at intake in South-Fork or discharge at
3     U.S.G.S. gage 03161000 is <50 cfs or 100% of production capacity on any
      day or, at any time as recommended by Public Utilities staff
 
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.312 APPEALS.
   (A)   A customer whose service is disconnected or who receives a notice of
termination shall have the right to appeal, as set forth in §
50.117. In the event of a timely appeal, the termination order will be
suspended until an appeal decision has been issued.
   (B)   Customers do not have the right to a §
50.117 appeal of a citation, civil penalty or fee imposed by this section. When
a customer contends that a citation or civil penalty or fee was issued or
imposed in error, the customer may dispute the violation which gave rise to the
citation, civil penalty or fee by submitting to the Director information which
shows that the customer did not violate the pertinent section of this
subchapter. If the citation, civil penalty or fee is thereafter determined by
the Director to have been issued in error, the Director shall take appropriate
action to recall it.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.313 LIFTING OF RESTRICTIONS IMPOSED DURING A WATER SHORTAGE.
   A declared water shortage stage ends only when the Town Manager, after
consultation with the Town Council and upon recommendation of the Director of
Public Utilities, deems that the conditions which caused the shortage have
abated. The termination of a water shortage declaration shall be promptly and
extensively publicized.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
PRETREATMENT STANDARDS
§ 50.325 (RESERVED)
§ 50.326 (RESERVED)
§ 50.327 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Purpose and policy.
      (1)   This subchapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and
indirect contributors into the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the
town, and enables the town to comply with all applicable state and federal
laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and the general
pretreatment regulations (40 C.F.R. Ch. 1, Subch. N, part 403). The objectives
of this subchapter are:
         (a)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that
will interfere with the operation of the POTW or contaminate the resulting
sludge;
         (b)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that
will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into any waters of the
state or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;
         (c)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and
sludges from the POTW;
         (d)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the
operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW;
         (e)   To protect both town personnel who may be affected by
wastewater, sludge and effluent in the course of their employment, as well as
protecting the general public; and
         (f)   To ensure that the town complies with the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) for non-discharge permit conditions,
sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal and state laws to
which the POTW is subject.
      (2)   This subchapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the POTW, through the issuance of wastewater permits to certain
industrial wastewater contributors and through enforcement of general
requirements for the other contributors, authorizes monitoring and enforcement
activities, requires contributor reporting, and provides for the setting of
fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program
established herein.
      (3)   This subchapter shall apply to all contributors to the POTW, as
authorized by G.S. § 160A-312. The town shall designate an administrator of the
POTW and pretreatment program, hereafter referred to as the POTW Director.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the POTW Director shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this subchapter. Any powers granted to
or assigned to the POTW Director may be delegated by the POTW Director to other
appropriate town personnel.
      (4)   By discharging wastewater into the POTW, an industrial wastewater
contributor located within or outside the town limits agrees to comply with the
terms and conditions established in this subchapter, as well as any wastewater
permits, enforcement actions, or orders issued hereunder. These requirements
apply to every industrial wastewater contributor discharging into the
wastewater collection system owned by any satellite POTW.
   (B)   Definitions and abbreviations. Unless the context specifically
indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this
subchapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.
      ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
      APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Director of the Division of Water Quality of the
North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources.
      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF AN INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTOR. An
individual designated in a written and properly attested statement meeting the
following criteria:
         (a)   If the industrial wastewater contributor is a corporation or a
limited liability company, AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean:
            1.   The president, secretary or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principle business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy- or decision-making functions for the corporation or
company; or
            2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production or
operating facilities of the corporation or company, provided, the manager is
authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the
regulated facility, including having the explicit or implicit duty to make
major capital investment recommendations, and to initiate and direct
comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with
environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are
established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for
control mechanism requirements; and has the authority to sign documents in
accordance with corporate procedures.
         (b)   If the industrial wastewater contributor is a partnership or
sole proprietorship, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a general partner
or the proprietor, respectively.
         (c)   If the industrial wastewater contributor is a federal, state or
local government facility, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a director
or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility or their designee.
         (d)   The individuals described in divisions (a), (b) and (c) above
may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in
writing and notarized, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge
originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company and the written authorization is submitted to the town.
         (e)   If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of
this section must be submitted to the POTW Director prior to, or together with,
any reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter in wastewater under standard laboratory
procedures, as defined in 40 C.F.R. part 136, for five days at 20°C, usually
expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
      BYPASS. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a
contributor’s treatment facility.
      CATEGORICAL STANDARD. See NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD.
      COLLECTION SYSTEM PERMIT. A permit issued to the town to maintain and
operate a sewer system consisting of sewer lines, force mains and pump
stations, to at all times prevent discharge to land or surface waters, and to
prevent any contravention of groundwater standards or surface water standards.
      CONTRIBUTOR. Any person who is a source of wastewater, sanitary and/or
industrial, to the POTW.
      DISCHARGE. The introduction of wastewater from any industrial wastewater
contributor into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the
system).
      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA). The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for
the Administrator or other duly authorized official of the agency.
      GRAB SAMPLE. A sample taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis, with
no regard to the flow in the waste stream, and over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
      HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks, including but not
limited to, such holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers,
septic tanks and vacuum-pump trucks.
      INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTOR. Any person who is a source of
industrial wastewater to the POTW. This term is synonymous with the term
“industrial user” found in state and federal wastewater regulations, a person
who discharges non-domestic wastewater.
      INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW collection system,
treatment processes, operations or its sludge process, use or disposal, which
contributes to a violation of any requirement of the town's NPDES Permit,
collection system permit or non-discharge permit, or prevents sewage sludge use
or disposal in compliance with specified applicable state and federal statutes,
regulations or wastewater permits. The term includes prevention of sewage
sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with § 405 of the Act (33
U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to
the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA)(42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.), the Clean Air
Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria
(including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to Title IV of the SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use
employed by the town.
      MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding and
other materials, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes
and dialysis wastes.
      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any regulation containing
pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with § 307(b) and
(c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which applies to a specific category of
industrial wastewater contributors, and which appears in 40 C.F.R. Ch. 1,
Subch. N, parts 405 through 471.
      NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPEDS) PERMIT. A permit
issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342) or pursuant to G.S. §
143-215.1 by the state under delegation from EPA.
      NEW SOURCE.
         (a)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of a proposed categorical pretreatment standards under §
307(c) of the Act, which will be applicable to the source if the standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307(c); provided that:
            1.   The building, structure, facility or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located;
            2.   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
            3.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a NEW SOURCE if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of divisions (a)2. or (a)3. above, but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
         (c)   For purposes of this definition, construction of a NEW SOURCE
has commenced if the owner or operator has:
            1.   Begun or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
               a.   Any placement, assembly or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
               b.   Significant site preparation work, including clearing,
excavation or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities necessary
for the placement, assembly or installation of new source facilities or
equipment; or
            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment intended to be used in its operation within a
reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts that can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss and contracts for feasibility, engineering
and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this
definition.
      NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling that does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or
finished product.
      NON-DISCHARGE PERMIT. A disposal system issued by the state, pursuant to
G.S. § 143-215.1.
      PASS THROUGH. A discharge that exits the POTW into waters of the state in
quantities or concentrations that, alone or with discharges from other sources,
causes a violation, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation, of the town’s NPDES permit, non-discharge permit or a downstream
water quality standard.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local government
entities.
      pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed as
standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of
the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
      POLLUTANT. Any “waste” as defined in G.S. § 143-213(18), dredged spoil,
solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions,
medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt or industrial,
municipal and agricultural waste or wastewater with certain characteristics
(e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity and odor).
      POTW DIRECTOR. The Town of Boone Director of Public Utilities, as the
town administrator designated with the responsibility for the pretreatment
program and enforcement of this subchapter, or his or her designee.
      POTW TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.
      PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or otherwise
introducing the pollutants into a POTW, whether obtained by physical, chemical
or biological processes, or process changes or other means, except by diluting
the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
pretreatment standard.
      PRETREATMENT PROGRAM. The program for the control of pollutants
introduced into the POTW from industrial wastewater sources, which was
developed by the town in compliance with 40 C.F.R. part 403.8, and approved by
the approval authority in accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 403.11.
      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard.
      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Prohibited discharge standards, categorical
standards or local limits that apply to an industrial wastewater contributor.
      PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD. Absolute prohibitions against the
discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in § 50.328 of this
chapter and are developed under the authority of § 307(b) of the Act and 40
C.F.R. part 403.5.
      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works, as defined by §
212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), owned in this instance by the town. This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of town sanitary or industrial wastewater
of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only
if they convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For the purposes of this
subchapter, POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the
POTW from persons outside the town who are, by contract or agreement with the
town or in any other way, contributors to the town’s POTW.
      RESIDENTIAL. Relating to a structure that is used primarily as a
dwelling.
      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property, damage
to the contributor’s treatment facilities that causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources that can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY
DAMAGE does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU). Any industrial wastewater contributor
to the POTW who:
         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and
boiler blowdown wastewaters); or
         (b)   Contributes process wastewater that makes up 5% or more of the
NPDES or non-discharge permitted flow limit or organic capacity of the POTW
treatment plant. In this context, ORGANIC CAPACITY refers to BOD, TSS and
ammonia; or
         (c)   Is required to meet a national categorical pretreatment
standard; or
         (d)   Is found by the town, the Division of Water Quality or the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have the potential for impact, either
singly or in combination with other contributing industrial wastewater
contributors, on the POTW, the quality of sludge, the POTW's effluent quality,
or compliance with any pretreatment standards or requirements, provided that:
         (e)   Subject to approval authority approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907
(b), the town may determine that an industrial wastewater contributor meeting
the criteria in divisions (a) and (b) above has no reasonable potential for
adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment
standards or requirement, or for contributing to violations of its NPDES or
non-discharge permit, or for limiting the POTW's sludge disposal options, and
thus is not a significant industrial user; or
         (f)   Subject to approval authority approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907
(b), the town may determine that an industrial wastewater contributor meeting
the criteria in division (c) above meets the requirements of 40 C.F.R. part
403.3(v)(2), and thus is a non-significant categorical industrial user; or
         (g)   Subject to approval authority approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907
(b), the town may determine that an industrial wastewater contributor meeting
the criteria in division (c) above meets the requirements of 40 C.F.R. part
403.12(e)(3), and thus is a middle tier significant industrial user. Sampling
and inspection requirements may be cut in half as per 40 C.F.R. parts 403.8 (f)
(2)(v)(C) and 403.12 (e)(3).
      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE (SNC). A status of noncompliance of a
significant industrial user when one or more of the following criteria are met.
Additionally, any industrial wastewater contributor that meets the criteria in
divisions (c), (d) or (h) below shall also be considered SNC:
         (a)   CHRONIC VIOLATIONS OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGE LIMITS, defined here
as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter (not including flow) during a six-month period exceed (by
any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 C.F.R. part 403.3(l);
         (b)   TECHNICAL REVIEW CRITERIA (TRC) VIOLATIONS, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as
defined by 40 C.F.R. part 403.3(l), multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4
for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease; 1.2 for all other pollutants (except flow
and pH));
         (c)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 C.F.R. part 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit or narrative standard) that the town determines has caused,
alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through
(including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);
         (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant or wastewater that has caused
imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment, or has
resulted in the town's exercise of its emergency authority under 40 C.F.R. part
403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) and §§ 50.395 through 50.400 to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
         (e)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a
wastewater permit or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing
construction, and attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the
schedule date;
         (f)   Failure to provide reports for compliance schedule, self-
monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, and
periodic compliance reports within 45 days from the due date;
         (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance;
         (h)   Any other violation or group of violations that the town
considers to be significant.
      SLUG LOAD or SLUG DISCHARGE. Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration that has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass
through, or in any other way violates the town's regulations, wastewater permit
limits or wastewater permit conditions. This can include, but is not limited
to, a spill and other accidental discharge; discharge of a non-routine,
episodic nature; a non-customary batch discharge; or any other discharge that
can cause a violation of the prohibitive discharge standards in § 50.328 of
this chapter.
      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, issued by the Executive Office
of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987.
      STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and is removable by
laboratory filtering.
      UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the contributor. An UPSET does not
include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly
designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of
preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
      WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried industrial or sanitary wastes
from dwellings, commercial building, industrial facility, mobile source,
treatment facility or institution, together with any groundwater, surface water
and storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, that are
contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
         (a)    SANITARY WASTEWATER. The combination of liquid and water-
carried wastes discharged from toilets and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
         (b)   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. The combination of liquid and water-
carried wastes discharged as a result of any trade or process carried on at the
contributor's facility, and shall include the wastes from pretreatment
facilities and polluted cooling water.
      WASTEWATER PERMIT. As set forth in § 50.339 of this chapter.
         (a)   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (SIU) PERMIT. A wastewater permit
issued to an SIU.
         (b)   NON-SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER (NON-SIU) PERMIT. A wastewater
permit issued to any industrial wastewater contributor that does not meet the
definition of an SIU.
      WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, rivers, brooks, swamps, sounds, tidal
estuaries, bays, creeks, lakes, waterways, reservoirs and all other bodies or
accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public
or private, that are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state,
or any portion thereof.
   (C)   Interpretations.
      (1)   This chapter is gender neutral, the masculine gender shall include
the feminine and vice-versa.
      (2)   SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissive or discretionary.
      (3)   The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural,
and the plural shall include the singular, as indicated by the context of its
use.
   (D)   Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this
subchapter, shall have the designated meanings:
      BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand.
      C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
      COD. Chemical oxygen demand.
      EPA. Environmental Protection Agency.
      gpd. Gallons per day.
      G.S. North Carolina General Statutes.
      l. Liter.
      mg. Milligrams.
      mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
      NCAC. North Carolina Administrative Code.
      NPDES. National pollutant discharge elimination system.
      O&M. Operation and maintenance.
      POTW. Publicly owned treatment works.
      RCRA. Resources Conservation and Recovery Act.
      SIC. Standard industrial classification.
      SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act.
      TKN. Total kjeldahl nitrogen.
      TSS. Total suspended solids.
      U.S.C. United States Code.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.328 GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Prohibitive discharge standards.
      (1)   General prohibitions. No contributor shall contribute or cause to
be contributed into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or
wastewater that causes interference or pass through. These general prohibitions
apply to all contributors to a POTW, whether or not the contributor is a
significant industrial user or subject to any national, state or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
      (2)   Specific prohibitions. No contributor shall contribute or cause to
be contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or
wastewater:
         (a)   Pollutants that create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less
than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. part 261.21.
Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes,
peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides,
and any other substances that the town, the state or EPA has notified the
contributor is a fire hazard or a hazard to the POTW;
         (b)   Solid or viscous substances that may cause obstruction to the
flow in the POTW resulting in interference such as, but not limited to: grease,
garbage with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension, animal guts
or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole
blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal,
glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste
paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or
processing of fuel, lubricating oil, mud, glass-grinding or polishing wastes;
         (c)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 11.0, or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage to the
POTW or equipment;
         (d)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids that, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for maintenance and repair;
         (e)   Any substance that may cause the POTW’s effluent or any other
product of the POTW, such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In cases
where a substance discharged to the POTW causes the POTW to be in noncompliance
with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits issued under § 405 of the
Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being
used, the town has the right to seek monetary compensation;
         (f)   Any wastewater, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
causing the POTW treatment plant effluent to fail a toxicity test, to violate
the town's NPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water
quality standards, the town has the right to seek monetary compensation.
         (g)   Any wastewater that imparts objectionable color that cannot be
removed by the treatment process, including but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently impart sufficient color to the
POTW treatment plant's effluent to render the waters injurious to public
health, secondary recreation, or to aquatic life and wildlife, or to adversely
affect the palatability of fish, or aesthetic quality, or to impair the
receiving waters for any designated uses.
         (h)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (66°C),
or that will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting
in interference, and in no case wastewater that causes the temperature at the
introduction into the POTW treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C).
         (i)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding
pollutants (BOD and the like), in sufficient quantity (flow or concentration),
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to cause interference
with the POTW or otherwise constitute a hazard to human or other biological
life.
         (j)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes,
except as specifically approved by the POTW Director in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
         (k)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.   
         (l)   Any pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker
health and safety problems.
         (m)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at the discharge points
designated by the POTW Director in accordance with §
50.335.   
         (n)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, non-contact cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the POTW Director.
         (o)   Fats, oils or grease of animal or vegetable origin in amounts
that may cause obstructions or maintenance problems in the POTW, or
interference in the POTW.
         (p)   Any sludge, screening or other residue from the pretreatment of
industrial waste.
         (q)   Any medical waste, except as specifically authorized by the POTW
Director in a wastewater permit.
         (r)   Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts or other
chelating agents that will produce metallic complexes that interfere with the
POTW.   
         (s)   Any material that would be identified as hazardous waste
according to 40 C.F.R. part 261 if not disposed of in a sewer, except as may be
specifically authorized by the POTW Director.
         (t)   Any wastewater causing the POTW treatment plant effluent to
violate state water quality standards for toxic substances as described in 15A
NCAC 2B .0020.
         (u)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents or other
substances that may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
         (v)   At no time, shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard
meter, at the point of discharge into the POTW (or at any point in the POTW) be
more than 5%, nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit
(LEL) of the meter.
      (3)   Pollutants, substances, wastewater or other wastes prohibited in
this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could
be discharged to the POTW. All floor drains located in process or material
storage areas must discharge to the industrial wastewater contributor's
pretreatment facility before connecting with the POTW.
      (4)   When the POTW Director determines that a contributor is discharging
to the POTW any of the above-enumerated substances in such amounts that may
cause or contribute to interference of POTW operation or pass through, the POTW
Director shall:
         (a)   Advise the contributor of the potential impact of the
contribution on the POTW in accordance with §§
50.395 through
50.400 and
50.999 of this chapter; and
         (b)   Take appropriate actions in accordance with §§
50.339,
50.395 through
50.400, and
50.999 for such contributor to protect the POTW from interference or pass
through.
   (B)   National categorical pretreatment standards. Contributors subject to
categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply with applicable
standards as set out in 40 C.F.R. Ch. 1, Subch. N, parts 405 through 471, and
incorporated herein.
      (1)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
POTW Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance
with 40 C.F.R. part 403.6(c).
      (2)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the POTW Director
shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40
C.F.R. part 403.6(e).
      (3)   A contributor may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the contributor can prove, pursuant to the procedural and
substantive provisions in 40 C.F.R. part 403.13, that factors relating to its
discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when
developing the categorical pretreatment standard.
      (4)   A contributor may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical
standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 403.15.
      (5)   A contributor may request a removal credit adjustment to a
categorical standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 403.7.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.329 LOCAL LIMITS.
   (A)   Industrial waste survey information will be used to develop
contributor-specific local limits when necessary to ensure that the POTW's
maximum allowable headworks loading are not exceeded for particular pollutants
of concern. Contributor-specific local limits for appropriate pollutants of
concern shall be included in wastewater permits. The POTW Director may impose
mass-based limits in addition to, or in place of, concentration-based limits.
An industrial waste survey is required prior to a contributor discharging
wastewater containing in excess of the following average sanitary wastewater
pollutant concentrations:
Average Sanitary Wastewater Pollutant Concentrations
Average Sanitary Wastewater Pollutant Concentrations
BOD        250 mg/l
TSS        250 mg/l
TKN        40 mg/l
Ammonia    25 mg/l
Arsenic    0.003 mg/l
Cadmium    0.003 mg/l
Chromium   0.05 mg/l
Copper     0.061 mg/l
Cyanide    0.015 mg/l
Lead       0.049 mg/l
Mercury    0.0003 mg/l
Molybdenum 0.060 mg/l
Nickel     0.021 mg/l
Selenium   0.006 mg/l
Silver     0.005 mg/l
Zinc       0.175 mg/l
 
   (B)   When unauthorized wastewater discharges are identified, the POTW
director may:
      (1)   Reject the waste; and/or
      (2)   Require pretreatment to the levels specified in this subchapter as
acceptable for discharge to the public sewers; and/or
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge to the
levels specified in this chapter; and/or
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes, fees or sewer charges.
      (5)   If the POTW Director permits or requires the pretreatment of waste
flow, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval, in writing, of the POTW Director, and subject to
the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.330 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.331 RIGHT OF REVISION.
   As allowed by 40 C.F.R. part 403.4, the town reserves the right to establish
limitations and requirements that are more stringent than those required by
either state or federal regulation, if deemed necessary to comply with the
objectives presented in §
50.327 of this chapter, or the general and specific prohibitions in §
50.328 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.332 DILUTION.
   No contributor shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way,
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national
categorical pretreatment standards, unless expressly authorized by an
applicable pretreatment standard, or by any other pollutant-specific limitation
developed by the town or state.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.333 PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Pretreatment facilities. Contributors shall provide wastewater
treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and wastewater permits
issued under §
50.339(B) of this chapter, and shall achieve compliance with all national
categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out
in §
50.328(A) of this chapter within the time limitations as specified by EPA, the
state or the POTW Director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities
necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated and maintained at
contributor’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and
operating procedures shall be submitted to the town for review, and shall be
approved by the POTW Director before construction of the facility. The review
of the plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the contributor
from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
effluent acceptable to the town under the provisions of this chapter. Any
subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall
be reported to and be approved by the POTW Director prior to the contributor’s
initiation of the changes.
   (B)   Additional pretreatment measures.
      (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW Director may require
contributors to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate
that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/
or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from
industrial wastestreams and other conditions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and determine the contributor’s compliance with the requirements of this
chapter.
      (2)   The POTW Director may require any person discharging into the POTW
to install and maintain, on his or her property and at his or her expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A
wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
      (3)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the POTW Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil or sand; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for residential contributors. All
interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the POTW Director
and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
The interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed,
by the contributor at the contributor’s expense. The contributor shall be
responsible for the proper removal and disposal of the captured material. The
contributor shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal, which
are subject to review by the POTW Director. See subchapter called Fat, Oil and
Grease Prevention Program Standards, beginning at §
50.440, for more information on grease interceptors and traps.
      (4)   Contributors with the potential to discharge flammable substances
may be required to install and maintain an approved, combustible-gas-detection
meter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.334 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   The POTW Director shall evaluate whether each SIU needs a plan or
other action to control and prevent slug discharges and accidental discharges
as defined in §
50.327(B) of this chapter. All SIUs must be evaluated within one year of being
designated an SIU. The POTW Director may require any industrial wastewater
contributor to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan or other
specific action, and may direct the completion of required actions by a certain
date. In the event that the industrial wastewater contributor does not comply
with the requirement to develop a plan, then the POTW Director may develop such
a plan for any industrial wastewater contributor.
   (B)   All SIUs are required to notify the POTW Director immediately of any
changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental
discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch
discharge, or a slug load. Also see §§
50.359 and
50.360 of this chapter.
   (C)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum,
the following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW Director of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by §
50.360 of this chapter; and
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. The procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.335 HAULED WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Hauled sanitary wastewater. Septic tank wastewater may be introduced
into the POTW only at locations and times designated by the POTW Director. The
wastewater shall not violate §
50.328 of this chapter or any other requirements established by the town. The
waste hauler is to fill out a waste-tracking form that shall include, at a
minimum, the name and address of the hauler, permit number, truck
identification, name and address of all of the sources of wastewater, volume
and characteristics of the wastewater. If the waste hauler is found to be
intentionally falsifying forms, dumping privileges will be terminated by the
POTW Director.
   (B)   Hauled industrial wastewater.
      (1)   The POTW Director may require haulers of industrial wastewater to
obtain wastewater permits. The POTW Director may require generators of hauled
industrial wastewater to obtain wastewater permits. The POTW Director may
prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial wastewater when it is in the best
interest of the town, including but not limited to, falsified documentation or
pollutant levels that are too high. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is
subject to all other requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Industrial wastewater haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the POTW Director. No load may be discharged without prior
consent of the POTW Director. The POTW Director may collect samples of each
hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW Director
may require the industrial wastewater hauler to provide a waste analysis of any
load prior to discharge.
      (3)   Industrial wastewater haulers must provide a waste-tracking form
for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of
the industrial wastewater hauler, permit number, truck identification, names
and addresses of all sources of wastewater, and volume and characteristics of
wastewater. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected
waste constituents and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. If the
waste hauler is found to be intentionally falsifying forms, dumping privileges
will be terminated by the POTW Director.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.336 (RESERVED).
§ 50.337 (RESERVED).
§ 50.338 FEES.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery
of costs from contributors to the town’s POTW for the implementation of the
program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set forth
in the town’s schedule of charges and fees established by the POTW Director as
approved by the Town Council. A copy of these charges and fees will be made
available by the POTW Director.
   (B)   Contributor charges. A contributor charge shall be levied on all
contributors, including but not limited to, persons, firms, corporations or
governmental entities that discharge, cause or permit the discharge of
wastewater into the POTW.
      (1)   The contributor charge shall be based upon factors, including the
cost of debt service and the operation and maintenance (including replacement)
of the POTW.
      (2)   Each contributor shall pay its proportionate cost based on volume
of flow.
      (3)   The Town Manager may review annually the wastewater contributions
of contributors, the total costs of debt service, operation and maintenance of
the POTW, and may make recommendations to the Town Council for adjustments in
the schedule of charges and fees as necessary.
      (4)   Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable to specific
or identifiable contributors shall be distributed among all contributors of the
POTW, based upon the volume of flow of the contributors.
   (C)   Pretreatment program administration charges. The schedule of charges
and fees adopted by the town may include charges and fees for:
      (1)   Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment
program;
      (2)   Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
      (3)   Reviewing slug control plans, including accidental and/or slug load
discharge procedures, and construction plans and specifications;
      (4)   Permitting;
      (5)   Other fees as the town may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements of the pretreatment program.
   (D)   Surcharges.
      (1)   The unit charge for wastewater of excessive strength shall be
defined and listed on the town's schedule of charges and fees.
      (2)   The amount of surcharges will be based upon the volume of flow and
the character and concentration of the constituents of the wastewater.
         (a)   The volume of flow used in determining the total discharge of
wastewater for payment of contributor charges and surcharges shall be based on
the following:
            1.   Metered water consumption as shown in the records of the meter
readings maintained by the town; or
            2.   If required by the town, other flow-monitoring devices that
measure the actual volume of wastewater discharged to the sewer. Such devices
shall be accessible and safely located, and the measuring system shall be
installed in accordance with the plans approved by the town. The metering
system shall be installed and maintained at the contributor's expense,
according to arrangements that may be made with the town.
            3.   Where any contributor procures all or part of his or her water
supply from sources other than the town, the contributor shall install and
maintain, at his or her own expense, a flow-measuring device of a type approved
by the town.
         (b)   The character and concentration of wastewater used in
determining surcharges shall be determined by samples collected and analyzed by
the town. Samples shall be collected in such as manner as to be representative
of the actual discharge, and shall be analyzed using procedures set forth in 40
C.F.R. part 136.
         (c)   The determination of the character and concentration of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge by the POTW Director shall be binding
as a basis for charges.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.339 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Wastewater dischargers. It shall be unlawful for any person to
contribute to the POTW without first obtaining the permission of the town. When
requested by the POTW Director, a contributor must submit information as to the
nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The
POTW Director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may
periodically require contributors to update this information.
   (B)   Wastewater permits. All SIUs shall obtain a SIU permit prior to the
commencement of discharge to the POTW. Existing industrial wastewater
contributors who are determined by the POTW Director to be SIUs shall obtain a
SIU permit within 180 days of receiving notification of the POTW Director’s
determination. Industrial wastewater contributors who do not fit the SIU
criteria may, at the discretion of the POTW Director, be required to obtain a
wastewater permit for non-SIUs, as defined in §
50.327 herein.
      (1)   Significant industrial contributor determination. All persons
proposing to discharge industrial wastewater or proposing to change the volume
or characteristics of an existing discharge of industrial wastewater shall
request from the POTW Director a SIU determination. If the POTW Director
concludes that the proposed discharge fits the SIU definition, he or she will
require that a SIU permit application be filed.
      (2)   Significant industrial contributor permit application. Contributors
required to obtain a SIU permit shall complete and file with the town an
application in the form prescribed by the POTW Director, accompanied by an
application fee in the amount prescribed in the schedule of charges and fees.
SIUs shall apply for a SIU permit within 180 days after notification of the
POTW Director’s determination in §
50.339(B)(1) above. In support of the application, the contributor shall submit
at a minimum, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:
         (a)   Name of industrial wastewater contributor;
         (b)   Address of industrial wastewater contributor;
         (c)   Standard industrial classification (SIC) code(s) or expected
classification and industrial wastewater contributor category;
         (d)   If available, actual daily maximum and average wastewater flow,
including daily, monthly or seasonal variations in flow rate for the preceding
12 months, or if the operation is a new operation with flow history of less
than 12 months, then use existing flow information plus flow estimates of
expected daily, monthly and seasonal variations;
         (e)   Analytical data on wastewater constituents and characteristics,
including but not limited to, those mentioned in §§
50.328 through
50.335 of this chapter, and any of the priority pollutants (§ 307(a) of the
Act) that the applicant knows or suspects are or will be present in the
discharge as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; any pollutants
limited by town, state or federal pretreatment standards; and any other
pollutant of concern to the town. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in
accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to § 304(g) of the
Act and contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136, as amended, and as required in §§
50.364 and
50.365 of this chapter;
         (f)   Major products manufactured or services supplied;
         (g)   Description of existing, on-site pretreatment facilities and
practices;
         (h)   Locations of discharge points;
         (i)   Raw materials used or stored at the site;
         (j)   Flow diagram or sewer map for the industrial wastewater
contributor, showing all sewers, floor drains, sewer connections, direction of
flow and appurtenances;
         (k)   Number and type of employees;
         (l)   Operation and production schedules, including actual hours of
operation of pretreatment system;
         (m)   Description of current and projected waste-reduction activities
in accordance with G.S. § 143-215.1(g);
         (n)   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials that are or could be accidentally or
intentionally discharged;
         (o)   If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance
(O&M) will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest
schedule by which the contributor will provide such additional pretreatment.
The completion date in this schedule shall not be longer than the compliance
date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. See §
50.356 of this chapter for compliance schedule requirements.
         (p)   If subject to a categorical standard, a baseline monitoring
report in accordance with 40 C.F.R. part 403.12(b) and 15A NCAC 2H .0908(a), as
outlined in §
50.355 of this chapter; and
         (q)   Any other information as may be deemed by the POTW Director to
be necessary to evaluate the wastewater permit application.
      (3)   Application signatories and certification. All wastewater permit
applications and contributor reports must be signed by an authorized
representative of the contributor, on file with the town as defined in §
50.327(B) of this chapter, and contain the following certification statement:
      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
      (4)   Application review and evaluation.
         (a)   The POTW Director is authorized to accept, review and evaluate
applications for the town.
         (b)   Within 30 days of receipt, the POTW Director shall acknowledge
and confirm that the application appears to be complete; or, if not complete,
shall return the application to the applicant with a statement of what
additional information is required.
      (5)   Tentative determination and draft wastewater permit.
         (a)   The POTW Director shall conduct a review of the application and
an on-site inspection of the industrial wastewater contributor, including any
pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation and tentative
determination to issue or deny the wastewater permit.
         (b)   If the POTW Director’s tentative determination in division (B)
(5)(a) above is to issue the wastewater permit, the following additional
determinations shall be made in writing:
            1.   Proposed discharge limitations for those pollutants proposed
to be limited;
            2.   A proposed schedule of compliance, including interim dates and
requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and
            3.   A brief description of any other proposed special conditions
that will have significant impact upon the discharge described in the
application.
         (c)   The POTW Director shall organize the determinations made
pursuant to divisions (B)(5)(a) and (B)(5)(b) above and the town’s general
wastewater permit conditions into a wastewater permit.
      (6)   Wastewater permit supporting documentation. Upon modification,
renewal or issuance of an SIU permit, the POTW Director shall prepare the
following documents and submit them to the approval authority:
         (a)   An allocation table (AT) listing permit information for all
significant industrial users, including but not limited to, wastewater permit
limits, wastewater permit effective and expiration dates, and a comparison of
total permitted flows and loads with Approval authority-approved maximum
allowable loadings of the POTW, including flow, on forms or in a format
approved by the approval authority. The AT shall be updated as wastewater
permits are issued or renewed, and as wastewater permits are modified where the
permitted limits or other AT information is revised.
         (b)   The basis, or rationale, for the pretreatment limitations,
including the following:
            1.   Documentation of categorical determination, including
documentation of any calculations used in applying categorical pretreatment
standards; and
            2.   documentation of the rationale of any parameters for which
monitoring has been waived under 40 C.F.R. part 403.12(e)(2).
      (7)   Hearings.
         (a)   Initial adjudicatory hearings. An applicant whose wastewater
permit is denied, or is granted subject to conditions he or she deems
unacceptable, a permittee/contributor assessed a civil penalty under §
50.999 of this chapter, or one issued an administrative order under §§
50.395 through
50.400 of this chapter, shall have the right to an adjudicatory hearing before
a hearing officer designated by the POTW Director. A hearing must be requested
in writing, must identify the specific issues to be contested, and must be
delivered to the POTW Director within 30 days following receipt of the
wastewater permit, civil penalty assessment, or administrative order. Unless
such written demand is made within the time specified herein, the action shall
be final and binding. The hearing officer shall conduct a hearing and make a
final decision on the contested wastewater permit, penalty or order within 45
days of the receipt of the written demand for a hearing. The POTW Director
shall transmit a copy of the hearing officer's decision by registered or
certified mail.
            1.   New wastewater permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review
in the Superior Court of Watauga County, of the terms or conditions of a newly
issued wastewater permit, the terms and conditions of the entire wastewater
permit are stayed, and the wastewater permit is not in effect until either the
conclusion of the judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual
resolution.
            2.   Renewed wastewater permits. Upon appeal, including judicial
review in the Superior Court of Watauga County, of the terms or conditions of a
renewed wastewater permit, the terms and conditions of the existing wastewater
permit remain in effect until either the conclusion of the judicial review or
until the parties reach a mutual resolution.
         (b)   Final appeal hearings. Any decision of a hearing officer made as
a result of an adjudicatory hearing held under §
50.339(B)(7)(a) above may be appealed to the Town Council, upon filing a
written demand within ten days of receipt of notice of the decision. Hearings
held under this division shall be conducted in accordance with customary quasi-
judicial hearing procedures. Failure to make written demand within the time
specified herein shall bar further appeal. The Town Council shall ordinarily
conduct the hearing at a regular meeting, and shall make a final decision on
the appeal in no case more than 60 days of the date the appeal was filed with
the Town Clerk. The Town Clerk shall deliver a written copy of its decision by
registered or certified mail.
         (c)   Judicial review. Any person against whom a final order or
decision of the Town Council is entered pursuant to the hearing conducted under
§
50.339(B)(7)(b) above, may seek judicial review of the order or decision by
filing a written petition for certiorari within 30 days after receipt of notice
by registered or certified mail of the order or decision, but not thereafter,
with the Superior Court of Watauga County. The proceeding shall follow the
procedures set out in G.S. § 160A-393. Within 30 days after receipt of the
Court's writ of certiorari, the Town Council shall transmit to the reviewing
court the official record.
         (d)   Official record. Within 30 days of Superior Court writ of
certiorari or such other time as Court may order, the Town shall prepare an
official record of the case, which shall include:
            1.   All notices, motions and other like pleadings;
            2.   A copy of all documentary evidence introduced;
            3.   A certified transcript of all testimony taken, if testimony is
transcribed. If testimony is taken and not transcribed, then a narrative
summary of any testimony taken. If applicant requests that a transcript be
included in the official record, it must state that in the petition for
judicial review and must deposit with the town a sum sufficient to pay for its
preparation. Once the transcript has been prepared, the town will refund any
portion of the deposit that exceeds the actual cost of the transcript, or
applicant must pay the additional sum required.
            4.   A copy of the final decision of the Town Council.
      (8)   Final action on wastewater permit applications.
         (a)   The POTW Director shall take final action on all wastewater
permit applications not later than 90 days following receipt of a complete
application.
         (b)   The POTW Director is authorized to:
            1.   Issue a wastewater permit containing such conditions as are
necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter and G.S. § 143-215.1;
            2.   Issue a wastewater permit containing time schedules for
achieving compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements;
            3.   Modify any wastewater permit upon not less than 60 days notice
and pursuant to §
50.339(B)(9) hereinafter set forth;
            4.   Revoke any wastewater permit pursuant to §§
50.395 through
50.400 and
50.999 of this chapter;
            5.   Suspend a wastewater permit pursuant to §§
50.395 through
50.400 and
50.999 of this chapter;
            6.   Deny a wastewater permit application when, in the opinion of
the POTW Director, such discharge may cause or contribute to pass through or
interference of the POTW treatment plant or where necessary to effectuate the
purposes of G.S. § 143-215.1.
      (9)   Wastewater permit modification.
         (a)   Modifications of wastewater permits shall be subject to the same
procedural requirements as the issuance of wastewater permits, except as listed
below. Any changes or new conditions in the wastewater permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.
            1.   Changes in the ownership of the discharge when no other change
in the wastewater permit is indicated;
            2.   A single modification of any compliance schedule not in excess
of four months;
            3.   Modification of compliance schedules (construction schedules)
in wastewater permits for new sources where the new source will not begin to
discharge until pretreatment facilities are operational.
         (b)   Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical
pretreatment standard, the wastewater permit of contributors subject to such
standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the
time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a contributor, subject to a
national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an
application for a wastewater permit as required by §
50.339(B) of this chapter, the contributor shall apply for a wastewater permit
within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical
pretreatment standard.
         (c)   A request for a modification by the permittee shall constitute a
waiver of the 60-day notice required by G.S. § 143-215.1(b) for modifications.
      (10)   Wastewater permit conditions. The POTW Director shall have the
authority to grant a wastewater permit with such conditions attached as he or
she believes necessary to achieve the purpose of this chapter and G.S. § 143-
215.1. Wastewater permits shall contain, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   A statement of duration (in no case more than five years);
         (b)   A statement of non-transferability;
         (c)   Applicable effluent limits based on categorical standards or
local limits, or both;
         (d)   Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting notification, and
record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification
of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample
type, based on federal, state and local law;
         (e)   Requirements for notifying the POTW Director in the event of an
accidental discharge or slug load as defined in §
50.327(B) of this chapter;
         (f)   Requirements to implement a plan or other controls for
prevention of accidental discharges and/or slug loads as defined in §
50.327(B) of this chapter, if determined by the POTW Director to be necessary
for the contributor;
         (g)   Requirements for immediately notifying the POTW Director of any
changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental
discharges, or slug load as defined in §
50.327(B) of this chapter. Also see §§
50.359 and
50.360 of this chapter; and
         (h)   A statement of applicable civil and/or criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable
compliance schedule.
      (11)   Wastewater permit duration. Wastewater permits shall be issued for
five years. However, a wastewater permit may be issued for a period less than a
year or may be stated to expire on a specific date when circumstance indicates
that a more limited time frame is appropriate.
      (12)   Wastewater permit transfer. Wastewater permits are issued to a
specific contributor for a specific operation. A wastewater permit shall not be
reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new contributor, different
premises, facility, or a new or changed operation.
      (13)   Wastewater permit reissuance. A contributor shall apply for
wastewater permit reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater permit
application, in accordance with §
50.339(B) of this chapter, a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the
existing wastewater permit.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.340 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information and data on a contributor obtained from reports,
questionnaires, wastewater permit applications, wastewater permits and
monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public or
other governmental agency without restriction, unless the contributor
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
POTW Director that the release of the information would divulge information,
processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of
the contributor. Any request must be asserted at the time of submission of the
information or data.
   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report that might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon
written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the
national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, non-discharge
permit and/or the pretreatment program; provided, however, that, the portions
of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in
judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information.
   (C)   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall
be made available to officials of the approval authority and EPA upon request.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am Ord. passed 12-13-2013)
§ 50.341 SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATIONS.
   All wastewater permit applications and contributor reports must be signed by
the current authorized representative of the contributor on file with the town,
as defined in §
50.327(B) of this chapter, and contain the following certification statement:
      “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments
were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system
designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the
information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the
information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and
belief, true, accurate and complete. I am aware that there are significant
penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine
and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
(Ord. passed 12-13-2013)
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY
§ 50.355 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.
   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 C.F.R. part 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical contributors currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to
the POTW shall submit to the POTW Director a report containing the information
listed in division (B) below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their
discharge, new sources and sources that become categorical contributors
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall
submit to the POTW Director a report containing the information listed in
division (B) below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment or
intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also
shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be
discharged, including anticipated seasonal variations.
   (B)   Contributors described above shall submit the information set forth
below:
      (1)   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner;
      (2)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility;
      (3)   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by the contributor. This description should include a
schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes;
      (4)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. part 403.6(e);
      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.
         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process;
         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the POTW
Director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average concentrations or mass,
where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §
50.364 of this chapter; and
         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in §
50.365 of this chapter and 40 C.F.R. part 403.12(b) and (g), including 40
C.F.R. part 403.12(g)(4);
      (6)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the contributor’s
authorized representative, as defined in §
50.327(B) of this chapter, and certified by a qualified professional,
indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis,
and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements;
      (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
contributor will provide the additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion
date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established
for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to
this section must meet the requirements set out in §
50.356 of this chapter; and
      (8)   Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must
be signed and certified in accordance with §
50.341 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.356 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.
   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
§
50.355(B)(7) of this chapter:
   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the contributor to meet
the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited
to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing
contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and
beginning and conducting routine operation);
   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
   (C)   The contributor shall submit a progress report to the POTW Director no
later than 14 days following each date of compliance, including, at a minimum,
a disclosure as to whether or not it complied with the increment of progress,
the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the
contributor to return to the established schedule; and
   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between the progress
reports to the POTW Director.
   (E)   All compliance progress reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with §
50.341 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.357 REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD DEADLINE.
   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any contributor
subject to the pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the POTW
Director a report containing the information described in §
50.355(B)(4) through (6) of this chapter. For contributors subject to
equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the
procedures in 40 C.F.R. part 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable
measure of the contributor’s long-term production rate. For all other
contributors subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms
of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of
operation), this report shall include the contributor’s actual production
during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed
and certified in accordance with §
50.341 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.358 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
   (A)   All SIUs shall, at a frequency determined by the POTW Director, but in
no case less than once every six months, submit a report indicating the nature
and concentration of pollutants in the discharge that are limited by
pretreatment standards, and the applicable flows for the reporting period.
Sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in §§
50.364 and
50.365 of this chapter. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance §
50.341 of this chapter.
   (B)   If a contributor subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW Director,
using the procedures prescribed in §§
50.364 and
50.365 of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the
report.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.359 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   At least 30 days before the change, each contributor must notify the POTW
Director of any planned significant changes to the contributor's operations or
treatment systems that might alter the nature, quality or volume of its
wastewater. The contributor shall not begin the changes until receiving written
approval from the POTW Director. See §
50.360(D) for other reporting requirements.
   (A)   The POTW Director may require the contributor to submit the
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition,
including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under §
50.339(B) of this chapter.
   (B)   The POTW Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under §
50.339(B) of this chapter, or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit
under §
50.339(B) of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions.
   (C)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are
not limited to, flow increases and the discharge of any previously unreported
pollutants.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2013)
§ 50.360 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch
discharge, or a slug load as defined in §
50.327 of this chapter, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the
contributor shall immediately telephone and notify the POTW Director of the
incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type
of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by
the contributor.
   (B)   Within five days following the discharge, the contributor shall,
unless waived by the POTW Director, submit a detailed, written report,
describing the causes of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
contributor to prevent similar future occurrences. The notification shall not
relieve the contributor of any expense, loss, damage or other liability that
may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources or any
other damage to person or property; nor shall the notification relieve the
contributor of any fines, penalties or other liability that may be imposed
pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the contributor’s bulletin
board or other prominent place, advising employees whom to call in the event of
a discharge described in division (A) above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   (D)   Each SIU is required to notify the POTW Director immediately of any
changes at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental
discharge, discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch
discharge, or a slug load as defined in §
50.327(B) of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.361 REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED CONTRIBUTORS.
   (A)   All contributors not required to obtain a wastewater permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director, as the POTW Director may
require in order to comply with pretreatment program standards and/or protect
the integrity of the POTW.
   (B)   All contributors classified as non-significant categorical industrial
users, under the definition of “significant industrial user” in §
50.327(B) of this chapter, shall provide appropriate reports to the POTW
Director as the POTW Director may require. At a minimum, this shall include the
annual certification of continuing to meet the non-significant categorical
industrial user criteria as required under 40 C.F.R. part 403.12(q).
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.362 NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.
   (A)   If sampling performed by a contributor indicates a violation, the
contributor must notify the POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of
the violation. The contributor shall also repeat the sampling and analysis, and
submit the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW Director within 30 days
after becoming aware of the violation. If allowed by the POTW Director, the
contributor may not be required to resample if the POTW Director monitors at
the contributor's facility at least once a month, or if the POTW Director
samples between the contributor's initial sampling and when the contributor
receives the results of the resample.
   (B)   If the POTW Director does not require the contributor to perform any
self-monitoring and the town's sampling of the contributor indicates a
violation, the POTW Director shall repeat the sampling and obtain the results
of the repeat analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the violations,
unless one of the following occurs:
      (1)   The POTW Director monitors the wastewater at the contributor's
facility at least once a month;
      (2)   The POTW Director samples the contributor between their initial
sampling and when the POTW Director receives the results of this initial
sampling; or
      (3)   The POTW Director requires the contributor to perform sampling and
submit the results to the POTW Director within 30 days of the POTW Director
becoming aware of the violation.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.363 NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   The town prohibits the discharge of any hazardous waste without notification
and approval of the POTW Director.
   (A)   Any contributor who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and state
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance that, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
C.F.R. part 261. The notification must include the name of the hazardous waste
as set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number and the type
of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the contributor discharges more
than 100 kilograms of the waste per calendar month to the POTW, the
notification also shall contain the following information, to the extent the
information is known and readily available to the contributor: an
identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an
estimation of the mass and concentration of the constituents in the wastestream
discharge during the calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of
constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following
12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the
discharge commences. Any notification under this division must be submitted
only once for each hazardous waste discharge. However, notifications of changed
conditions must be submitted under § 50.359 of this chapter. The notification
requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by
contributors subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-
monitoring requirements of §§
50.355,
50.357 and
50.358 of this chapter.
   (B)   Contributors are exempt from the requirements of division (A) above,
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of
hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specific in
40 C.F.R. parts 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of
non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. parts 261.30(d) and 261.33(e),
requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the
contributor discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not
require additional notification.
   (C)   In the case of any new regulation under § 3001 of RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the contributor must notify the POTW Director,
the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director and state hazardous
waste authorities of the discharge of the substance within 90 days of the
effective date of the regulations.
   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the
contributor shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume
and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated, to the degree it has determined to
be economically practical.
   (E)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a wastewater permit
issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.364 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater permit application or report shall be performed in
accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part 136, unless
otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, or
unless otherwise performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA or the
town. If 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques
for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in
accordance with procedures approved by EPA and the town.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.365 SAMPLE COLLECTION.
   (A)   Representative samples required. All wastewater samples must be
representative of the contributor's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow
measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean and maintained in
good working order at all times. If a contributor fails to keep its monitoring
facility in good working order, it may not claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
   (B)   Grab samples. Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, volatile organic compounds and any other
pollutants as required by 40 C.F.R. part 136. The town shall determine the
number of grabs necessary to be representative of the contributor's discharge.
See 40 C.F.R. part 403.12(g)(5) for additional grab sample number requirements
for BMR and 90-day compliance reports. Additionally, the POTW Director may
allow collection of multiple grabs during a 24-hour period that are composited
prior to analysis, as allowed under 40 C.F.R. part 136.
   (C)   Composite samples. All wastewater composite samples shall be collected
with at least hourly aliquots or grabs for each hour in which there is a
discharge. All wastewater composite samples shall be collected using flow-
proportional, composite-collection techniques, unless time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the POTW Director. When
authorizing time-proportional composites or grabs, the samples must be
representative and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be
documented.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.366 TIMING.
   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked
by the United States Postal Service. For reports that are not mailed, postage
prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the
date of receipt of the report shall govern.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.367 RECORD KEEPING.
   Contributors subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall
retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this
chapter, and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to
monitoring activities undertaken by the contributor independent of such
requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; the certified lab that performed the analyses; the analytical
techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records
shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall
be automatically extended by the duration of any litigation between the
contributor and the town, or where the contributor has been specifically
notified of a longer retention period by the POTW Director.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.368 ELECTRONIC REPORTING.
   The POTW Director may develop procedures for receipt of electronic reports
for any reporting requirements of this chapter. Such procedures shall comply
with 40 C.F.R. Ch. 1, Subch. A, part 3. These procedures shall be enforceable
under §§
50.395 through
50.400 and
50.999 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
COMPLIANCE MONITORING
§ 50.380 MONITORING FACILITIES.
   The town requires the contributor to provide and operate, at the
contributor’s own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling
and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems.
The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the contributor’s
premises, but the town may, when such a location would be impractical or cause
undue hardship on the contributor, allow the facility to be constructed in the
public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by
landscaping or parked vehicles. There shall be ample room in or near the
sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of
samples for analysis. The facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense
of the contributor. Whether constructed on public or private property, the
sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the
town’s requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the town.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.381 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   The town shall inspect the facilities of any contributor to ascertain
whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are being
complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or
discharged shall allow the town, approval authority and EPA, or their
representatives, ready access, at all reasonable times, to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination or in
the performance of any of their duties. The town, approval authority and EPA
shall have the right to set up on the contributor’s property such devices as
are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or
metering operations. Where a contributor has security measures in force that
would require proper identification and clearance before entry into its
premises, the contributor shall make necessary arrangements with its security
guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from
the town, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay,
for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. Denial of the
POTW Director’s approval authority’s or EPA’s access to the contributor’s
premises shall be a violation of this chapter. Unreasonable delays may
constitute denial of access.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.382 SEARCH WARRANTS.
   If the town, approval authority or EPA has been refused access to a
building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program of the town designed to verify compliance with
this chapter, or any wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect
the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the town,
approval authority or EPA may seek issuance of a search warrant from the a
court having jurisdiction within the POTW service area.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
ENFORCEMENT; ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES
§ 50.395 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the POTW Director finds that any industrial wastewater contributor
has violated or is violating this chapter, a wastewater permit, or any
prohibition, limitation or requirements contained therein, or any other
pretreatment requirement, the POTW Director may serve upon such a person a
written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days from the
date of this notice, an explanation for the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the town by the
contributor. Submission of this plan does not relieve the contributor of
liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of
violation.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.396 CONSENT ORDERS.
   The POTW Director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders,
assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance. The orders will
include specific action to be taken by the contributor to correct the
noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders
shall have the same force and effect as an administrative order issued pursuant
to §
50.398 below.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.397 SHOW CAUSE HEARING.
   (A)   The POTW Director may order any industrial contributor who causes or
is responsible for an unauthorized discharge, has violated this chapter or is
in noncompliance with a wastewater permit to show cause why a proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. In the event the POTW Director
determines that a show cause order should be issued, a notice shall be served
on the contributor, specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for the action, and a request that the
contributor show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be
taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or
certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing.
Service may be made on any person designated as its authorized representative
by the contributor, subject to service of Rule 4 of the North Carolina Rules of
Civil Procedure.
   (B)   The POTW Director shall review the evidence presented at the hearing
and determine whether the proposed enforcement action is appropriate.
   (C)   A show cause hearing under this section is not a prerequisite to the
issuance of a notice of violation under §
50.395 of this chapter or the assessment of a civil penalty under §
50.999, nor is any action or inaction taken by the POTW Director under this
section subject to an administrative appeal under §
50.339(B)(7) of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.398 ADMINISTRATIVE ORDERS.
   When the POTW Director finds that an industrial wastewater contributor has
violated or continues to violate this chapter, wastewater permits or orders
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the POTW Director may
issue an order to cease and desist all such violations, and direct those
persons in noncompliance to do any of the following:
   (A)   Immediately comply with all requirements;
   (B)   Comply in accordance with a compliance time scheduled set forth in the
order;
   (C)   Take appropriate remedial or preventative action in the event of a
continuing or threatened violation; and/or
   (D)   Disconnect, unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other
related appurtenances are installed and properly operated within a specified
time period.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.399 EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS.
   (A)   The POTW Director may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or
wastewater permit when the suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual
or threatened discharge that presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, interferes
with the POTW or causes the town to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
   (B)   Any contributor notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. A hearing will be held within 15 days of the notice of suspension
to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or the contributor’s
wastewater discharge permit terminated. In the event of a failure of the person
to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the POTW Director shall take
steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer
connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW or endangerment to any
person. The POTW Director shall reinstate the wastewater permit and the
wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncompliant
discharge. The industrial contributor shall submit a detailed written statement
describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence to the POTW Director prior to the date of the
above-described hearing.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.400 TERMINATION OF WASTEWATER PERMIT OR PERMISSION TO DISCHARGE.
   (A)   The POTW Director may revoke a watewater permit or permission to
discharge for good cause, including but not limited to, the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of the individual wastewater contributor’s discharge;
      (2)   Failure to report significant changes in operations, or in
wastewater constituents and characteristics;
      (3)   Refusal of reasonable access to the contributor’s premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
      (4)   Violations of conditions of the wastewater permit or permission to
discharge, conditions of this chapter, or any applicable state and federal
regulations; or
      (5)   Failure to submit the written statement required by §
50.399.
   (B)   A noncompliant industrial contributor will be notified of the proposed
termination of its wastewater permit, and will be offered an opportunity to
show cause under §§
50.395 through
50.400 of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.401 ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   At least annually, the POTW Director shall publish, in a newspaper of
general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the
jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW, a list of those industrial wastewater
contributors that were found to be in significant noncompliance with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements, during the previous 12 months.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.402 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Upset.
      (1)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if criteria
set out in division (A)(2) below are met.
      (2)   A contributor who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of
upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs or other relevant evidence, that:
         (a)   An upset occurred and the contributor can identify the cause(s)
of the upset;
         (b)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
         (c)   The contributor has submitted the following information to the
POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if the
information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within
five days):
            1.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
            2.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
            3.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
      (3)   In any enforcement proceeding, the contributor seeking to establish
the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
      (4)   A contributor will have the opportunity for a judicial
determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for
noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards.
      (5)   A contributor shall control production of all discharges to the
extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards
upon reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
   (B)   Prohibited discharge standards defense. A contributor shall have an
affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against or for
noncompliance with the general prohibitions in §
50.328(A)(1) of this chapter or the specific prohibitions in §
50.328(A)(2)(b), (d) through (l) and (n) through (v) of this chapter, if it can
prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone
or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through
or interference, and that either:
      (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharge and the
contributor was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during,
the pass through or interference; or
      (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the contributor’s prior discharge
when the town was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the
case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
   (C)   Bypass.
      (1)   A contributor may allow any bypass to occur that does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to the provision of divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) below.
      (2)   If a contributor knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the POTW Director, at least ten days before the
date of the bypass, if possible. If the contributor learns of need to bypass
less than ten days before the date of the bypass, then it must notify the POTW
Director immediately.
         (a)   A contributor shall promptly notify the POTW Director of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards, in no case
less than 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass.
         (b)   A written submission must also be provided within five days of
the time the contributor becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission
shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the
bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been
corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or
planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
      (3)   Unless it has been allowed, bypass is prohibited and the POTW
Director may take an enforcement action against a contributor for a bypass.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL STANDARDS
§ 50.415 INTRODUCTION.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to define the authority of the
Public Utilities Department of the town as the water purveyor in the
elimination of all cross-connections within its public potable water supply.
   (B)   This chapter shall apply to all users connected to the town potable
water supply regardless of whether the user is located within the city limits
or outside of the city limits.
   (C)   This chapter will comply with the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act
(Pub. Law No. 93-523), the State Administrative Code (Title 15A, Subchapter 8C)
and the State Building Code (Volume II) as they pertain to cross-connections
with the public water supply.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.416 OBJECTIVES.
   The specific objectives of this subchapter are as follows:
   (A)   To protect the public potable water supply of the town against actual
or potential contamination by isolating within the consumer's water system,
contaminants or pollutants which could, under adverse conditions, backflow
through uncontrolled cross-connections into the public water system;
   (B)   To eliminate or control existing cross-connections, actual or
potential, between the consumer's potable water system(s) and non-potable or
industrial piping system(s); and
   (C)   To provide a continuing inspection program of cross-connection control
which will systematically and effectively control all actual or potential
cross-connections which may be installed in the future.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.417 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Responsibility: town.
      (1)   Except as, otherwise provided herein, it is the town's
responsibility to ensure a safe water supply, which begins at the source and
includes all of the public water distribution system, including the service
connection, and ends at the point of delivery to the consumer's water system
(water meter). In addition, the town shall exercise reasonable vigilance to
ensure that the consumer has taken the proper steps to protect the public
potable water system. To ensure that the proper precautions are taken, the
Public Utilities Department shall determine the degree of hazard or potential
hazard to the public potable water system; the degree of protection required;
and proper containment protection through an on-going inspection program.
      (2)   When it is determined that a backflow prevention assembly is
required for the protection of the public system, the town shall require the
consumer, at the consumer's expense, to install an approved backflow prevention
assembly at each service connection, to test immediately upon installation and
thereafter at a frequency as determined by the Public Utilities Department, to
properly repair and maintain the assembly or assemblies and to keep adequate
records of each test and subsequent maintenance and repair, including materials
and/or replacement parts.
   (B)   Responsibility: plumbing inspections.
      (1)   The Department of Planning and Inspections and the Department of
Public Utilities for the town shall review building plans and inspect plumbing
as it is installed and shall prevent cross- connections from being designed and
built into any plumbing system within the Department of Planning and
Inspection's jurisdiction. Where the review of building plans suggests or
detects the potential for cross-connections being made an integral part of the
plumbing system, the Plumbing Inspector shall require that the cross-
connections be either eliminated or provided with backflow prevention equipment
approved by the State Building Code.
      (2)   The Plumbing Inspector's responsibility begins at the point of
delivery (downstream of the first installed backflow prevention assembly) and
continues throughout the entire length of the consumer's water system. The plan
inspector should inquire about the intended use of water at any point where it
is suspected that a cross-connection might be made or where one is actually
called for by the plans. When such is discovered, it shall be mandatory that a
suitable, approved backflow prevention assembly approved by the State Building
Code be required by the plans and be properly installed. The primary protection
assembly for containment purposes only shall have approval from the town's
Public Utilities Department, the State Building Code and the State Department
of Environment, Health and Natural Resources.
   (C)   Responsibility: consumer. The consumer has the primary responsibility
of preventing pollutants and contaminants from entering his or her potable
water system(s) or the public potable water system. The consumer's
responsibility starts at the point of delivery from the public potable water
system and includes all of his or her water system(s). The consumer, at his or
her own expense, shall install, operate, test and maintain approved backflow
prevention assemblies as directed by the town's Public Utilities Department.
The consumer shall maintain accurate records of tests and repairs made to
backflow prevention assemblies and shall maintain the records for a minimum
period of three years. The records shall be on forms approved by town's Public
Utilities Department and shall include the list of materials or replacement
parts used. Following any repair, overhaul, repiping or relocation of an
assembly, the town shall test it to ensure that it is in good operating
condition and will prevent backflow. Tests, maintenance and repairs of backflow
prevention assemblies shall be made by a certified backflow prevention assembly
tester employed by the town.
   (D)   Responsibility: certified backflow prevention assembly tester.
      (1)   The certified backflow prevention assembly tester will have the
following responsibilities:
         (a)   Making competent inspections and for repairing or overhauling
backflow prevention assemblies and making reports of the repair to the consumer
and responsible authorities on forms approved by the town's Public Utilities
Department;
         (b)   Including the list of materials or replacement parts used;
         (c)   Being equipped with and being competent to use all the necessary
tools, gauges, manometers and other equipment necessary to properly test,
repair and maintain backflow prevention assemblies; and
         (d)   Ensuring that original manufactured parts are used in the repair
of or replacement of parts in a backflow prevention assembly. The tester shall
not change the design, material or operational characteristics of an assembly
during repair or maintenance without prior approval of the town's Public
Utilities Department. The tester shall perform the work and be responsible for
the competency and accuracy of all tests and reports. The tester shall provide
a copy of all test and repair reports to the consumer and to the town's Public
Utilities Department within ten business days of any completed test or repair
work. A tester shall maintain the records for a minimum period of three years.
      (2)   All certified backflow prevention assembly testers must use the
backflow prevention assembly test equipment provided by/approved by the town's
Public Utilities Department. All test equipment shall be registered with the
town's Cross-Connection Control Department. All test equipment shall be checked
for accuracy annually (at a minimum), calibrated, if necessary and certified to
town as to the calibration, employing an accuracy/calibration method acceptable
to the town's Public Utilities Department.
      (3)   All certified backflow prevention assembly testers must become re-
certified every two years through an approved backflow prevention certification
program.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.418 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR-GAP SEPARATION. A physical separation between the free flowing discharge
end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving
vessel. An approved AIR-GAP SEPARATION shall be at least double the diameter of
the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the receiving
vessel, in no case less than one inch (2.54 cm).
   APPROVED. As herein used in reference to a water supply, shall mean a water
supply that has been approved by the State Department of Environment, Health
and Natural Resources (Division of Health Services). The term APPROVED, as
herein used in reference to air-gap separation, a pressure vacuum breaker, a
double check valve assembly, a double check detector assembly, a reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, a reduced pressure principle
detector assembly or other backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall mean
APPROVED by the town's Public Utilities Department.
   BACKFLOW. The undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and
other liquids, gases or other substances into the distribution pipes of the
consumer or public potable water system from any source or sources.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY, APPROVED. An assembly used for containment
and/or isolation purposes that has been investigated and approved by the town's
Public Utilities Department and has been shown to meet the design and
performance standards of the American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE), the
American Water Works Association (AWWA) or the Foundation for Cross- Connection
Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California. The
APPROVAL OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES by the town shall be based on a
favorable report by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic
Research of the University of Southern California, recommending an approval.
(To be approved, an assembly must be readily accessible for in-line testing and
maintenance and shall successfully complete a one-year field evaluation within
the town's water system.)
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION, ASSEMBLY TESTER, CERTIFIED. A person who has proven his
or her competency to the satisfaction of the town Public Utilities Department.
Each person who is certified to make competent tests or to repair, overhaul and
make reports on backflow prevention assemblies shall be knowledgeable of
applicable laws, rules and regulations, shall be a licensed plumber or have at
least two years of experience under the supervision of a licensed plumber by
the town and have qualifications acceptable to the town and must hold a
certificate of completion from an approved training program in the testing and
repair of backflow prevention assemblies.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY, UNAPPROVED. An assembly that has been
investigated by the town's Public Utilities Department and has been determined
to be unacceptable for installation within the town's water system.
Consideration for disapproval and removal from the approved list shall be based
upon, but not limited to, the following criteria:
      (1)   Poor performance standards (i.e., significant failure rate);
      (2)   Lack of or unavailability of repair parts; and/or
      (3)   Poor service or response from assembly's factory representative(s).
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE, APPROVED. A device used for isolation purposes
that has been shown to meet the design and performance standards of the
American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE) and the American Water Works
Association (AWWA).
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY, TYPE A. An assembly used to prevent backflow
into a consumer or public potable water system. The type of assembly used
should be based on the degree of hazard either existing or potential (as
defined herein). The types are:
      (1)   Double check valve assembly (DCVA);
      (2)   Double check detector assembly (fire system) (DCDA);
      (3)   Pressure vacuum breaker (PVB);
      (4)   Reduced pressure principle assembly (RP); and
      (5)   Reduced pressure principle-detector assembly (fire system) (RPDA).
   BACK-PRESSURE BACKFLOW. Any elevation in the consumer water system (by pump,
elevation of piping or steam and/or air pressure) above the supply pressure at
the point of delivery which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the
normal direction of flow.
   BACK-SIPHONAGE BACKFLOW. A reversal of the normal direction of flow in the
pipeline due to a negative pressure (vacuum) being created in the supply line
with the backflow source subject to atmospheric pressure.
   CHECK VALVE, APPROVED. A check valve that is drip-tight in the normal
direction of flow when the inlet pressure is at least one psi and the outlet
pressure is zero. The check valve shall permit no leakage in a direction
reversed to the normal flow. The closure element (e.g., clapper, poppet or
other design) shall be internally loaded to promote rapid and positive closure.
An approved check valve is only one component of an approved backflow
prevention assembly (i.e., pressure vacuum breaker, double check valve
assembly, double check detector assembly, reduced pressure principle assembly
or reduced pressure detector assembly).
   CONSUMER. Any person, firm or corporation using or receiving water from the
town's water system.
   CONSUMER'S POTABLE WATER SYSTEM. The portion of the privately owned potable
water system lying between the point of delivery and point of use and/or
isolation protection. This system will include all pipes, conduits, tanks,
receptacles, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances used to produce, convey,
store or use potable water.
   CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system commencing at the point of
delivery ( water meter) and continuing throughout the consumer's plumbing
system, located on the consumer's premises, whether supplied by a public
potable water or an auxiliary water supply. The system or systems may be either
a potable water system or an industrial piping system.
   CONTAINMENT. Preventing the impairment of the public potable water supply by
installing an approved backflow prevention assembly at the service connection.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water which creates a
potential or actual hazard to the public health through the introduction of
hazardous or toxic substances or through the spread of disease by sewage,
industrial fluids or waste.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any unprotected actual or potential connection or
structural arrangement between a public or a consumer's water system and any
other source or system through which it is possible to introduce any
contamination or pollution, other than the intended potable water with which
the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable
sections, swivel or changeover devices and other temporary or permanent devices
through which or because of which backflow can or may occur are considered to
be CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   DOUBLE CHECK, VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of two independently
acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing shut-off valves
attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located test
cocks. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a non-health hazard
(i.e., pollutant).
   DOUBLE CHECK, DETECTOR ASSEMBLY. A specially designed assembly composed of a
line-size approved double check valve assembly with a specific bypass water
meter and a meter-sized approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall
register (in U.S. gallons) accurately for only very low rates of flow and shall
show a registration for all rates of flow. This assembly shall only be used to
protect against a non-health hazard (i.e., pollutant).
   HAZARD, DEGREE OF. The evaluation of conditions within a system which can be
classified as either a pollutional (non-health) or a contamination (health
hazard).
   HAZARD, HEALTH. An actual or potential threat of contamination of a
physical, hazardous or toxic nature to the public or consumer's potable water
system to a degree or intensity that there would be a danger to health.
   HAZARD, NON-HEALTH. An actual or potential threat to the quality of the
public or the consumer's potable water system. A NON-HEALTH HAZARD is one that,
if introduced into the public water supply system, could be a nuisance to water
customers, but would not adversely affect human health.
   HAZARD, POLLUTIONAL. An actual or potential threat to the quality or the
potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would
not constitute a health or a system hazard, as defined. The maximum degree or
intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded
under this definition would be one that causes a nuisance or is aesthetically
objectionable or causes minor damage to the system or its appurtenances.
   HEALTH AGENCY. The State Department of Environment, Health and Natural
Resources (Division of Health Services), NCDEHNR.
   INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS. Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health or non-health hazard if introduced into a
public or consumer potable water system. The FLUIDS may include, but are not
limited to: process waters; chemicals in fluid form; acids and alkalis; oils,
gases; and the like.
   INDUSTRIAL PIPING SYSTEM, CONSUMER'S. Any system used by the consumer for
transmission of or to confine or store any fluid, solid or gaseous substance
other than an approved water supply. A system includes all pipes, conduits,
tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances used to produce,
convey or store substances which are or may be polluted or contaminated.
   ISOLATION. The act of confining a localized hazard within a consumer's water
system by installing approved backflow prevention assemblies. (Disclaimer:
town's Public Utilities Department may make recommendations, upon facility
inspection, as to the usages of isolation devices/assemblies, but does not
assume or have responsibility whatsoever for the installations.)
   POINT OF DELIVERY. At the property line of the customer, adjacent to the
public street where the town's mains are located or at a point on the
customer's property where the meter is located. The customer shall be
responsible for all water piping and control devices located on the customer's
side of the point of delivery.
   POLLUTION. An impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does
not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and
unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of the waters for domestic use.
   POTABLE WATER. Water from any source which has been investigated by the
State Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources (Division of
Health Services) and which has been approved for human consumption.
   PUBLIC POTABLE WATER SYSTEM. Any publicly or privately owned water system
operated as a public utility, under a current State Department of Environment,
Health and Natural Resources permit, to supply water for public consumption or
use. This system will include all sources, facilities and appurtenances between
the source and the point of delivery such as valves, pumps, pipes, conduits,
tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances used to produce,
convey, treat or store a potable water for public consumption or use.
   REDUCED PRESSURE, PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY. An assembly
containing within its structure a minimum of two independently acting, approved
check valves, together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically
independent, pressure differential relief valve located between the check
valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The first check valve
reduces the supply pressure a predetermined amount so that during normal flow
and at cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the checks shall be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
pressure differential relief valve, by discharge to atmosphere, shall operate
to maintain the pressure between the checks less than the supply pressure. The
unit shall include tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the
assembly and each assembly shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
The assembly is designed to protect against a health hazard (i.e.,
contaminant).
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE, DETECTOR ASSEMBLY. A specially designed assembly
composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly with a specific bypass water meter and a meter-sized approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. The meter shall register (in
U.S. gallons) accurately for only very low rates of flow and shall show a
registration for all rates of flow. This assembly shall be used to protect
against health hazard (i.e., contaminant).
   SERVICE CONNECTIONS. The terminal end of a service connection from the
public potable water system (i.e., where the town loses jurisdiction and
sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the consumer's
water system).
   VACUUM BREAKER, ATMOSPHERIC TYPE. The terminal end of a service connection
from the public potable water system (i.e., where the town loses jurisdiction
and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the consumer's
water system).
   VACUUM BREAKER, PRESSURE TYPE. An assembly containing an independently
operating internally loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded
air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly
must be equipped with properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off
valves attached at each end of the assembly. This assembly is designed to
protect against a health hazard (i.e., contaminant) under a back-siphonage
condition only.
   WATER PURVEYOR. The owner or operator of a public potable water system,
providing an approved water supply to the public.
   WATER SUPPLY, APPROVED.
      (1)   Any public potable water supply which has been investigated and
approved by the State Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources.
The system must be operating under a valid health permit.
      (2)   In determining what constitutes an approved water supply, the State
Division of Health Services shall have the final judgment as to its safety and
potability.
   WATER SUPPLY, AUXILIARY. Any water supply on or available to the premises
other that the purveyor's approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary
water supplies may include water from another purveyor's public water supply or
any natural source such as well, spring, river, stream and the like, used water
or industrial fluids. These waters may be polluted, contaminated or
objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water
purveyor does not have sanitary control.
   WATER SUPPLY, UNAPPROVED. A water supply which has not been approved for
human consumption by the State Department of Environment, Health and Natural
Resources.
   WATER, USED. Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public water
system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of
delivery and is no longer under the control of the water purveyor.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.419 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   Authorized representative(s) from the town shall have the right to
enter, upon presentation of proper credentials and identification, any
building, structure or premises during normal business hours or at any time
during the event of an emergency, to perform any duty imposed by this chapter.
Those duties may include sampling and testing of water or inspections and
observations of all piping systems connected to the public water supply. Where
a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification
and clearance before entry into his or her premises, the user shall make
necessary arrangements with the security guards so that upon presentation of
suitable identification, town's Public Utilities Department personnel will be
permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their
specific responsibilities. Refusal to allow entry for these purposes may result
in discontinuance of water service.
   (B)   On request, the consumer shall furnish to the town any pertinent
information regarding the water supply system on the property where cross-
connections and backflow are deemed possible.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.420 ELIMINATION OF CROSS-CONNECTIONS; DEGREE OF HAZARD.
   When cross-connections are found to exist, the owner, his or her agent,
occupant or tenant will be notified in writing to disconnect the same within
the time limit established by the town's Public Utilities Department. The
degree of protection required and maximum time allowed for compliance will be
based upon the potential degree of hazard to the public water supply system.
The maximum time limits are as follows:
   (A)   Cross-connections with private wells or other auxiliary water
supplies: immediate disconnection;
   (B)   All facilities which pose a health hazard to the potable water system
must have a containment assembly in the form of a reduced pressure principle
backflow prevention assembly within 60 days;
   (C)   All industrial and commercial facilities not identified as a health
hazard shall be considered non-health hazard facilities. All non-health hazard
facilities must install, as a minimum containment assembly, a double check
valve assembly within 90 days;
   (D)   If, in the judgment of the town's Public Utilities Department, an
imminent health hazard exists, water service to the building or premises where
a cross-connection exists may be terminated unless an air gap is immediately
provided or the cross-connection is immediately eliminated;
   (E)   Based upon recommendation from the town, the consumer is responsible
for installing sufficient internal isolation backflow prevention assemblies
and/or methods (i.e., air gap, pressure vacuum breakers, reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly, double check valve assembly);
   (F)   Water mains served by Appalachian State University, but not maintained
by the town, should be considered cross-connections, with degree of hazard to
be determined by town's Public Utilities Department; the degree of protection
shall be based upon the degree of hazard, as determined by the town's Public
Utilities Department.
   (G)   In the event that a town Cross-Connection Control Inspector does not
have sufficient access to every portion of a private water system (i.e.,
classified research and development facilities; federal government property) to
allow a complete evaluation of the degree of hazard associated with the private
water systems, an approved reduced pressure principle assembly shall be
required as a minimum of protection.
   (H)   No person shall fill special-use tanks or tankers containing
pesticides, fertilizers, other toxic chemicals or their residues from the
public water system except at a location equipped with an air gap or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly properly
installed on the public water supply.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.421 INSTALLATION OF ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance
with the specifications furnished by the town's Public Utilities Department,
and/or the manufacturer's installation instructions and/or in the latest
edition of the State Building Code then in existence.
   (B)   All new construction plans and specifications, when required by the
State Building Code and the State Division of Health Services (NCDEHNR), shall
be made available to the town for review and approval and to determine the
degree of hazard.
   (C)   Ownership, testing and maintenance of the assembly shall be the
responsibility of the customer.
   (D)   All double check valve assemblies must be installed in drainable pits
wherever below-ground installation is necessary, in accordance with detailed
specifications provided by the town's Public Utilities Department.
   (E)   Reduced pressure principle assemblies must be installed in a
horizontal position and in a location in which no portion of the assembly can
become submerged in any substance under any circumstances (pit and/or below
grade installations are prohibited). Double check valve assemblies may be
installed in a vertical position with prior approval from the town's Cross-
Connection Control Department; provided, the flow of water is in an upward
direction.
   (F)   The installation of a backflow prevention assembly which is not
approved must be replaced with an approved backflow prevention assembly.
   (G)   The installer is responsible to make sure a backflow prevention
assembly is working properly upon installation and is required to furnish the
following information to the town's Cross-Connection Control Program Department
within 15 days after a reduced pressure principle backflow preventer (RP),
double check-detector assembly (DCDA), pressure vacuum breaker (PVB) or reduced
pressure principle detector assembly (RPDA) is installed:
      (1)   Service address where assembly is located;
      (2)   Owner (and address, if different from service address);
      (3)   Description of assembly's location;
      (4)   Date of installation;
      (5)   Installer's name, plumbing company represented, plumber's license
number and project permit number;
      (6)   Type of assembly, size of assembly;
      (7)   Manufacturer, model number, serial number; and
      (8)   Test results/reports.
   (H)   When it is not possible to interrupt water service, provisions shall
be made for a parallel installation of backflow prevention assemblies. The
town's Public Utilities Department will not accept an unprotected bypass around
a backflow preventer when the assembly is in need of testing, repair or
replacement.
   (I)   The town shall, upon notification, install the appropriate containment
assembly not to exceed the following time frame:
      (1)   Health hazard: 60 days; and
      (2)   Non-health hazard: 90 days.
   (J)   Following installation, all RP, DCVA, PVB, DCDA and RPDA are required
to be tested by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester within ten
days.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.422 TESTING AND REPAIR OF ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   Testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be made by a certified
backflow prevention assembly tester or may be contracted out to the town's
Cross-Connection Control Department at the customer's expense. The tests are to
be conducted upon installation and annually thereafter or at a frequency
established by town's Public Utilities Department. A record of all testing and
repairs is to be retained by the customer. Copies of the records must be
provided to the town's Public Utilities Cross- Connection Control Department
within ten business days after the completion of any testing and/or repair
work.
   (B)   Any time that repairs to backflow prevention assemblies are deemed
necessary, whether through annual or required testing or routine inspection by
the owner or by the town's Public Utilities Department, these repairs must be
completed within a specified time in accordance with the degree of hazard. In
no case shall this time period exceed:
      (1)   Health hazard facilities: 14 days; and
      (2)   Non-health hazard facilities: 21 days.
   (C)   All backflow prevention assemblies with test cocks are required to be
tested annually or at a frequency established by town's Department of Public
Utilities. Testing requires a water shutdown usually lasting five to 20
minutes. For facilities that require an uninterrupted supply of water and when
it is not possible to provide water service from two separate meters,
provisions shall be made for a parallel installation of backflow prevention
assemblies.
   (D)   All certified backflow prevention assembly testers must utilize the
backflow prevention assembly test equipment which has been provided/approved by
the town's Public Utilities Department. All test equipment shall be registered
with the town's Cross-Connection Control Department. All test equipment shall
be checked for accuracy annually (at a minimum), calibrated, if necessary and
certified to the town as to the accuracy/calibration, employing a calibration
method acceptable to the town. (See §
50.417.)
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any customer or certified tester to submit
any record to the town which is false or incomplete in any material respect. It
shall be unlawful for any customer or certified tester to fail to submit to the
town any record which is required by this chapter. The violations may result in
any of the enforcement actions outlined in §
50.426.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.423 FACILITIES REQUIRING PROTECTION.
   (A)   Approved backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed on the
service line to any premises that the town has identified as having a potential
for backflow.
   (B)   (1)   The following types of facilities or services have been
identified by the town as having a potential for backflow of non-potable water
into the public water supply system. Therefore, an approved backflow prevention
assembly will be required on all services according to the degree of hazard
present. Other types of facilities or services not listed below may also be
required to install approved backflow prevention assemblies if determined
necessary by the town. As a minimum requirement, all commercial services will
be required to install a double check valve assembly, unless otherwise listed
below.
DCVA = Double check valve assembly
RP= Reduced pressure principle assembly
DCDA = Double check detector assembly
RPDA = Reduced pressure detector assembly
AG = Air gap
PVB = Pressure vacuum breaker
Automotive services stations, dealerships and the like
   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
   Health hazard                                                         RP
Automotive plants                                                           RP
Auxiliary water systems
   Approved public/private water supply                                  DCVA
   Unapproved public/private water supply                                AG
Bakeries
   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
   Health hazard                                                         RP
Beauty shops/barber shops
   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
   Health hazard                                                         RP
Beverage bottling plants                                                    RP
Breweries                                                                   RP
Buildings: hotels, apartment houses, public and private buildings or other
structures having unprotected cross- connections
   (Under 5 stories) no health hazard                                    DCVA
   (Under 5 stories) health hazard                                       RP
   (Over 5 stories) all                                                  RP
Canneries, packing houses and rendering plants                              RP
Chemical plants: manufacturing, processing, compounding or treatment        RP
Chemically contaminated water systems                                       RP
Commercial car-wash facilities                                              RP
Commercial greenhouses                                                      RP
Commercial sales establishments (department stores, malls and the like)
   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
   Health hazard                                                         RP
Concrete/asphalt plants                                                     RP
Dairies and cold storage plants                                             RP
Dye works                                                                   RP
Film laboratories                                                           RP
Fire systems
   Systems 3/4-inch to 2-inch
      No health hazard                                                DCDA
      Health hazard (booster pumps, foam, antifreeze solution and the RPDA)
   Systems 2-1/2-inch to 10-inch (or larger)
      No health hazard                                                DCDA
      Health hazard (booster pumps, foam, antifreeze solution and the RPDA)
Hospitals, medical buildings, sanitariums, morgues, mortuaries, autopsy
facilities, nursing and convalescent homes, medical clinics and veterinary  RP
hospitals
Industrial facilities
   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
   Health hazard                                                         RP
Laundries
   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
   Health hazard: (i.e., dry cleaners)                                   RP
Lawn irrigation systems (split taps)
   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
   Health hazard: (booster pumps, chemical systems)                      RP
Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing and fabricating plants            RP
Mobile home parks
   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
   Health hazard                                                         RP
Oil and gas production, storage or transmission properties                  RP
Paper and paper products plants                                             RP
Pest control (exterminating and fumigation)                                 RP
Plating plant                                                               RP
Power plants                                                                RP
Radioactive materials or substances, plants or facilities handling          RP
Restaurants
   No health hazard                                                      DCDA
   Health hazard                                                         RP
Restricted, classified or other closed facilities                           RP
Rubber plants (natural or synthetic)                                        RP
Sand and gravel plants                                                      RP
Schools and colleges                                                        RP
Sewage and storm drain facilities                                           RP
Swimming pools                                                              RP
Used water and industrial fluids                                            RP
Waterfront facilities and industries                                        RP
 
      (2)   All assemblies and installations shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the town's Public Utilities Department.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.424 CONNECTIONS WITH UNAPPROVED SOURCES OF SUPPLY.
   (A)   No person shall connect or cause to be connected any supply of water
not approved by the State Department of Environment, Heath and Natural
Resources to the water system supplied by the town. Any connections allowed by
the town must be in conformance with the backflow prevention requirements of
this chapter.
   (B)   In the event of contamination or pollution of a public or consumer
potable water system, the consumer shall notify the town and the town's Public
Utilities Department immediately in order that appropriate measures may be
taken to overcome and eliminate the contamination or pollution.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011) Penalty, see §
50.999
§ 50.425 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   All connections for fire protection systems connected with the public
water system, two inches and smaller, shall be protected with an approved
double check valve assembly as a minimum requirement. All fire systems using
toxic additives or booster pumps shall be protected by an approved reduced
pressure principle assembly at the main service connection.
   (B)   All connections for fire protection systems connected with the public
water system greater than two inches shall be protected with an approved double
check detector assembly as a minimum requirement. All fire protection systems
using toxic or hazardous additives or booster pumps shall be protected by an
approved reduced pressure principle detector assembly at the main service
connection.
   (C)   All existing backflow prevention assemblies two and one-half inches
and larger installed on fire protection systems (that were initially approved
by the town's Public Utilities Department) shall be allowed to remain on the
premises, as long as they are being properly maintained, tested and repaired as
required by this chapter. If, however, the existing assembly must be replaced
(once it can no longer be repaired) or in the event of proven water theft
through an unmetered source, the consumer shall be required to install an
approved double check detector assembly or reduced pressure principle detector
assembly as required by this provision.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.426 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The owner, manager, supervisor and person in charge of any
installation found not to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter
shall be notified in writing with regard to the corrective action(s) to be
taken. The time for compliance shall be in accordance with §
50.420.
   (B)   The owner, manager, supervisor and person in charge of any
installation which remains in non-compliance after the time prescribed in the
initial notification, as outlined in §
50.420, shall be considered in violation of this chapter and may be issued a
civil citation by the town. The citation shall specify the nature of the
violation and the provision(s) of this chapter violated and further notify the
offender that the civil penalty for the violation is as set forth in division
(C) below and is to be paid to the town at the office of the Public Utilities
Department, 321 E. King Street Boone, North Carolina, within 30 days. If the
penalty prescribed herein is not paid within the time allowed, the town may
initiate a civil action in the nature of a debt and recover the sums set forth
in division (C) below, plus the cost of the action and attorney's fees.
   (C)   Any offender who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in the aforementioned notification shall be subject to a civil
penalty of up to $1,000 per violation. Each day in which a violation of any
provision of this chapter shall occur or continue shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
   (D)   If, in the judgment of town, any owner, manager, supervisor and person
in charge of any installation is found to be in non-compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or neglects his or her responsibility to correct any
violation, the town may discontinue water service until compliance is achieved.
   (E)   Failure of a certified tester to submit any record required by this
chapter or the submission of falsified reports/records may result in a civil
penalty of up to $1,000 per violation. If a certified backflow prevention
assembly tester submits falsified records to town, the town may take the
necessary actions to revoke certification to test backflow prevention
assemblies within the potable water system for a time period not to exceed one
year. The tester will then be required to complete an approved certification
course to acquire a new certification. Falsification made to records/reports
after becoming re-certified shall result in the permanent revocation of
backflow testing certification, in addition to a civil penalty of $1,000 per
violation.
   (F)   Enforcement of this program shall be administered by the Manager of
the town or his or her authorized representative.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.427 ADOPTION.
   This chapter amendment shall be in full force and effective 6-26-2003.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
FATS, OIL AND GREASE PREVENTION PROGRAM STANDARDS
§ 50.440 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter sets forth uniform requirements for contributors into the
wastewater collection and treatment system for the town, enables the town to
comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water
Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.), the state-issued collection system permit and
more completely describes how contributors shall meet the requirements in §
50.333.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2013)
§ 50.441 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following terms and phrases shall have
the meanings designated below.
   (A)   The following abbreviations, when used in this subchapter, shall have
the designated meanings.
      BMPs. Best management practices.
      C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
      FOGPP. Fat, oil and grease prevention program.
      FSE. Food service establishment.
      gpd. Gallons per day.
      HRT. Hydraulic retention time.
      PDI. Plumbing and Drainage Institute.
      POTW. Publicly owned treatment works (includes collection system).
      WWTP. Wastewater treatment plant.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACCESSIBLE. Direct access to each compartment of the grease removal
device without the necessity of removing any panel, door, vehicle, equipment,
materials or other similar obstructions that are not a part of the grease
removal device.
      BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs). The measures or practices used to
reduce the amount of pollution entering the sanitary sewer system, surface
water, air, land or ground waters.
      FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state so that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a pretreatment device
approved by the town.
      FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT (FSE). A facility engaged in the preparation
and/or packaging of food and/or beverage for sale and/or consumption. FOOD
SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS shall include, but not be limited to: food
manufacturers, food packagers, restaurants, cafés, bars, bakeries, hot dog
stands, grocery stores and kitchens in hotels, lounges, hospitals, nursing
homes and schools.
      GREASE. Describes anything containing fats, oils and/or grease (FOG),
including food and beverages containing animal and vegetable components.
      GREASE REMOVAL DEVICE.  Any device designed to remove grease waste from
wastewater.
      GREASE WASTE. All contents of the grease interceptor/traps at food
service establishments, including accumulated floatable oil, whether emulsified
or not, whether solidified or viscous, solids, water and trash.
      GREASE WASTE HAULER. A business licensed to collect and transport grease
waste to an approved facility. A GREASE WASTE HAULER may also provide other
services to a facility related to grease interceptor/trap maintenance.
      INTERCEPTOR. A containment box designed to passively remove and retain
grease waste from kitchen wastewater prior to discharge into the sanitary sewer
system. It is usually installed outside.
      LOCAL CODE OFFICIAL. Town Planning and Inspections Inspector responsible
for approving building permits.
      POTW DIRECTOR. The Town Director of Public Utilities, the town
administrator designated with the responsibility for the pretreatment program
and the enforcement of this subchapter, or his or her designee.
      PRETREATMENT SECTION. The section in the town responsible for the control
of pollutants introduced into the POTW from industrial wastewater sources. The
section was developed by the town in compliance with federal regulation 40
C.F.R. § 403.8, and approved by the approval authority in accordance with 40
C.F.R. § 403.11.
      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works, as defined by §
212 of the Clean Water Act. POTW is owned in this instance by the town. This
definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes
of a liquid nature. It also includes sewer, pipes and other conveyances only if
they convey water to the POTW treatment plant.
      SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissive.
      SOLIDS INTERCEPTOR. A containment box designed to remove solids from
kitchen wastewater.
      SOLIDS SCREEN. Any device that screens out solids one-half inch or larger
in dimension from the wastewater.
      TRAP. A containment box designed to actively remove and retain grease
waste from kitchen wastewater prior to discharge into the sanitary sewer
system. It is usually installed inside.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.442 EDUCATION.
   An education program employed by the town will be used to encourage proper
grease disposal practices by all contributors to the POTW.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.443 INSTALLATION.
   (A)   FSE shall install grease removal device(s), at FSE expense, as
required by the POTW Director.
   (B)   FSE shall hire a grease removal device manufacturer, commercial
plumber, architect or engineer to determine the correct size, design and
location for the grease removal device.
   (C)   The hired manufacturer, commercial plumber, architect or engineer
should size interceptors for a 30-minute HRT and traps for the proper flow
rating. The POTW Director will not advise any FSE about the specific
installation or sizing of the grease removal device.
   (D)   FSE shall install only the size grease removal device that is
recommended by the hired manufacturer, commercial plumber or engineer and
approved by the POTW Director and the local code official.
   (E)   Flow control devices and solids screens shall be required prior to
grease traps.
   (F)   The maximum size for an interceptor/trap shall be 2,000 gallons. If
the calculated minimum size is larger than this, two or more interceptors of
approximately equal size shall be installed in series.
   (G)   Grease removal device selection and installation shall be done
according to all applicable laws and building codes, even where not indicated
in this subchapter.
   (H)   Grease removal device installation and operation shall be done
according to all manufacturer’s instructions, unless more stringent
instructions are given by the POTW Director.
   (I)   All compartments of grease removal devices shall be readily and easily
accessible for FSE maintenance requirements and town inspection.
   (J)   The following shall be connected to the grease removal device: all
fixtures and drains to wastewater lines in kitchens, food and beverage prep and
bar areas (exceptions may be made for drink fountains and condensate drains
that are not flush with the floor). Automatic dishwashers shall be plumbed to
grease interceptors, but shall not be plumbed to grease traps. Kitchens with
automatic dishwashers bypassing a grease trap must have a pre-rinse sink
present.
   (K)   Food grinders shall be connected to grease interceptor/traps. The
interceptor/trap size should be increased by 30% to accommodate the high solid
waste stream, and when connected to a grease trap, a solids interceptor will be
required prior to the grease trap. It is strongly recommended that food grinder
use be discontinued and the food grinder removed as it increases the FSE cost
of installation and maintenance.
   (L)   In the case where grease removal device installation occurred before
this subchapter was approved by town and the grease removal device does not
meet the standards of this subchapter, the FSE shall upgrade its grease removal
device, when the POTW Director determines it is necessary.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.444 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   FSE shall ensure that interceptor(s) are pumped out by a grease waste
hauler, removing all water, floatable oil, settled solids and any other visible
signs of grease anywhere within the grease interceptor, at a frequency adequate
for the proper function of the interceptor and at a minimum of every three
months. Any other pumping schedule that is less frequent shall be subject to
written approval by the POTW Director.
   (B)   The cleaning frequency of a grease trap shall be adequate for the
proper function of the trap and at a minimum of every one month. Any other
pumping schedule that is less frequent shall be subject to written approval by
the POTW Director. The trap must have surface grease and oil removed, settled
solids removed, all sides scraped, removable parts removed and cleaned,
inspected for damage and corrosion, and properly reassembled.
      (1)   If a grease waste hauler pumps the trap, then all contents must be
removed as described in divisions (A) through (H) of this section; except that,
it must be done at the frequency indicated in this division (B).
      (2)   When cleaned by FSE personnel (i.e., surface grease and settled
solids have been removed), water in trap may remain in the unit or may be
flushed to the sewer. FSE shall be responsible for appropriate disposal of the
removed substances. Removed substances shall not be reintroduced to the sewer
collection system.
   (C)   To ensure proper function, grease interceptor/trap shall be cleaned
whenever the combined thickness of the floating greases and settled solids is
equal to or greater than 25% of the total liquid depth in the interceptor/trap.
   (D)   No FSE shall allow a grease waste hauler to skim the waste in an
interceptor/trap. Both sides of the interceptor/trap shall be cleaned to the
bottom at all times as indicated above. Washdown water shall be pumped out as
well.
   (E)   Reintroduction of wastewater (e.g., decanting) removed from a grease
interceptor/trap is prohibited, whether it has been treated by the grease waste
hauler or not, except as noted in division (B)(2) above.
   (F)   It is recommended that the FSE be witness to interceptor/trap
cleaning.
   (G)   FSEs shall not use any chemical and/or biological product to remove
grease from the grease removal device. (These products move grease into the
sewer collection system and defeat the purpose of having interceptor/traps in
the first place.)
   (H)   All needed repairs shall be completed within 30 days of discovery,
unless otherwise instructed by the town.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.445 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   (A)   The fat, oil and grease prevention program (FOGPP) packet, provided by
the town, shall be kept on-site for reference and management training for the
duration of the operation of the FSE at its present site. The FSE shall make
this packet available upon request by the POTW Director.
   (B)   FSE shall retain, on site, each invoice, receipt and cleaning log from
the grease waste hauler for a period of three years from the date the waste was
removed from the FSE’s site. Upon request by the POTW Director, the FSE shall
make any and all original copies of the invoices, receipts and cleaning logs
from the grease waste hauler available for review.
   (C)   FSE shall submit a copy of the invoice or receipt from the grease
waste hauler each time the interceptor/trap is cleaned. The document from the
grease waste hauler must have the following information on it or a town waste
manifest form must accompany it: name and physical address of the FSE;
contracted service frequency; name, physical address and phone number of grease
waste hauler; identification of specific grease removal device pumped; date of
service. FSEs that clean their own trap(s) shall submit a copy of the cleaning
log used by FSE staff each month. These reports are due by the last day of the
month that follows the month in which the interceptor/trap was cleaned.
   (D)   FSE wishing to obtain or maintain a waiver from the FOGPP must request
and submit an application for the waiver annually by January 30. Waivers are
given to FSE that cannot contribute grease waste to the sewer due to FSE
operations. Waivers are given to FSEs that are exempt from Health Department
regulations (G.S. §§ 130A-247 through 130A-250), unless the FSE has a deep
fryer or is causing grease waste to accumulate in the sewer.
   (E)   (1)   All reports required by the town shall be submitted to the town
at the following address, unless other arrangements are made with pretreatment
staff:
      Town of Boone - WWTP
      Pretreatment Section
      P.O. Box 192
      Boone, N.C. 28607
      (2)   All reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.446 INSPECTION.
   The FSE shall provide access to all compartments of the grease removal
device for inspection by an authorized representative from the town. The
inspection may include the interior and exterior structure of the grease
removal device, the waste sources and types that are plumbed to the grease
removal device, and the waste levels inside the grease removal device. Any
corrective actions indicated by the Inspector shall be enforceable.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.447 FEES.
   An annual program fee will be assessed and is due in July of each year. The
annual program fee will be waived for each FSE that received zero violations
during the previous calendar year. The amount of this fee will be listed on the
schedule of charges and fees.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
§ 50.448 ENFORCEMENT RESPONSE PLAN.
   The enforcement response plan for this program models the grid in §
50.999 and will go into effect after a 12-month educational period. The year
begins with the receipt of the FOGPP packet. During the educational period,
enforcement will consist of educational materials and increased frequency of
inspection. A copy of the enforcement response plan is provided in the FOGPP
document packet mentioned in §
50.445(A).
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2012)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 50.460 GENERAL RATES AND CHARGES.
Service Fee
Service                                      Fee
Building permit - pretreatment review        $115
Building permit - utility systems review     $115
Zoning permit - site plan review for utility $115
connections
Re-inspection fee                            $55 (per employee, per trip)
Meter deposits*
Residential                                  $150
Commercial                                   $500
*Note: Deposits for any meter outside corporate limits are double the
rate listed.
Construction meter (temporary)
3/4"                                         $500
2"                                           $1,600
3"                                           $1,600
System development fee
Water                                        $7.89 per gallon
Sewer                                        $7.99 per gallon
Minimum fee*                                 Water   Sewer
Residential
   3/4" includes 0-1,000 gallons          $19.70  $18.45
   3/4" includes 1,001-2,000 gallons      $21.50  $20.10
Commercial
   3/4" includes first 2,000 gallons      $28.75  $26.90
   1" includes first 2,000 gallons        $35.00  $32.75
   1 1/2" includes first 2,000 gallons    $41.25  $38.60
   2" includes first 2,000 gallons        $41.25  $38.60
   3" includes first 2,000 gallons        $53.70  $50.30
   4" includes first 2,000 gallons        $66.20  $61.95
   6" includes first 2,000 gallons        $91.15  $85.30
   8" includes first 2,000 gallons        $116.10 $108.75
*Note: Minimum rates for use outside corporate limits are double the rate
listed. Master meters installed for residential multi-family properties
are required to pay the minimum rate equivalent to individual unit
metering.
Water distribution*
2,001-4,999 gallons                          $8.55
5,000-9,999 gallons                          $8.95
10,000-14,999 gallons                        $9.30
15,000-19,999 gallons                        $9.55
Over 20,000 gallons                          $9.85
*Note: Minimum rates for distribution outside corporate limits are double
the rate listed.
Sewer collection*
Residential- over 2,000 gallons              $7.10 per 1,000 gallons
Commercial- over 2,000 gallons               $7.40 per 1,000 gallons
**Note: Minimum rates for collection outside corporate limits are double
the rate listed.
Miscellaneous utility fees
Pretreatment fee (previous violation         $100
BOD surcharge                                $0.376 per pound
TSS surcharge                                $0.433 per pound
Bio-solid sales                              $1 per ton
WTP sample charge                            $20 per sample
Septic disposal fee
   Residential                            $0.10 per gallon
   Commercial                             $0.13 per gallon
Meter connect/disconnect/reconnect           $40 each
Returned check charge                        $25
Meter re-read charge                         $10
Late penalty charge                          $10
 
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 7-1-2011; Ord. passed 6-19-2018; Ord.
passed - -; Ord. passed 6-28-2023; Ord. passed 6-26-2024; Ord. passed 6-25-
2025)
§ 50.461 OVERDUE FEES AND OTHER CHARGES.
   (A)   Except for monthly water and sewer consumption fees that are subject
to late penalty charges, all fees and charges assessed pursuant to this
chapter, including but not limited to connection or extension fees, meter fees,
and system development fees, must be paid within 30 days of the date of
invoicing. In the event fees and charges are not paid within 30 days of
invoicing, interest shall accrue at the rate of 1.25% per month or the highest
rate allowed by law, whichever is lowest, and in addition, the town may revoke
or suspend any permits it has issued authorizing the construction or use and/or
issue a stop work order until such fees and charges are paid.
   (B)   The Administrator may in his or her discretion allow construction or
use to proceed without payment in full of all fees and charges but subject to
interest charges as previously specified where the applicant signs a written
agreement to pay such fees, charges, and interest prior to issuance of a
Certificate of Occupancy or other final approval authorizing the use or
occupancy (“final certificate”). The Administrator ordinarily will allow such
late payment, subject to interest charges, in the absence of extenuating
circumstances. Extenuating circumstances include, but are not limited to,
circumstances in which the Administrator has reasonable grounds to believe that
all fees, charges and interest will not be paid by the applicant before a
certificate of occupancy or other final certificate is issued, and in cases
where the applicant has failed to pay all fees, charges and/or interest when
due on one or more other projects.
   (C)   All fees, charges and accrued interest must be paid before a
certificate of occupancy or other final certificate may be issued and before a
permanent service account may be opened.
(Ord. passed 7-18-2019)
§ 50.462 USER CHARGE METHODOLOGY.
   (A)   Debt service based on 3% interest, 20-year declining payments.
   (B)   Billable flow projections:
      (1)   Year 1: 1.35 mgd; and
      (2)   Year 20: 2.12 mgd.
   (C)   Annual O&M costs are based on a year one estimate of $888,047 and year
20 estimate of $1,643,273, projected linearly.
(Annual Debt Service (Principal & Interest) + Annual O&M) ÷ (Billable Flow
(Gallons) x 365) x 1,000 = Cost Per 1,000 Gallons
   (D)   Methodology for toxics must be determined on a case-by-case basis
according to the specific nature of the toxic and its impact on the POTW.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011)
§ 50.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any user or contributor who is found to have failed to comply with any
provision of this chapter, except §§
50.240 through
50.243, or the orders, rules, regulations and wastewater permits issued
hereunder, may be assessed a civil penalty up to $25,000 per day per violation,
as stated in G.S. § 143-215.6A, 15A 02H NCAC .0918 and/or G.S. § 143-215.3(a).
In no case, shall the amount be less than the amount of the penalty, if any,
imposed upon the town as a result of the violation. Minimum actions to be taken
in response to violations are charted below, but elevated enforcement as
described in §
50.999 may occur at the discretion of the POTW Director.
      (1)   Continuing violation. Each days continuing violation of any section
of this chapter, except §§
50.240 through
50.243, shall be a separate and distinct offense.
      (2)   Violation of chapter. Any person, industry, commercial activity,
institution or other type of business found violating any provision of this
chapter shall become liable to the town for any expense, loss or damage
incurred by the town due to the violation.
      (3)   Court of competent jurisdiction. Notwithstanding divisions (1) and
(2) above, this chapter may also be enforced by appropriate equitable remedies
issued from a court of competent jurisdiction.
      (4)   In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW Director
shall consider the following:
         (a)   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural resources, to
the public health, or to public or private property resulting from the
violation;
         (b)   The duration and gravity of the violation;
         (c)   The effect on ground or surface water quantity or quality or on
air quality;
 
DESCRIPTION OF  FIRST OFFENSE SECOND OFFENSE  THIRD OFFENSE   SUBSEQUENT
NONCOMPLIANCE                                                 OFFENSES
                                                              Notice of
Title V                       Notice of       Notice of       Violation
noncompliance   Notice of     Violation       Violation       -with increased
-unaware of     Violation     -with civil     -with increased civil penalty and
requirement     -warning      penalty         civil penalty   possible
                                                              suspension of
                                                              service
                                                              Notice of
Title V                       Notice of       Notice of       Violation
noncompliance   Notice of     Violation       Violation       -with increased
-aware of       Violation     -with civil     -with increased civil penalty and
requirement     -warning      penalty         civil penalty   possible
                                                              suspension of
                                                              service
Title V
noncompliance                                 Notice of       Notice of
-results in     Notice of     Notice of       Violation       Violation
NPDES violation Violation     Violation       -with increased -with increased
of or other     -with civil   -with increased civil penalty   civil penalty and
state-issued    penalty       civil penalty   and possible    possible
permit or state                               suspension of   suspension of
general statute                               service         service
violations
                Notice of     Notice of       Notice of       Notice of
Title V         Violation     Violation -with Violation -with Violation -with
noncompliance   -with civil   suspension of   suspension of   suspension of
-results in     penalty and   service and     service and     service and
endangerment    possible      increased civil increased civil increased civil
                suspension of penalty         penalty         penalty
                service
 
         (d)   The cost of rectifying the damage;
         (e)   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;
         (f)   Whether the violation was committed willfully or intentionally;
         (g)   The prior record of the violator;
         (h)   The cost of enforcement to the town.
      (5)   Penalties between $10,000 and $25,000 per day per violation may be
assessed against a violator:
         (a)   For any class of violation, only if a civil penalty has been
imposed against the violator within the five years preceding the violation; or
         (b)   In the case of failure to file, submit or make available, as the
case may be, any documents, data or reports required by this chapter, except §§
50.240 through
50.243, or the orders, rules, regulations and wastewater permits issued
hereunder, only if the POTW Director determines that the violation was
intentional and a civil penalty has been imposed against the violator within
the five years preceding the violation.
      (6)   A contributor in violation will be issued a notice of violation
explaining the violation and what penalty, if any, is being assessed. The
assessment will be added to the contributor's next scheduled sewer service
charges, and the POTW shall have the remedies for the collection of the
assessment as it has for collection of other service charges.
      (7)   Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this section
shall be as provided in §
50.339.
   (B)   Remedies, in addition to those previously mentioned in this chapter,
are available to the POTW Director who may use any single one or combination
against a noncompliant user or contributor. Additional available remedies
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Criminal violations. Referral to the District Attorney for the 24th
Judicial District for the prosecution of noncompliant users or contributors who
violate the provisions of G.S. § 143-215.6B.
         (a)   Under North Carolina law, it is a crime to negligently violate
any term, condition or requirement of a pretreatment permit (called wastewater
permits in this chapter), or negligently fail to apply for a pretreatment
permit, issued by local governments (G.S. § 143-215.6B(f)), to knowingly and
willfully violate any term, condition or requirement of a pretreatment permit,
or knowingly and willfully fail to apply for a pretreatment permit issued by
local governments (G.S. 143-215.6B(g)), to knowingly violate any term,
condition or requirement of a pretreatment permit issued by local governments,
or knowingly fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, knowing at the time that
a person is placed in imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury (G.S.
143-215.6B(h)), and to falsify information required under Article 21 of Chapter
143 of the General Statutes (G.S. 143-215.6B(i));
         (b)   Violation of a prohibition or requirement of a Stage III Water
Shortage shall be a misdemeanor, pursuant to G.S. § 14-4, punishable by a fine
equal to the stated civil penalty, up to a maximum of $500 and imprisonment for
each offense of up to 30 days;
      (2)   Injunctive relief. Whenever an industrial wastewater contributor is
in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or an order or permit issued
hereunder, the POTW Director may petition the Superior Court of Justice for the
issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary and permanent injunction,
which restrains or compels the activities in question;
      (3)   Performance bonds. The POTW Director may refuse to reissue a
wastewater permit to any industrial wastewater contributor that has failed to
comply with the provisions of this chapter, or any order or previous permit
issued hereunder, unless the industrial wastewater contributor first files with
it a satisfactory bond, payable to the POTW, in a sum not to exceed a value
determined by the POTW Director to be necessary to achieve consistent
compliance;
      (4)   Water supply severance. 
         (a)   Whenever an industrial wastewater contributor is in violation of
the provisions of this chapter, or an order or permit issued hereunder, water
service to the industrial wastewater contributor may be severed and service
will only recommence, at the contributor’s expense, once the contributor has
paid the town all costs associated with re-establishing service as well as all
customary charges for initiating service, and has also demonstrated
satisfactorily the ability and willingness to comply;
         (b)   The town may disconnect a user from the town's water supply
after two or more violations of §§
50.309 and
50.310 during any 36-month period or the duration of a water shortage
declaration, whichever is longer. Should service be disconnected pursuant
thereto, a $100 reconnect fee shall be imposed before service is restored. If
three or more violations of §§
50.309 and/or
50.310 occur during any 36-month period or the duration of the water shortage
declaration, whichever is longer, the town may also, pursuant to the discretion
of the POTW Director, remove the user's water meter and in that event, all
previously unpaid fees and deposits shall be forfeited. Reconnection thereafter
shall only be made with the approval of the Town Manager. Before service is
restored after the removal of the user's water meter, in addition to the $100
reconnect fee, the user shall also be required to pay new tap fees and system
development fees and a deposit equal to twice the usual service deposit.
      (5)   Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent
limitations of this chapter, or contained in a wastewater permit or order
issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected
or abated as directed by the POTW Director. Any person(s) creating a public
nuisance shall be required to reimburse the town for any costs incurred in
removing, abating or remedying the nuisance, including attorney's fees should a
civil action be initiated to correct, discontinue or abate the nuisance. The
town may recover all such costs and expenses.
   (C)   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The POTW
Director may take any, all or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user or contributor. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will
generally be in accordance with the town’s enforcement response plan. However,
the POTW Director may take other action against any user or contributor when
the circumstances warrant. Further, the POTW Director is empowered to take more
than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user or contributor.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed 12-13-2012; Ord. passed 6-19-2018)
APPENDIX A: IMAGES
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1152.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1168.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1170.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1172.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1174.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1176.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1178.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1180.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1182.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1132.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1134.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1136.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1138.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1140.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1142.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1144.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1146.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1148.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1150.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1154.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1156.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1158.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1874.jpg]
(Am. Ord. passed 12-13-2 012)
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1162.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1164.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1166.jpg]
 
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      Chapter
         
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
71.   BICYCLE SAFETY
         
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
         
73.   TOWING AND BOOTING
         
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Administration and enforcement
   
70.03   Accident investigation
   
70.04   Traffic regulation and pedestrian safety
   
70.05   Removal or alteration of traffic tickets
   
70.06   Responsibility of registered vehicle owners for violations;
applicability to town and emergency personnel
   
70.07   (Reserved)
   
70.08   Towing or booting to collect unpaid citations
   
70.09   Appeals for citations issued under this title
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
    For the purpose of this Title VII, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The person or persons designated by the Town Manager to
administer and enforce this title. Whenever this title authorizes or requires
the Administrator to install a traffic-control device controlling parking or
regulating the movement of traffic on, to or from a state-highway-system street
and the installation of a device is in practice a function of the State
Department of Transportation, the Administrator may discharge his or her
responsibility by requesting the State Department of Transportation to install
the device.
   DRIVER. The operator of a vehicle.
   HIGHWAY or STREET. The entire width between property or right-of-way lines
of every way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is open to the
use of the public as a matter of right for the purposes of vehicular traffic.
The terms HIGHWAY or STREET or a combination of the two terms shall be used
synonymously.
   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curb
lines or, if none, then the lateral edge of roadway lines of two or more
highways which join one another at any angle, whether or not one highway
crosses the other. Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of the divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event that the
intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of two roadways of the highways shall be regarded as a separate
intersection.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle that is self-propelled and every vehicle
designed to run upon the highways which is pulled by a self-propelled vehicle.
This shall not include mopeds, as defined in G.S. § 20-4.01(27)d1.
   OPERATOR. A person in actual physical control of a vehicle which is in
motion or which has an engine running. The terms OPERATOR and DRIVER and their
cognates are synonymous.
   PARKING or STANDING. A vehicle is parked or is permitted to stand when it is
stopped and allowed to remain in a fixed location for any duration of time,
whether attended or unattended. Except where the context clearly indicates
otherwise, the limitations on parking and standing in this title apply only to
locations within a street right-of-way. In no case do these limitations on
parking and standing in this title apply only to locations within a street
right-of-way. In no case do these limitations apply when a vehicle is stopped
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions result of an emergency or because the vehicle is disabled.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder. In the event a highway includes
two or more separate roadways, the term. ROADWAY, as used herein, shall refer
to any roadway separately, but not to all roadways collectively.
   SAFETY ZONE. A traffic island or other space that is officially set aside
within a highway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and that is so plainly
marked or indicated by proper signs as to be plainly visible at all times while
set apart as a safety zone.
   STATE HIGHWAY SYSTEM STREET. A street within the town that is part of the
state highway system. Whenever this title regulates parking or the movement of
traffic on, to or from a state highway system street, then to the extent that
concurrence by the State Department of Transportation is necessary (by passage
of a concurring ordinance or otherwise) the regulation shall not become
effective until the concurrence is obtained. The following streets are part of
the state highway system:
Deck Hill                                     Poplar Grove Road
Rivers Street                                 Deerfield Road
U.S. Highway 421 (East and West King Streets) U.S. Highway 321
Water Street                                  Junaluska Road
N.C. Highway 105                              Summerplace Drive
U.S. Highway 321                              Fairway Drive
N.C. Highway 194                              Winkler's Creek Road
High School Drive                             Deck Hill Road
Academy Street                                University Drive
Locust Street                                 Kellwood Drive
Brown Street                                  Pinnacle Drive
Upper half of Eastview Drive                  Daulph Blan Street
 
   STREET. See HIGHWAY.
   TOWN STREET. A street within the town that is not part of the state highway
system but rather is owned and maintained by the town.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICE. Any sign, signal, marking or other device placed or
erected pursuant to a lawfully adopted ordinance and designed to regulate,
warn, guide or control traffic.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device designated to regulate, guide or control
traffic through the use of alternating or flashing lights or by some other
mechanical means.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon fixed rails or tracks; provided that, for the purposes of
this title, bicycles shall be deemed VEHICLES and every rider of a bicycle upon
a highway shall be subject to the provisions of this title applicable to the
driver of a VEHICLE, except those which, by their nature, can have no
application. This term shall not include a device which is designed for and
intended to be used as a means of transportation for a person with a mobility
impairment or who uses the device for mobility enhancement, is suitable for use
both inside and outside a building, including on sidewalks and is limited by
design to 15 mph when the device is being operated by a person with a mobility
impairment or who uses the device for mobility enhancement. This term shall not
include an electric personal assistive mobility device, as defined in G.S. §
20-4.01(7)(a).
(G.S. § 20-4.01) (Ord. passed 10-20-16; Am. Ord. passed 12-16-19)
§ 70.02 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   It is the duty of the town to enforce the provisions of this title and the
state motor vehicle laws.
(Am. Ord. passed 12-16-19)
§ 70.03 ACCIDENT INVESTIGATION.
   It is the duty of the town's law enforcement officers to investigate traffic
accidents and to obtain identification and insurance information of those
persons apparently guilty of violations of this title or state motor vehicle
laws causing or contributing to those accidents. The owner or operator of any
ambulance must arrange for the County Emergency Communications Center to be
notified before leaving to answer a call to the scene of a traffic accident.
(Am. Ord. passed 12-16-19)
§ 70.04 AUTHORITY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS TO PROTECT TRAFFIC SAFETY.
   (A)   In the event that it becomes necessary to protect the safety of
motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians, the town's law enforcement officers may
direct traffic as required and may place temporary official traffic-control
devices without regard to the other provisions of this chapter. No person may
refuse to comply with a lawful order of a law enforcement officer when the
order is given under the authority of this section.
   (B)   The town's law-enforcement officers are authorized to arrange the
towing and storage of any vehicle parked or left standing in any area
designated as a fire lane.
   (C)   The town's law-enforcement officers are authorized to arrange the
removal to the shoulder of the roadway or other suitable place, or the towing
and storage in a safe place, of any vehicle parked or left standing such that
any part of the vehicle is within the main-traveled portion of any public
roadway, or interfering with the regular flow of traffic, or otherwise
constitutes a hazard, within the town limits.
   (D)   The vehicle owner shall be liable for any costs incurred in the
removal, storage, and subsequent disposition of a vehicle, cargo, or other
personal property under the authority of state law and/or this title.
(Am. Ord. passed 12-16-19)
Statutory Reference:
   See also G.S. §§ 20-162 and 160A-301
§ 70.05 REMOVAL OR ALTERATION OF TRAFFIC TICKETS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to remove a traffic ticket from a vehicle or to
permit it to be removed, except for the purpose of answering the charge for
which it was issued.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to alter a traffic ticket and no person may have
in his or her possession an unlawfully altered ticket.
(Am. Ord. passed 12-16-19)
§ 70.06 RESPONSIBILITY OF REGISTERED VEHICLE OWNERS FOR VIOLATIONS;
APPLICABILITY TO TOWN AND EMERGENCY PERSONNEL..
   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) below, it shall be unlawful for any
person to cause, allow or permit a vehicle registered in the name of or
operated by that person to be parked, stopped, left standing or operated in any
manner in violation of the provisions of this title.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the preceding subsection, the registered owner of a
vehicle that has been leased or rented to another person or company shall not
be liable for a violation of a provision of Chapter 72 of this title if, after
receiving notification of the civil violation within 90 days of the date of
occurrence, the owner, within 30 days thereafter, files with the officials or
agents of the municipality an affidavit including the name and address of the
person or company that leased or rented the vehicle. If notification is given
to the owner of the vehicle after 90 days have elapsed from the date of the
violation, the owner is not required to provide the name and address of the
lessee or renter, and the owner shall not be held responsible for the
violation.
   (C)   Town employees and authorized emergency responders shall not be
considered in violation of a provision of this title to the extent their action
is reasonably necessitated by their duties as an employee of the town and/or in
the course of reasonable response to an emergency. This provision shall not
relieve a town employee or the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from
the duty to operate a motor vehicle with due regard for the safety of all
persons and in compliance with all other applicable laws, regulations, and
policies; nor shall this provision protect the driver from the consequences of
such driver's reckless disregard for the safety of others.
(Am. Ord. passed 12-16-19)
§ 70.07 (RESERVED).
§ 70.08 TOWING OR BOOTING TO COLLECT UNPAID CITATIONS.
   Once a vehicle accumulates five citations issued under this title and the
vehicle owner/operator fails to pay these citations within five days of the
issuance of the fifth citation, the vehicle may be booted.
   (A)   A brightly colored adhesive sticker will be placed in a conspicuous
location on the windshield of the booted vehicle stating that the vehicle is in
violation of the parking policy. The sticker will contain information
concerning where and when payment can be made.
   (B)   The owner/operator of the vehicle will be charged a fee of $50 to
remove the boot in addition to his or her outstanding citations.
   (C)   If no contact is made by the owner/operator of the vehicle by 4:00
p.m., the vehicle may be towed. The tow company shall not release the vehicle
until all outstanding penalties and late-payment penalties are paid.
   (D)   Once a vehicle is towed, the owner/operator of the vehicle will be
responsible for all outstanding citations, the boot removal fee of $50 and any
towing and/or storage fees assessed by the towing company.
   (E)   The owner of the vehicle or any person entitled to claim possession of
the vehicle may appeal the towing of the vehicle pursuant to the post-towing
procedures set forth in G.S. §§ 20-219.9 through 20-219.14. If the violator
prevails in his or her judicial appeal of the towing, the town shall reimburse
the violator for the fees and charges which he or she was required to prepay,
as well as for any court costs incurred.
(Am. Ord. passed 12-16-19)
§ 70.09 APPEALS FOR CITATIONS ISSUED PURSUANT TO THIS TITLE.
   (A)   Any person who wishes to appeal a citation issued by a town law
enforcement officer pursuant to this title may do so within ten calendar days
of the issuance of the citation. This appeal shall be made to the Chief of
Police or his or her designee.
   (B)   Any person who wishes to appeal a citation issued by town parking
enforcement personnel pursuant to this title may do so by delivering a written
notice of appeal to the Boone Town Hall located at 567 West King Street, which
written notice must be delivered or post-marked within ten days of the issuance
the citation and shall be heard by the Parking Committee of the Downtown Boone
Development Association. The Parking Committee shall be composed of six
persons. A quorum of three committee members is required to reach a decision on
any appeal. The Parking Committee will meet every two weeks or as needed.
(Ord. passed 10-20-16; Am. Ord. passed 12-16-19)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General. Except as specifically provided otherwise elsewhere in this
Title VII, a violation of this Title VII is a civil violation only, shall not
constitute a criminal offense, and is subject to the general provisions of §
10.99 of this code.
   (B)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Unless specifically provided otherwise by a particular section of
this Title VII, a violation of this title shall subject the offender to a
penalty of $50.
      (2)   Civil penalties that are not voluntarily paid by the violator may
be recovered by the town through a civil action in the nature of a debt.
      (3)   Whenever a member of the Police Department or other person
authorized with the enforcement of the provisions of this title regulating the
parking or operation of vehicles shall find that any of those provisions are
being or have been violated by the owner or operator of the vehicle, the
officer or person shall notify the owner or operator of the vehicle of the
violation by conspicuously attaching to the vehicle a parking violation notice
or citation in a form as the Administrator may direct.
      (4)   If a civil penalty imposed for a violation is not paid within 30
days of the parking violation notice or citation, an additional civil penalty
of $20 shall be imposed for every subsequent month in which the prescribed
penalty for a violation is not been paid.
      (5)   In the event it is necessary for the town to institute a civil
action to collect any civil penalty, the violator shall be responsible for all
court costs and attorney's fees incurred by the town.
      (6)   Civil penalties are imposed pursuant to this Title VII in order to
help fund the town's enforcement of its traffic and parking regulations for the
benefit of the town's residents, businesses and visitors, and not to punish
violators. All civil penalties imposed pursuant to this division (B) and paid
to the town as herein provided shall be paid into the General Fund of the town
and used to fund the town's traffic and parking enforcement operations.
(Ord. passed 5-14-25)
CHAPTER 71: BICYCLE SAFETY
Section
   
71.01   Special provisions for non-motorized wheeled vehicles, including
bicycles, skateboards and the like
   
71.02   Bicycle equipment and operating regulations
 
   
71.99   Penalties
§ 71.01 SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR NON-MOTORIZED WHEELED VEHICLES, INCLUDING
BICYCLES, SKATEBOARDS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Skateboards, skates, and similar devices. The following provisions
govern the operation of non-motorized vehicles other than bicycles, including
but not limited to roller skates, in-line skates, skateboards, coasters,
scooters, and toy vehicles (collectively referred to hereafter as "skating
device") on any public right-of-way or on any property open to the public or
used by the public for pedestrian or vehicular purpose:
      (1)   No person may ride a skating device upon any roadway, except while
crossing a street at a crosswalk, except that a person may ride upon a roadway
upon all of the following conditions:
         (a)   The roadway has a posted speed limit of 20 mph or less;
         (b)   The road is not a through street; and
         (c)   The rider yields to all vehicular traffic and pedestrians.
      (2)   No person riding a skating device may attach himself or herself or
the skating device to any moving motor vehicle.
      (3)   A person may ride a skating device upon a sidewalk only upon the
following conditions:
         (a)   The rider must yield to all pedestrians. Pedestrians shall at
all times have the right-of-way upon a sidewalk. In the case of any doubt of
safe and untouched passage by a pedestrian, a person riding a skating device
shall stop or dismount such device until the pedestrian passes.
         (b)   Riding a skating device is prohibited on the sidewalks adjacent
to King Street from Water Street to Appalachian Street.
   (B)   Bicycles. The following provisions govern the operation of bicycles on
any public right-of-way, including roads, sidewalks, and greenways.
      (1)   Helmets and other equipment must be used as provided at §
71.02 herein.
      (2)   Bicycles may only be ridden on public sidewalks if:
         (a)   The bicyclist is a minor, or is an adult transporting a minor on
the bicycle consistent with the requirements of §
71.02; or
         (b)   The sidewalk is adjacent to a road that the bicyclist reasonably
considers unsafe for bicycling.
      (3)   Bicyclists riding upon a public sidewalk adjacent to a street with
sidewalks available on both sides of the street shall ride in the same
direction as the immediately adjacent lane of motor vehicle traffic where it is
reasonably possible and practical to do so, taking into consideration the
intended route of the bicyclist, the availability of safe alternatives, and
other relevant considerations. Warnings may be issued for violations of this
division, but a citation may be issued only where the bicyclist has
demonstrated repeated and reckless disregard for his or her safety or the
safety of others in the course of violating this provision.
      (4)   Bicyclists must yield to pedestrians. Pedestrians shall at all
times have the right-of-way upon a sidewalk or crosswalk. In the case of any
doubt of safe and untouched passage by a pedestrian, a bicyclist shall stop or
dismount until the pedestrian has passed.
      (5)   Bicyclists riding upon a sidewalk against the direction of the
motor vehicle traffic in the immediately adjacent lane of the street must yield
to motor vehicles at crosswalks. Bicyclists must yield whether the motor
vehicle is entering onto the adjacent street from an intersecting driveway or
road, or exiting that adjacent street onto an intersecting road or driveway.
      (6)   Bicycling is prohibited on the sidewalks adjacent to King Street
from Water Street to Appalachian Street.
   (C)   A bicyclist may not carry any other person upon the handlebars or any
other part of the bicycle not designed for carrying passengers.
   (D)   The limitations stated in this section shall not apply to bicycles
operated by the town's police officers who are engaged in the pursuit or
apprehension of violators. This exemption shall not, however, protect the
driver of any vehicle from the consequence of a reckless disregard of the
safety of others.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord. passed 1-19-2021)
§ 71.02 BICYCLE EQUIPMENT AND OPERATING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Preamble. This section is enacted because:
      (1)   The major cause of death and permanent disability in bicycle
accidents is head injury;
      (2)   Helmets and child carrying devices which meet nationally recognized
standards have been demonstrated to significantly reduce the numbers of head
injuries in accidents;
      (3)   Many cyclists do not use the appropriate equipment; and
      (4)   Incentives are necessary to encourage bicyclists to wear helmets.
   (B)   Regulations.
      (1)   Every person operating a bicycle on a public right-of-way or on any
property open to the public or used by the public for pedestrian or vehicular
purposes shall ride on a permanent and regular attached seat.
      (2)   Every person under the age of 21 operating a bicycle on a public
right-of-way or on any property open to the public or used by the public for
pedestrian or vehicular purposes shall wear a helmet of good fit, fastened
securely and:
         (a)   Meeting ANSI Z90.4 standards;
         (b)   The Snell Memorial Foundation's 1984 Standard for Protective
Headgear for Use in Bicycling;
         (c)   ASTM bicycle helmet standards; or
         (d)   Subsequent amendment(s) to the bicycle helmet standards
described above.
      (3)   No person operating a bicycle on a public right-of-way or on any
property open to the public or used by the public for pedestrian or vehicular
purposes shall allow anyone four years old or younger and weighing 40 pounds or
less to ride as a passenger on the bicycle, other than in a seat which shall
adequately retain the passenger in place and protect the passenger from the
bicycle's moving parts; or else astride a regular seat of a tandem bicycle.
      (4)   No person operating a bicycle on a public right-of-way or on any
property open to the public or used by the public for pedestrian or vehicular
purposes shall allow anyone under the age of 21 to ride as a passenger unless
the passenger is wearing a helmet as defined in division (B)(2) above or else
in an enclosed trailer or other device which meets or exceeds current
nationally recognized standards of design and manufacture for the protection of
the passenger's head from impacts in an accident without the need for a helmet.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord. passed 1-19-2021)
§ 71.99 PENALTIES.
   A violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute an infraction
and the offender shall be subject to a fine of $50, except that a first
violation of §
71.02(B)(2), (3) or (4) shall be dismissed if the person charged submits proof
within ten days that equipment meeting the standards in §
71.02(B)(2), (3) or (4) has been acquired for use by the operator or passenger.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord. passed 1-19-2021)
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
72.01   Parking prohibited in certain locations
   
72.02   Parking prohibited for certain purposes
   
72.03   Snow emergency zones
   
72.04   Loading and unloading zones
   
72.05   School loading zones
   
72.06   Commercial loading zones
   
72.07   Public carrier loading zones
   
72.08   Parking in town parks
   
72.09   Using slugs or substitutes, tampering with or injuring parking meters
 
   
72.99   Penalties
§ 72.01 PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN LOCATIONS.
   (A)    Parking is prohibited in the following locations. No traffic-control
devices are required. No person may park or leave standing any vehicle in any
of the following locations:
      (1)   On any sidewalk or greenway, or on the space between the sidewalk
or greenway and the curb, or between the sidewalk or greenway and the street
pavement, if there is no curb;
      (2)   On any alley or private road in a manner or under conditions as to
leave available less than ten feet of the width of the street for the free
movement of vehicular travel or to block the driveway entrance to any abutting
property;
      (3)   In front of a gate or other accessway (whether closed or opened)
that provides access to a town greenway, town park or other town property;
      (4)   On any town-owned or town-operated property, other than within a
marked-off or otherwise designated parking space.
      (5)   In a town-owned or town-operated leased parking space without a
leased parking sticker;
      (6)   In any metered space without making proper payment therefor;
      (7)   In any space in a town-owned parking lot, garage, or other parking
facility without making proper payment therefor;
      (8)   In any marked space designated by signage for certain purpose(s)
and/or period(s) or duration of time for parking other than for the purpose,
period, and/or duration of time authorized;
      (9)   In any marked-off parking space in a manner that the vehicle is not
entirely within the parking space as marked-off;
      (10)   In a private driveway or in front of a private driveway without
the permission of the property owner or tenant;
      (11)   Unless within a clearly marked-off parking space, within 15 feet
of either direction of a fire hydrant (whether or not located in a public
right-of-way) or the entrance to a fire station;
      (12)   In a designated fire lane;
      (13)   Unless within a clearly marked-off or otherwise designated parking
space, within 15 feet of the intersection of curb lines or if none, then within
15 feet of the intersection of street pavement at an intersection of streets;
      (14)   Within an intersection or on a marked crosswalk;
      (15)   Unless within a clearly marked-off or otherwise designated parking
space, within 30 feet of any traffic-control signal or device installed at an
intersection, regardless of whether the vehicle is located within or outside of
the public right-of-way;
      (16)   In any portion of the travel lanes of a street; provided, however,
that this prohibition shall not apply to a vehicle stopped or parked in order
to deliver goods to or collect goods from a business so long as the standing or
parking of the vehicle does not cause substantial obstruction of traffic.
"Travel lanes" means portions of a street intended for motor vehicle traffic
and not marked, signed, or otherwise designated for parking or loading/
unloading;
      (17)   In any portion of a street specifically designated by markings or
signage as a travel lane for pedestrians and/or bicycles; and
      (18)   In any parking space clearly marked or otherwise designated as
reserved for the handicapped, whether on public or private property, unless the
driver of or a passenger in the vehicle is handicapped.
      (19)   On a street where parallel parking is specifically permitted and
marked, in any fashion other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed
in the direction of traffic, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within
18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway.
   (B)   The Administrator may install no-parking signs, yellow curb markings
or other traffic-control devices to indicate where parking and standing is
prohibited as stated in division (A) above, but enforcement of the provisions
of this section is not dependent on the installation of the devices.
   (C)   Parking time limits shall be enforced as indicated by signage,
installed parking meters or parking lot pre-pay stations.
   (D)   Whenever, pursuant to division (B) or (C), the Administrator has
installed signs, yellow pavement markings or other traffic-control devices
clearly indicating that parking or standing within a specified area is
prohibited or is allowed only at certain times or for a certain duration, no
person may park any vehicle or permit it to stand contrary to the directions of
those traffic-control devices.
   (E)   The Administrator may mark any street where parking is permitted with
lines that indicate the parking space for vehicles and no person may park any
vehicle outside the lines.
   (F)   The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to emergency and
public service vehicles whose operators are performing services for which they
are responsible.
   (G)   A vehicle parked in violation of one or more of the provisions of this
section may be towed without notice to the owner, and whether or not towing is
indicated by signage, if, in the discretion of Police Department or Public
Works Department personnel, the vehicle presents a threat to public safety, for
example, by hindering rescue vehicle access, blocking traffic, or increasing
the chances of a traffic accident.
(Ord. passed 10-20-2016; Ord. passed 2-21-2019; Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord.
passed 4-15-2021; Ord. passed 5-14-2025) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 PARKING PROHIBITED FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES.
   No person may park any vehicle or permit it to stand upon any public street,
public sidewalk or other public property, or on town-owned property for any of
the following principal purposes:
   (A)   Displaying it for sale, except foreclosure and judicial sales;
   (B)   Washing, greasing, changing tires or repairing the vehicle, except to
the extent necessitated by an emergency;
   (C)   Storing it;
   (D)   Advertising; and
   (E)   Operating a commercial enterprise out of a parked vehicle, except with
the express advance permission of the town. By way of illustration and without
limiting the foregoing, vehicles may not be parked for purposes of selling food
or other items from the vehicle. The town may provide exemptions to this
general rule for special events, such as street festivals or events held at the
Daniel Boone Park, and the like, but any such exemption shall require advance
written permission granted by the town.
(Ord. passed 2-21-2019; Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord. passed 4-15-2021) Penalty,
see §
72.99
§ 72.03 SNOW EMERGENCY ZONES.
   (A)   The Administrator shall establish snow emergency zones and shall
install appropriate traffic-control devices to give clear notice that parking
within the zones is not permissible during the stated hours or times indicated
during periods of snow accumulation.
   (B)   Whenever a snow emergency zone is designated and marked by traffic-
control devices, no person may park any vehicle within the zones between the
hours or during the periods specified in the traffic-control devices.
(Ord. passed 10-20-2016; Ord. passed 2-21-2019; Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord.
passed 4-15-2021) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.04 LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, whenever streets or
portions of streets are designated as vehicle loading and unloading zones in
accordance with the provisions of this title, parking and standing are
permitted in those locations, but only in accordance with the provisions of
this title.
(Ord. passed 10-20-2016; Ord. passed 2-21-2019; Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord.
passed 4-15-2021) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.05 SCHOOL LOADING ZONES.
   Whenever a school loading zone is designated and clearly marked by traffic-
control devices, no person may park any vehicle or permit it to stand in any
zone for any purpose other than the expeditious loading or unloading of school
passengers, and then only for a period not to exceed ten minutes.
(Ord. passed 10-20-2016; Ord. passed 2-21-2019; Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord.
passed 4-15-2021) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.06 COMMERCIAL LOADING ZONES.
   Whenever a commercial loading zone is designated and marked by traffic-
control devices, no person may park any vehicle there or permit it to stand in
any zone for any purpose other than the expeditious loading or pickup of
materials and goods, or unloading and delivery, and then only for a period not
to exceed 30 minutes.
(Ord. passed 10-20-2016; Ord. passed 2-21-2019; Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord.
passed 4-15-2021) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.07 PUBLIC CARRIER LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   Whenever a bus stop or taxicab stand is designated and marked by
traffic-control devices, no person may park any vehicle other than a bus or a
taxicab, respectively, in any zone so designated and marked.
   (B)   Whenever a bus stop or taxicab stand is necessary in a particular
location to accommodate the needs of those requiring access to a public
carrier, and a zone is consistent with the necessary free flow of traffic and
the public safety, the Administrator may install appropriate traffic-control
devices to give clear notice that parking or standing within those locations,
except for buses and taxicabs, respectively, is prohibited.
   (C)   The operator of a bus shall not stop the vehicle upon any street or at
any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage,
except at a bus stop designated in accordance with this section.
(Ord. passed 10-20-2016; Ord. passed 2-21-2019; Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord.
passed 4-15-2021) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.08 PARKING IN TOWN PARKS.
   (A)   Parking overnight is prohibited in all town parks.
   (B)   Parking is prohibited in Junaluska Park between the hours of 6:00 a.m.
and 12:00 p.m. on the third Saturday of each month, and at such other times as
may be noticed by posted warning signs, except that this prohibition does not
apply to members of the American Legion and their guests. This parking
limitation is required so that the parking area is available to American Legion
members and their guests during their meeting times per the terms of the town's
lease of the park.
   (C)   Persons may park vehicles at town parks only for purposes of using the
park facilities. Parking by commuters is prohibited.
   (D)   Violators of any of the provisions of this section may be issued
warnings or citations, or be subject to towing. Towing is authorized from any
town park parking area where:
      (1)   The Town Manager, in his or her discretion, has caused signs to be
posted warning that vehicles parked overnight in violation of any of the above
divisions (A) through (C) of this section are subject to towing. Such signs
shall substantially comply with the visibility requirements set forth at §
73.03(A), and shall direct those subject to towing to call the Police
Department; or
      (2)   The town has provided at least eight hours advance written notice
that the vehicle will be towed, by means of written notice placed on the
vehicle as provided at §
73.03(C), except that the requirements of §
73.03(C)(2) through (4) shall not apply, and instead, the notice shall direct
the violator to call the Police Department.
(Ord. passed 2-21-2019; Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord. passed 4-15-2021) Penalty,
see §
72.99
§ 72.09 USING SLUGS OR SUBSTITUTES, TAMPERING WITH OR INJURING PARKING METERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to deposit a slug or other substitute for a coin
of the United States or city-issued parking meter token in any city parking
meter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to deface, injure, tamper with, open or willfully
break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any city parking meter, except that
duly authorized persons may make necessary collections and repairs.
(Ord. passed 10-20-2016; Ord. passed 2-21-2019; Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord.
passed 4-15-2021) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Criminal penalties.  A violation of § 72.09 shall constitute a Class 3
misdemeanor and shall subject the offender to a fine of up to $500.
   (B)   Civil penalties. Except as provided at division (A) of this section, a
violation of this chapter is a civil violation only, shall not constitute a
criminal offense as otherwise provided per G.S. 14-4, and is subject to the
general provisions of §
10.99 of this code. Provided, however, that the following civil penalties shall
apply to the following violations:
      (1)   A violation of §
72.01 shall subject the violator to a penalty of $20 except as follows:
         (a)   A violation of §
72.01(A)(4) through (A)(7) shall subject the violator to a penalty of $25.
         (b)   A violation of §
72.01(A)(12) (parking in fire lane) shall subject the violator to a penalty of
$50.
         (c)   A violation of §
72.01(A)(18) (unlawful parking in handicapped spaces) shall subject the
violator to a penalty of $100.
      (2)   A violation of §§
72.02 through
72.08 shall subject the violator to a penalty of $30.
      (3)   If a civil penalty imposed for a violation is not paid within 30
days of the parking violation notice or citation, an additional civil penalty
of $20 shall be imposed for every subsequent month in which the prescribed
penalty for a violation is not been paid.
      (4)   In the event it is necessary for the town to institute a civil
action to collect any civil penalty, the violator shall be responsible for all
court costs and attorney’s fees incurred y the town.
   (C)   Civil penalties are imposed pursuant to this chapter in order to help
fund the town's enforcement of its traffic and parking regulations for the
benefit of the town's residents, businesses and visitors, and not to punish
violators. All civil penalties imposed pursuant to this division (B) and paid
to the town as herein provided shall be paid into the general fund of the town
and used to fund the town's traffic and parking enforcement operations.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord. passed 4-15-2021; Ord. passed 5-14-2025)
CHAPTER 73: TOWING AND BOOTING
Section
   
73.01   Definitions
   
73.02   Authority for and scope of chapter; persons liable for violations
   
73.03   Advanced notice of trespass towing or booting required
   
73.04   Trespass towing practices
   
73.05   Booting practices
   
73.06   Notice of fees and payment options; fees to be reasonable
   
73.07   Receipts
   
73.08   Complaint information
   
73.09   Compliance dates
   
73.10   Restrictions related to certain criminal convictions
 
   
73.99   Violations; civil penalties for violations; other enforcement measures
§ 73.01 DEFINITIONS.
    For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOOT. A wheel lock or any other instrument that is attached to a motor
vehicle in order to immobilize it. As context requires, BOOTING can include any
or all of the activities involved in controlling unauthorized parking by means
of immobilization of a vehicle, including but not limited to applying a boot,
monitoring parking lots for unauthorized vehicles, and/or demanding or
accepting payment to remove a boot. IMMOBILIZATION may be used interchangeably
with BOOTING herein.
   BOOTING SERVICE. Any person that engages in, or that owns or operates a
business that engages in, the booting of motor vehicles parked in a private
parking lot.
   CONTRACT. Any agreement, whether oral or written, express or implied.
   EMPLOYEE. A natural person who works for another person as an employee
(i.e., as a W-2 worker).
   ESTABLISHMENT. The use of a structure for a commercial purpose.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. A Class A, B, or C motor vehicle as defined in G.S. § 20-4.01
(23).
   NATURAL PERSON. An individual human being.
   PARKING ENFORCEMENT COMPANY. A towing company or booting service engaged in
towing or booting activity governed by this chapter.
   PERSON. Any natural person or entity, including but not limited to
corporations, partnerships, trusts, and the like; i.e., a legal person.
   PRIVATE PARKING LOT. Any privately-owned area created, designated or used
for the parking of two or more vehicles. As used herein, PRIVATE PARKING LOT
does not include driveways, garages or other parking areas or yards of single-
family or duplex residences.
   SUBCONTRACTOR. A natural person or any other person who works for another
person as a purported independent contractor and not as an employee.
   TOWING COMPANY. Any person that engages in, or that owns or operates a
business that engages in, the towing of motor vehicles for compensation.
   TRESPASS TOW. To tow a motor vehicle that is parked in a private parking lot
without the property owner's or agent's consent without the consent of the
motor vehicle's owner or operator, i.e., a non-consensual tow.
(Ord. passed 12-15-2016; Ord. passed 6-28-2023)
§ 73.02 AUTHORITY FOR AND SCOPE OF CHAPTER; PERSONS LIABLE FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   This chapter is enacted in furtherance of the town's authority to
define, prohibit, regulate, or abate acts, omissions, or conditions,
detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of its citizens and the peace and
dignity of the town, as granted per G.S. § 160A-174, and its authority to
regulate and license occupations, businesses and trades, and prohibit those
that may be inimical to the public health, welfare, safety, order, or
convenience, as granted per G.S. § 160A-194(a).
   (B)   This chapter is applicable to any trespass towing or booting
activities that take place for compensation in a private parking lot in the
town limits, except as provided in division (D) below.
   (C)   No towing company may engage in any trespass tow from a private
parking lot in the town limits or charge any fee in connection therewith, and
no booting service may immobilize a vehicle in a private parking lot in the
town limits or charge any fee in connection therewith, unless in compliance
with the requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   This chapter is not intended to limit, modify or abrogate:
      (1)   The authority of police, Fire Department or other public officers
to direct the towing or immobilization of a motor vehicle as authorized by
other provisions of the town code or state law;
      (2)   The towing of vehicles encroaching into areas clearly designated as
fire lanes; or
      (3)   A property owner's right to tow vehicles blocking clearly
designated areas of ingress and/or egress or right to tow vehicles blocking
access to a Dumpster so long as signage conspicuously warns that a vehicle
blocking access to the Dumpster is subject to towing.
   (E)   This chapter does not limit other legal remedies that a property owner
may have against a person trespassing on private property, but only applies to
and limits the use of trespass towing and booting as specified herein.
   (F)   If a towing company or booting service acts in violation of this
chapter through an employee, it is the towing company or booting service
(whether a natural person or corporation, partnership, or other entity) that
shall be cited for the violation. The employee shall not be personally cited.
   (G)   If a towing company or booting service acts in violation of this
chapter through a subcontractor, both the towing company or booting service
(whether a natural person or corporation, partnership, or other entity) and the
subcontractor who engaged in the violation shall be cited for the violation.
(Ord. passed 12-15-2016; Ord. passed 6-28-2023)
§ 73.03 ADVANCE NOTICE OF TRESPASS TOWING OR BOOTING REQUIRED.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to authorize, direct, engage in, or
contract for trespass towing or booting in a private parking lot unless advance
notice is given as follows:
   (A)   The parking lot has one or more warning signs posted at such locations
and heights so as to provide a conspicuous warning to drivers of vehicles who
are not familiar with that parking lot that the lot is private and that
unauthorized vehicles will be towed or booted.
      (1)   Each sign shall be no smaller than four square feet and no larger
than six square feet, with a white background and red letters, printed in fonts
that can easily be read by a driver of ordinary vision, and shall contain the
following information, as applicable:
         (a)   That the parking lot is a private parking lot and that
unauthorized vehicles will be towed or immobilized and subject to a fine/fee
for removal of the boot, e.g., "Private Parking Lot - Towing Enforced" or
"Private Parking Lot - Unauthorized Vehicles Will Be Immobilized and Fined"; or
"Parking for Customers Only - Towing Enforced," or "Parking for Residents Only
- Unauthorized Vehicles Will Be Immobilized and Fined ", or similar phrasing.
         (b)   The name and telephone number of the towing company and/or
booting service that enforces parking in that lot.
      (2)   If applicable, the following information must be contained either
on the warning sign(s) required per the preceding division (A)(1) or on
separate sign(s) attached immediately adjacent on the same post or structure:
         (a)   If the parking lot serves a shopping center, mall, or office
building, then at the option of the property owner or lessor either:
            1.   The name of the shopping center or mall or office building; or
            2.   The names of all businesses within that shopping center or
mall or office building, and a warning that parking is authorized only for
persons patronizing that shopping center or mall or office building.
         (b)   If the parking lot serves multiple locations (other than a
shopping center or mall or office building), the name of every establishment
served by the parking lot and a warning that parking is authorized only for
persons patronizing one of those establishments.
            1.   Effective as of August 15, 2023, if a parking lot described in
this division (A)(2)(b) is located in the downtown Municipal Services District
(MSD), then in addition the following information: "This is a Private Lot; for
complaints about parking enforcement in this lot, please call [name; telephone
number]" with the name and telephone number of the owner or lessee of the lot
who contracts for parking enforcement services. For clarification, such name
and telephone number must be that of the owner or lessee itself, and may not be
that of an agent of the lot owner or lessee, such as the parking enforcement
company. If at any time the telephone number on this sign is not in working
order to reach the property owner or lessee during regular business hours, then
said property owner or lessee is in violation of this chapter and subject to
citation.
            2.   Exceptions. This division (A) shall not apply to parking
spaces that require display of a permit (e.g., hang-tag or decal) or are
administered through a pay-upon-parking system.
      (3)   There shall be a minimum of one warning sign for each vehicular
entrance to the parking lot and such other signs as are required so that an
ordinary driver who is not familiar with that parking lot is warned by the
signage upon entering the parking lot, exiting his or her vehicle, and/or upon
exiting the parking lot as a pedestrian that the lot is private and that
unauthorized vehicles are subject to towing or booting.
      (4)   One or more police officers designated by the Chief of Police (the
"liaison officer") shall direct and approve the number and placement of warning
signs in his or her reasonable discretion to ensure that signs are conspicuous
to warn vehicle drivers as specified per the foregoing provisions of this
division (A). If the property owner or lessee disagrees with the direction
provided by the liaison officer, the owner or lessee may appeal to the Chief of
Police. The determination of the Chief of Police shall be final and non-
appealable.
      (5)   If one or more credible complaints are received by the Police
Department from any person to the effect that the warning signs posted on a
parking lot are not sufficiently conspicuous as required per this division (A),
the liaison officer shall re-consider the sign layout and may require the re-
location of signs or the installation of new signs.
   (B)   As an alternative to the signage required per division (A) above, the
parking lot may have a sign at every parking space within the lot as to which
parking is to be enforced, each such sign being posted in a conspicuous
location facing the parking space, no smaller than 120 square inches, with a
white background and red letters, identifying the space as private property,
and warning that unauthorized vehicles will be towed or booted (for example,
"Private Parking - Towing Enforced"). In addition, the name and telephone
number of the towing company or booting service must be posted either:
      (1)   On each sign facing the individual parking spaces; or
      (2)   On at least one other sign, no smaller than four square feet and no
larger than six square feet, placed in a conspicuous location in the parking
lot.
   (C)   As an alternative to the signage required per division (A) or (B)
above, a trespass tow is authorized where a weather-proof (e.g., laminated)
written notice, not less than 8.5 inches by 11 inches, is placed on the front
driver's side windshield and/or the driver's window of the car, affixed in
manner that will not mar the vehicle but will insure that the notice will not
blow away, at least eight hours prior to the trespass towing of the vehicle,
which notice contains all of the following information on both sides of the
notice in large, easily readable type:
      (1)   That the parking lot is a private parking lot and unauthorized
vehicles will be towed;
      (2)   The name and telephone number of the towing company and location
where any towed vehicle is taken;
      (3)   The towing charges imposed by the towing company;
      (4)   The amount of any storage charges related to the storage by the
towing company of the vehicle, and the terms and conditions for the imposition
of storage charges; and
      (5)   The time and date that the notice has been placed on the vehicle
and the time and date as of which the vehicle will become subject to towing.
   (D)   Once an owner or operator of a vehicle has been notified of
unauthorized use pursuant to division (C) above, it shall be unnecessary for
the person authorizing, directing, engaging in, or contracting for the trespass
tow to give any further notification should there be any future unauthorized
parking of the same vehicle at the same parking lot, and upon its discovery,
the vehicle may be immediately towed.
(Ord. passed 12-15-2016; Ord. passed 6-28-2023)
§ 73.04 TRESPASS TOWING PRACTICES.
   (A)    An occupied vehicle may not be towed or attached to a towing vehicle.
   (B)   A towing company may not attempt to impede or block an occupied
vehicle from being removed from a parking lot by its owner or operator.
   (C)   A towing company must accept at least two nationally-recognized credit
cards (such as MasterCard or Visa) and any debit card in payment for any fees
charged in connection with a trespass tow.
   (D)   Whenever a towing company is attempting a trespass tow but the vehicle
has not yet been removed from the parking lot, and the owner or operator of the
vehicle appears and states a desire that the vehicle not be towed, the towing
company shall release the vehicle to the owner or operator upon the payment of
its noticed fees and charges.
   (E)   A towing service engaged in a trespass tow shall, upon request of the
owner or operator of the motor vehicle, permit the owner or operator access to
the trespass vehicle for the purpose of retrieving personal property from the
vehicle. If personal items are removed from the motor vehicle by the towing
service, then upon request those items will be returned to the owner or
operator.
   (F)   A towing company that engages in a trespass tow shall, prior to or
immediately upon removing the vehicle from the private parking lot, report to
the Police Department by telephone to its non-emergency number the fact that a
vehicle is to be towed and shall provide a description of the vehicle including
make, color, and license tag number, the parking lot from which it is to be
towed, and the place it is to be stored.
   (G)   For six hours immediately following a trespass tow and during the next
business day, the towing company must respond within one-half hour to a
telephone call from the vehicle's owner or operator to the contact number
provided by the towing company. During its response call, upon the request of
the operator or owner of the towed vehicle, the towing company must make
arrangements for the release of the vehicle upon the full payment of fees.
      (1)   The towing company must arrange for and allow the full payment of
fees within one-half hour of responding to a call from the owner or operator of
the vehicle. If the towing company is located more than ten miles from the
location from which the vehicle was towed, and the owner or operator has
requested the opportunity and indicated a willingness to pay the fees, but
states an inability to obtain transportation to the location of the vehicle,
the company must travel to the location of the operator or owner of the towed
vehicle to allow the full payment of fees to be made. The towing company may
charge an additional fee for this service.
      (2)   The towing company must arrange for the release of the towed
vehicle within one hour of payment. If the vehicle is more than ten miles from
the location from which it was towed, the company must return the vehicle to
the public street nearest the location from which the vehicle was towed within
one hour of payment. The towing company may charge an additional fee for this
service.
   (H)   No storage fee may be charged for days when the towing company is not
open during the full normal business hours of at least 9:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.
for the recovery of a trespass towed vehicle. A towing company that is not open
for the recovery of a towed vehicle 24 hours a day shall not charge a storage
fee for the storage of the towed vehicle until at least one full business day
(no less than 24 hours) has elapsed from the time the towing company is next
open for the recovery of a towed vehicle after the towing.
(Ord. passed 12-15-2016; Ord. passed 6-28-2023)
§ 73.05 BOOTING PRACTICES.
   (A)    An occupied vehicle may not be booted.
   (B)   A booting service may not attempt to impede or block an occupied
vehicle that has not yet been booted from being removed from a parking lot by
its owner or operator.
   (C)   A booting service must accept at least two nationally-recognized
credit cards (such as MasterCard or Visa) and any debit card in payment for any
and all fees charged in connection with booting.
   (D)   (1)   No natural person may engage in booting in any capacity (whether
as an employee, subcontractor, officer, sole proprietor, and the like) until he
or she has obtained an identification badge from the town. Identification
badges shall be issued for a single calendar year and must be renewed annually.
In order to obtain an identification badge from the town, the applicant must:
         (a)   Authorize a criminal background review by the Police Department
or such other entity as the town may enlist;
         (b)   Fully complete an application, on a form provided by the town,
disclosing his or her name, address, telephone number, date of birth, gender,
company affiliation, if any (to include the legal name, mailing address, and
physical location of the affiliated company), and status as an employee or
independent contractor of the company (by stating whether and by whom income
taxes and FICA taxes are withheld from his or her pay); and
         (c)   Disclose and certify, under oath, any and all criminal
convictions described at §
73.10 below. An identification badge may not be issued to a person who has been
convicted as described at §
73.10.
      (2)   A natural person engaged in booting must display on his or her
person at all times the picture identification badge issued by the town. The
identification must be plainly visible, either attached to the exterior
clothing or on a lanyard hanging around the neck. Upon request, the person
engaged in booting must allow the operator or owner of the vehicle which has
been immobilized to examine and copy any information from the identification
badge. In addition, a person engaged in booting must wear clothing that
identifies in a manner that is conspicuous and easily readable to other persons
with whom that persons engages the name of the business for whom that person
works and includes in either the name of the business or otherwise a
description of the parking control device or method used, e.g., “ABC Wheel-lock
Company.” The letters on such insignia shall be no less than three-quarters of
an inch in height.
   (E)   Any vehicle used in connection with booting must have insignia on both
the operator's door and the front passenger door or a car-top-mounted sign that
identifies the company with which the attendant is employed or associated by
name and telephone number and includes either in the name of the company or
otherwise a description of the parking control device or method utilized, e.g.,
“ABC Wheel-lock Company.” All letters on such insignia shall be no less than
three inches in height; provided, that notwithstanding any other provision of
this chapter, vehicle insignia must comply with this three-inch minimum
requirement when new insignia is purchased, when insignia is replaced, or by
June 30, 2017, whichever occurs earlier.
   (F)   After immobilizing a vehicle, the booting service must place a
weather-proof (e.g., laminated) notice on the driver's side windshield of the
car, affixed in manner that will not mar the vehicle but will insure that the
notice will not blow away. This notice must be brightly colored (e.g., yellow
or orange), a minimum of 8.5 inches by 11 inches, and contain the following
information, all of which shall be in a large, plainly readable type:
      (1)   In capital letters: “YOUR VEHICLE HAS BEEN WHEEL-LOCKED BECAUSE IT
WAS PARKED IN A PRIVATE LOT WITHOUT AUTHORIZATION. DO NOT DRIVE THIS VEHICLE OR
YOU MAY DAMAGE YOUR CAR AND THE WHEEL LOCK”;
      (2)   All fees that may be charged prior to release of the vehicle;
      (3)   That all fees may be paid by cash, credit card or debit card; and
      (4)   A telephone number to call to have the wheel lock removed. The fees
that may be charged must be specifically and precisely disclosed; that is, the
notice may not refer to minimum or maximum fees or a range of fees.
      (5)   If a fee is charged in the event that (and on grounds that) the
notice itself is destroyed, then in capital letters “DO NOT DESTROY THIS
NOTICE. AN ADDITIONAL FEE OF $____ WILL BE CHARGED IF YOU DO NOT RETURN THIS
NOTICE TO [NAME OF PARKING ENFORCEMENT COMPANY]”.
   (G)   A booting service must arrange to respond to a telephone call from the
owner or operator of an immobilized vehicle within no more than 15 minutes.
   (H)   A booting service must make a reasonable effort to release the
immobilized vehicle within 30 minutes of responding to the telephone call from
the owner or operator of an immobilized vehicle.
   (I)   After a vehicle is booted, it shall be unlawful for any person to
authorize, direct or contract for the trespass towing of that vehicle for a
period of at least eight hours following such booting. Once a boot has been
applied, the vehicle subsequently may be trespassed towed after the vehicle has
been booted for at least eight hours, so long as the requirements of either §
73.03(A) or (C) are met as to that trespass tow.
   (J)   A booting company may not charge more than one boot removal fee for
the booting of a particular vehicle in a particular instance, and may not
charge a higher removal fee based solely on the length of time that a boot has
been attached to a vehicle; provided, however, that this provision is not
intended to prevent a booting service from charging additional fees for
separate and additional services, such as a service call to meet an owner or
operator of a vehicle to remove a boot where the owner or operator does not
appear and has to be rescheduled.
   (K)   Should the town receive and verify three or more unrelated and
credible complaints within any three-month period asserting the failure of a
booting service to respond within 15 minutes to telephone contact by the owners
or operators of immobilized vehicles and to arrange the vehicles’ release
within 30 minutes thereafter, it shall be presumptively concluded that the
booting service does not have the capacity to respond within the required
times. Thereafter for the following 12-month period, a duly authorized person
must be on duty and present in the parking lot at all times when any vehicle is
booted, and the person must remain on the property until the owner or operator
of the vehicle returns, with the ability to remove the boot upon payment of
fees. After the 12-month period, the booting service shall not be required to
maintain a duly authorized person at all times in parking lots where vehicles
are booted, unless and until such time as the town again receives and verifies
three or more complaints as set forth in the first sentence of this division.
(Ord. passed 12-15-2016; Ord. passed 6-28-2023)
§ 73.06 NOTICE OF FEES AND PAYMENT OPTIONS; FEES TO BE REASONABLE.
   (A)    With respect to every trespass tow or booting subject to this
chapter, plain and conspicuous notice must be given to the owner or operator of
the vehicle:
      (1)   (a)   As to any fee that may be charged in connection with the
trespass tow or booting, including storage and any other fee or charge of any
nature; and
         (b)   That credit and debit cards may be used for payment of any and
all such fees. Fees must be specifically and precisely disclosed; the notice
may not refer to minimum or maximum fees or a range of fees.
      (2)   Notice may be given:
         (a)   On the parking lot warning sign(s) to be posted as provided at
section §
73.03(A) or (B)(2) above, or on separate sign(s) attached to the same sign post
or immediately adjacent on the same structure; or
         (b)   On the weather-resistant notices to be attached to the vehicle's
windshield as provided at sections §§
73.03(C) or
73.05(F) above, in the same or a larger type size than that used for the other
information provided in the notice; or
         (c)   On the vehicle insignia on the towing vehicle or booting service
vehicle, provided that such vehicle is easily viewable by the owner or operator
of the vehicle when arrangements are being made for payment of the towing or
booting fees.
   (B)   Any towing company engaged in trespass towing shall post in a
conspicuous location at its place(s) of business and in size sufficient to be
easily read a schedule of fees that states, at a minimum, its consensual towing
fee(s), its trespass towing fee, its daily storage fee and its hours of
operation. The schedule of fees shall be posted in a location(s) so that a
person may obtain the information at times when the towing company is not open
for business.
   (C)   Any towing company or booting service engaged in activities subject to
this chapter must provide to the Police Department (i) a schedule of all its
fees and charges and (ii) a true and correct copy of the notice(s) employed by
the service pursuant to §§
73.03(C) and/or
73.05(F) herein, and such schedule of fees and notices must be kept current at
all times. Fees must be specifically and precisely disclosed; the required
schedule of fees may not refer to minimum or maximum fees or to a range of
fees.
   (D)   A towing company or booting service may not assess any fee or other
charge in connection with a trespass tow or booting unless all of the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The fee or other charge has been publicly noticed as required per
divisions (A) and (B) above; and
      (2)   The fee or other charge is set forth in a schedule of fees and
charges that has been on file with the Police Department for at least 24 hours
prior to the assessment of the fee. In the case of any discrepancy in the
amount of a fee or other charge noticed by posting in any manner provided at
division (A) above or provided to the Police Department on a schedule of fees,
only the lowest fee or other charge so noticed may be charged.
      (3)   The particular trespass tow or booting at issue has been conducted
in full and complete compliance with all requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Any fee charged in connection with a trespass tow or booting regulated
under this chapter must be reasonable in relation to the cost of providing the
service or item, inclusive of reasonable overhead and profit.
   (F)   A towing or booting service may not charge or collect any fee or other
charge for a trespass tow or booting that is conducted in a manner that is in
violation of any requirement of this chapter. Any fee or other charge that is
paid in violation of the foregoing provision must be refunded upon demand.
Failure to comply with this division (F) constitutes a separate and distinct
violation of this chapter and shall be subject to citation in addition to the
underlying violation.
(Ord. passed 12-15-2016; Ord. passed 6-28-2023)
§ 73.07 RECEIPTS.
   (A)    Upon receiving payment for a trespass tow or release of a boot, and
whether requested or not, the towing company or booting service shall prepare a
receipt and offer a copy of the receipt to the person providing payment. The
receipt shall provide in legible print:
      (1)   A breakdown of individual fees charged;
      (2)   The total amount paid and method of payment;
      (3)   The name of the person accepting the payment;
      (4)   A clear and accurate reason for the towing or booting and the date,
place and time of the towing or booting; and
      (5)   The appeals process, if any, provided to contest the tow or
booting.
   (B)   The towing company or booting service shall maintain copies of these
receipts on file for at least 12 months and shall provide copies to the Police
Department upon request.
(Ord. passed 12-15-2016; Ord. passed 6-28-2023)
§ 73.08 COMPLAINT INFORMATION.
    Any person who pays for a trespass tow or booting subject to this chapter
must be provided, in an easily readable and conspicuous format, the name and
telephone number of the property owner, lessor, or property manager to whom
complaints about the trespass tow or booting may be directed. The person or
company to whom complaints are to be directed may not be a towing company,
booting service, or any employee, representative, officer, agent or affiliate
thereof. The aforesaid information may be provided by any of the following
methods:
   (A)   On the parking lot warning sign(s) to be posted as provided at section
§
73.03(A) or (B)(2) above, or on a separate sign attached to the same sign post
or immediately adjacent on the same structure; or
   (B)   On separate sign(s) posted on the property, so long as said sign(s)
are conspicuous to a person who has parked in the parking lot at issue.
   (C)   On a weather-resistant notice attached to the vehicle's windshield as
provided at sections §§
73.03(C) or
73.05(F) above, in the same or a larger type size than that used for the other
information provided in the notice; or
   (D)   In large, easily-readable type on a pre-printed notice, not less than
8.5 inches by 11 inches, provided to the owner or operator of the vehicle prior
to the payment of fees.
(Ord. passed 12-15-2016; Ord. passed 6-28-2023)
§ 73.09 COMPLIANCE DATES.
    This chapter, as amended, shall be effective as of February 1, 2017. All
parts of this chapter, as amended, are mandatory as of the effective date
except as follows:
   (A)   The mandate that signs contain red lettering against a white
background is required when any required sign is replaced, or December 31,
2016, whichever is earlier.
   (B)   The mandate per section §
73.03(A) that warning sign number and locations be reviewed and approved by the
liaison officer shall be effective immediately for any private parking lot that
was not in compliance with the requirements of this chapter (as then effective)
as of October 1, 2016. As to any private parking lot that was in compliance as
of October 1, 2016, the property owner or his or her agent shall consult with,
obtain the review and approval of liaison officer for a sign layout plan, and
come into compliance with the approved sign plan no later than June 30, 2017.
(Ord. passed 12-15-2016; Ord. passed 6-28-2023)
§ 73.10 RESTRICTIONS RELATED TO CERTAIN CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS.
   (A)    A person may not engage in trespass towing or booting activities in
the town limits involving direct interaction with the public:
      (1)   For a period of two years following conviction within any five-year
period of any two criminal infractions (felony and/or misdemeanor) arising from
a violation of, or related to activities governed by, this chapter; or
      (2)   For a period of two years following conviction of any manner of
assault related to a trespass tow or booting within the town.
   (B)   A person may not engage in trespass towing or booting activities in
the town limits involving direct interaction with the public if, within the
prior ten years, that person has been convicted in any jurisdiction for any one
or more of the following crimes: assaults or threats; homicide; sexual assault;
crimes against nature, incest, indecent exposure and related offenses;
kidnaping, larceny, possession of stolen goods, embezzlement and related
offenses; robbery, extortion and related offenses; burglary and breaking and
entering; felony fraud, false pretenses and related offenses involving
financial transactions; and weapons offenses.
(Ord. passed 12-15-2016; Ord. passed 6-28-2023)
§ 73.99 VIOLATIONS; CIVIL PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS; OTHER ENFORCEMENT MEASURES.
   The provisions of §
10.99 apply to violations of this chapter except as specifically provided
otherwise in this section.
   (A)   (1)   Any person trespass tow or booting conducted in violation of a
requirement of this chapter shall subject the responsible towing company,
booting service, and/or subcontractor responsible for said violation to a civil
penalty in the amount of $100. In the event there is more than one violation
within any one-year period by the same towing company, booting service, or
subcontractor, then the civil penalty shall be increased for each additional
violation over one during such period, as follows.
         (a)   Second offense within one year: $250.
         (b)   Third offense within one year: $500.
         (c)   Fourth offense within one year: $750.
         (d)   Fifth and any subsequent offense within one year: $1,000.
      (2)   Once the one-year period has run from the first violation, the next
violation shall be considered to be a first violation for the purposes of
establishing a new one-year period.
   (B)   This chapter may also be enforced by an appropriate equitable action.
   (C)   This chapter may also be enforced by the lawful order of a law
enforcement officer, who may, by way of example only, order that a tow
connection be undone or boot be removed without charge to the vehicle operator
and/or that a collected charge be refunded. Failure to comply with such order
of a law enforcement officer shall constitute a separate and distinct violation
of this chapter subject to additional citation.
   (D)   Per G.S. § 160A-175(f), any one, all, or any combination of the
foregoing penalties and remedies may be used to enforce this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-15-2016; Ord. passed 11-16-2021; Ord. passed 6-28-2023)
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Section
   
74.01   Adoption of traffic schedules
 
Schedule
   
I.   Stop intersections with stop lights
   
II.   Intersections with flashing red or yellow lights
   
III.   Stop and through streets
   
IV.   Four-way stops
   
V.   One-way streets
   
VI.   Yield intersections
   
VII.   Restricted turns
   
VIII.   Truck weight and route limitations
   
IX.   Speed limits
§ 74.01 ADOPTION OF TRAFFIC SCHEDULES.
   Pursuant to its authority to regulate streets and traffic pursuant to G.S.
Ch. 20 and Ch. 160A, Art. 15, and in the interests of public safety and
welfare, the Town Council adopts the following traffic schedules.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
SCHEDULE I. STOP INTERSECTIONS WITH STOP LIGHTS.
   The Administrator shall erect or install mechanical stop lights to regulate
vehicular and pedestrian traffic at the following intersections and locations.
The effect of the stop lights on vehicles and pedestrians shall be as provided
in G.S. §§ 20-158 and 20-172.
Street At Intersection With
Street                       At Intersection With
Dale Street/Shadowline Drive State Farm Road
Doctors Drive                Deerfield Road
Meadowview Drive             Greenway Road/Leola Street
New Market Boulevard         Hardin Park School
Old East King Street         Go Pioneers Drive
                             Boone Heights Drive
State Farm Road              Shadowline Drive
                             Furman Road
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 73, Sch. I) (Am. Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
SCHEDULE II. INTERSECTIONS WITH FLASHING RED OR YELLOW LIGHTS.
   The Administrator shall erect or install mechanical red or yellow blinking
or flashing lights as provided below at the indicated intersections and other
locations. The effect of the blinking or flashing red or yellow lights on
vehicles and pedestrians shall be as provided in G.S. §§ 20-158 and 20-172.
 
Flashing Red Intersections
Faculty Street and Highland Avenue
Longvue Drive and Deerfield Road
Flashing Yellow Intersections
Deerfield Road and Longvue Drive
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 73, Sch. II) (Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
SCHEDULE III. STOP AND THROUGH STREETS.
   The second-named street in the following list of intersections is hereby
designated as a main traveled or through street and the Administrator shall
erect stop signs on the first named street at the entrance to the main traveled
or through street. The effect of the stop signs on vehicles and pedestrians
shall be as provided in G.S. §§ 20-158 and 20-172.
Stop Street Through Street
Stop Street                   Through Street
Appalachian Drive             Forest Hill Drive
Arbor Lane                    Tracy Circle
Arrowhead Court               Market Hills Drive
Azalea Drive                  Highway 105 Extension
Bear Trail                    Grand Boulevard
                              Eastview Drive
Berkley Avenue                Beverly Heights Avenue
                              State Farm Road
Beverly Heights Avenue        Highway 105 Extension
                              Doctors Drive
Birch Street                  Furman Road
                              Kimberly Drive
Blairmont Drive               Deerfield Road
Blanwood Drive                Horn-in-the-West Drive
                              Woodland Drive
Blue Ridge Avenue             Buena Vista Drive
                              Watauga Drive
Boone Creek Drive             Winklers Creek Road
Boone Docks Street            Meadowview Drive
Breckonshire Drive            Fairway Drive
Brookside Drive               Farthing Street
Brown Street                  Howard Street
Buena Vista Drive             Farthing Street
                              Tracy Circle
Burrell Street                Rivers Street
Carolina Avenue               North Street
                              Summit Street
Casey Lane                    New River Hills
Castle Heights                Chestnut Drive
                              Farthing Street
                              New River Heights
Cecil Miller Road             New River Hills
                              Old E King Street
Chandy Street                 Poplar Hill Drive
Charles Street                Queen Street
Chase Hill Drive              Kellwood Drive
Cherokee Street               Grove Street
Cherry Drive                  Eastbrook Drive
                              W King Street
Cherrybrook Lane              Cherry Drive
Chestnut Drive                E King Street
Church Street                 Junaluska Road
                              North Street
Clawson Street                Perkinsville Drive
Clement Street                Oak Street
Coffey Street                 Howard Street
                              W King Street
Cole Street                   Old E King Street
Councill Street               Cherry Drive
Crest Drive                   Tracy Circle
Daniel Boone Drive            Daniel Boone Drive Extension
Daniel Boone Drive Extension  Daniel Boone Drive
Delmar Street                 Old E King Street
Doctors Drive                 Furman Road
Dogwood Road                  Highway 105
                              Poplar Hill Drive
Dotson Drive                  Park Street
Dove Circle                   Pheasant Ridge
Eastbrook Drive               Hunting Road
Eastridge Drive               Appalachian Drive
Eastview Drive                Hunting Road
Edgewood Drive                Glendale Drive
                              Tracy Circle
Edora Street                  Hillandale Drive
Faculty Street                Highland Avenue
                              Highway 105
Faculty Street Extension      Highway 105
                              Winklers Creek Road
Fairview Drive                Dogwood Road
Farthing Street               E King Street
Ferncliff Road                Stadium Drive
Franklin Drive                Dogwood Road
Furman Road                   Longvue Drive
Gladys Street                 Charles Street
Gragg Street                  Queen Street
Grand Boulevard               Grand Boulevard
                              W King Street
Grandview Heights             Poplar Grove Road
Green Heights                 Green Heights
                              Queen Street
Green Street                  Old Bristol Road
                              W King Street
Grove Street                  Perkinsville Drive
Hamby Alley                   Coffey Street
Hampton Drive                 Poplar Hill Drive
Hawthorne Lane                Tanglewood Drive
Hayes Street                  Hill Street
Hemlock Drive                 Stadium Drive
Hidden Valley Circle          Chestnut Drive
Highland Avenue               Highway 105
                              Poplar Hill Drive
Highland Park Lane            Highland Avenue
Hill Street                   Rivers Street
Hillandale Drive              Highland Avenue
Hillcrest Circle              Farthing Street
Hillside Drive                E King Street
                              Woodland Drive
Hodges Street                 Blowing Rock Road
                              Longvue Drive
Horn Avenue                   Horn-in-the-West Drive
                              Highway 105 Extension
                              Blowing Rock Road
Horn-in-the-West Drive        E King Street
                              Oak Street
Horseshoe Drive               Poplar Hill Drive
                              Poplar Hill Drive
                              Appalachian Street
Howard Street                 College Street
                              Depot Street
Hunters Point                 Hunting Hills Lane
Hunting Road                  Eastview Drive
Industrial Park Drive         Brookshire Road
Iris Lane                     Orchard Street
Ivy Drive                     Greenway Road
                              Meadowview Drive
Keystone Drive                Poplar Hill Drive
Kimberly Drive                Deerfield Road
                              Furman Road
Laurel Drive                  Highway 105 Extension
                              State Farm Road
Linney Street                 Queen Street
Longvue Drive                 Blowing Rock Road
                              Deerfield Road
Mac Street                    E King Street
                              Tracy Circle
Maple Drive                   Chestnut Drive
Market Court                  Market Hills Drive
Market Hills Drive            New Market Boulevard
Martin Luther King Jr. Street State Farm Road
Mary Street                   Deerfield Road
                              W Virginia Street
Maryah Drive                  Highway 105
Meadowview Drive              Blowing Rock Road
                              Blowing Rock Road
Megan Lane                    Appalachian Drive
Moretz Drive                  Rivers Street
Morningside Drive             Daniel Boone Drive
N Hampton Road                Highway 421 S
New Market Boulevard          Highway 194
North Ridge Circle            Market Hills Drive
                              North Ridge Circle
North Street                  N Depot Street
                              N Water Street
                              Clement Street
Oak Street                    E King Street
                              Horn-in-the-West Drive
                              Pine Street
Oakdale Drive                 Highway 105 Extension
                              Laurel Drive
Oakwood Drive                 Appalachian Drive
                              Eastridge Drive
Olancha Avenue                Beverly Heights Avenue
                              VFW Drive
Old Bristol Road              W King Street
                              W King Street
Orchard Street                Grand Boulevard
                              Grand Boulevard
Overlook Drive                Laurel Drive
Owens Drive                   Daniel Boone Drive
Palmer Drive                  Blairmont Drive
Park Street                   Queen Street
Perkins Street                Perkinsville Drive
                              Grove Street
                              Grove Street
Perkinsville Drive            Highway 421 S
                              Jefferson Road
                              Terrace Lane
                              Terrace Lane
Perry Street                  New Market Boulevard
Pheasant Ridge                Quail Drive
Pine Street                   Oak Street
Poplar Hill Drive             Highland Avenue
                              Highway 105
Poplar Summit                 Dogwood Road
Quail Drive                   Highway 105 Extension
                              Grand Boulevard
                              N Depot Street
                              N Depot Street
Queen                         N Water Street
                              N Water Street
                              Straight Street
                              Straight Street
Racquet Road                  State Farm Road
Realty Row                    Highway 105 Extension
Rhododendron Lane             Appalachian Drive
Ridgewood Drive               Queen Street
Robin Lane                    Dove Circle
Rogers Drive                  Meadowview Drive
Russell Drive                 Poplar Grove Road
Sheridan Avenue               Beverly Heights Avenue
Skyview Drive                 Woodland Drive
Southview Drive               Blairmont Drive
Spring Street                 Dogwood Road
Spruce Street                 Old E King Street
Stadium Drive                 Dogwood Road
Straight Street               Queen Street
                              W King Street
Summer Place Drive            Fairway Drive
Summit Street                 Junaluska Road
Sunnyside Drive               State Farm Road
Sunset Drive                  Highway 105 Extension
Tanglewood Drive              Stadium Drive
Temple Drive                  High School Drive
Tracy Circle                  Councill Street
                              Edgewood Drive
Tremont Drive                 Church Street
                              N Depot Street
University Circle             Appalachian Drive
                              Appalachian Drive
University Hall Drive         Blowing Rock Road
VFW Drive                     State Farm Road
W Grandview Heights           Grandview Heights
W Hilltop Drive               Cecil Miller Road
W Virginia Street             Mary Street
Wallace Circle                Orchard Street
                              Orchard Street
Watauga Drive                 Farthing Street
Westbrook Drive               Cherry Drive
Wey Street                    Clement Street
Whitener Drive                Hill Street
Wickham Square                Fieldstream Drive
Wildwood Lane                 Forest Hill Drive
Wind Walker Court             Market Hills Drive
Windy Drive                   Hillside Drive
                              Oak Street
Winklers Meadow               Winklers Creek Road
Wintergreen Lane              Faculty Street
                              Highland Avenue
Wood Circle                   E King Street
Woodland Drive                Horn-in-the-West Drive
                              Pine Street
Wyn Way                       Junaluska Road
Yosef Drive                   Brookshire Road
                              Highway 421 S
Zeb Street                    Leola Street
                              Meadowview Drive
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 73, Sch. III) (Ord. passed 11-19-2009; Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
SCHEDULE IV. FOUR-WAY STOPS.
   The intersections of the following streets are declared to be four-way stop
intersections and the Administrator shall erect stop signs on each street at
the entrance to the intersection. The effect of a stop sign on vehicles and
pedestrians shall be as provided in G.S. §§ 20-158 and 20-172.
 
Intersection
Highland Avenue and Faculty Street
North Depot Street and Queen Street
South Depot Street and Howard Street
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 73, Sch. IV) (Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
SCHEDULE V. ONE-WAY STREETS.
   The following streets are hereby designated one-way streets as indicated
below and the Administrator shall install appropriate traffic-control devices
at every intersection clearly indicating the direction of unlawful traffic
movement.
Street Lawful Direction of Travel
Street        Lawful Direction of Travel
Bear Trail    Grand Boulevard to Eastview Avenue
Hamby Alley   From College Street to Coffey Street
Howard Street From South Depot Street to Burrell Street
Linney Street From West King Street to Queen Street
Oak Street    From Pine Street to Horn in the West Drive
Queen Street  From North Depot Street to North Water Street on north side of
              median
Queen Street  From North Water Street to North Depot Street on south side of
              median
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 73, Sch. V) (Ord. passed 11-17-2005; Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
SCHEDULE VI. YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   The second named street in the following list of intersections is hereby
designated as a main traveled or through street and the Administrator shall
erect yield right-of-way signs on the first named street at the entrance to the
main traveled or through street. The effect of the yield right-of-way signs on
vehicles and pedestrians shall be as provided in G.S. §§ 20-158.1 and 20-160.1.
Yield Street Through Street
Yield Street       Through Street
Cherry Drive       Eastbrook Drive
College Street     Howard Street
Crest Drive        Crest Drive (dead end)
Daniel Boone Drive Delmar Street
Hawthorne Lane     Tanglewood Drive
Horn Avenue        Horn-in-the-West Drive
Howard Street      College Street
Longvue Drive      Highway 321
Sheridan Avenue    VFW Drive
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 73, Sch. VI) (Ord. passed 11-19-2009; Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
SCHEDULE VII. RESTRICTED TURNS.
   The following restrictions on turning shall henceforth be in effect at the
indicated locations and the Administrator shall install appropriate traffic-
control devices that clearly and adequately notify drivers of the turns
required or prohibited. The effect of the turn restrictions on vehicles and
pedestrians shall be as provided in G.S. §§ 20-153.
 
Type of Turn                       Intersection
No left turn                       Faculty Street and Highway 105
                                   Faculty Extension and Highway 105
Left turn only from left lane of   Horn Avenue at Horn-in-the-West Drive
Right turn only from right lane of Horn Avenue at Horn-in-the-West Drive
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 73, Sch. VII) (Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
SCHEDULE VIII. TRUCK WEIGHT AND ROUTE LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Weight limitations.  Whenever the Administrator installs a traffic-
control device clearly stating or indicating that the vehicles are not
permitted on a street or any portion thereof, no person may drive any vehicle
with multiple rear axles or any single rear axle vehicle with a gross vehicle
weight rating (GVWR) of 20,000 pounds or more, on that street or designated
portion thereof unless the vehicle's destination or point of origin is on that
street, within the corporate limits of the town and there is no alternative
street to access the point of origin or destination. Municipal vehicles, public
utility vehicles and heating fuel delivery vehicles are exempt from this
restriction. The following streets shall be weight-restricted upon installation
of traffic-control devices:
 
Eastbrook Drive
Westbrook Drive
Hunting Hills Lane
 
   (B)   Route limitations. The town has serious traffic problems within its
corporate limits. In particular, the town has a problem with tractor and
trailer trucks traveling through the downtown business district. The purpose of
this provision is to regulate the movement of large trucks so as to facilitate
traffic flow within the town.
      (1)   Trucks having more than two axles are prohibited from using U.S.
Highway 421 between the 105 Extension and Burrell/North Water Street.
      (2)   Trucks having more than two axles shall be allowed to use the
following streets: beginning on U.S. Highway 421-221 (East King Street) at 105
Extension, then along U.S. Highway 221 (N.C. 105 Extension) to its intersection
with U.S. Highway 321, then along N.C. Highway 105 to S.R. 1107 (known locally
as N.C. 105 Bypass), then along S.R. 1107 to U.S. 321-421 (West King Street)
west of Boone.
      (3)   Division (A) above shall not apply to trucks having more than two
axles making local deliveries to customers located within the prohibited area
described in division (A) above.
      (4)   U.S. Highway 421 beginning at 105 Extension and continuing on West
King Street shall be designated as U.S. 421 Business.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
SCHEDULE IX. SPEED LIMITS.
   The following speed limits shall be applicable to the following streets as
indicated and the Administrator shall install appropriate traffic-control
devices clearly indicating the established speed limit. The effect of these
speed limits shall be as provided in G.S. §§ 20-141 and 20-141.1.
15 miles per hour limit
Arrowhead Court
Bear Trail
Breckonshire Drive
Brown Street
Casey Lane
Castle Heights
Chandy Street
Chase Hill Drive
Church Street
Cole Street
College Street
Dotson Drive
Edora Street
Fairview Drive
Ferncliff Road
Franklin Drive
Gragg Street
Green Heights
Hampton Drive
Hawthorne Lane
Hayes Street
Hill Street
Horseshoe Drive
Keystone Drive
Mac Street
Maple Drive
Market Court
Maryah Drive
Megan Lane
N Hampton Road
Overlook Drive
Poplar Summit
Postal Street
Realty Row
Ridgewood Drive
Southview Drive
Spring Street
Spruce Street
Summer Place Drive
Tremont Drive
W Grandview Heights
Westridge Lane
Wey Street
Whitener Drive
Wickham Square
Wind Walker Court
Winklers Meadow
Wyn Way
 
20 miles per hour limit
Appalachian Drive
Appalachian Street
Arbor Lane
Azalea Drive
Berkley Avenue
Beverly Heights Avenue
Birch Street
Blairmont Drive
Blanwood Drive
Blue Ridge Avenue
Boone Creek Drive
Boone Docks Street
Boone Heights Drive
Brookside Drive
Buena Vista Drive
Burrell Street
Carolina Avenue
Cecil Miller Road
Cecil Street
Charles Street
Cherokee Street
Cherry Drive
Cherrybrook Lane
Chestnut Drive
Clawson Street
Clement Street
Coffey Street
Councill Street
Crest Drive
Dale Street
Daniel Boone Drive
Daniel Boone Drive Extension
Deerfield Road
Delmar Street
Doctors Drive
Dogwood Road
Dove Circle
Eastbrook Drive
Eastridge Drive
Eastview Drive
Edgewood Drive
Faculty Street Extension
Farthing Street
Forest Hill Drive
Furman Road
Gladys Street
Glendale Drive
Grand Boulevard
Grandview Heights
Green Street
Greenway Road
Grove Street
Hamby Alley
Hemlock Drive
Hidden Valley Circle
Highland Avenue
Highland Park Lane
Hillandale Drive
Hillcrest Circle
Hillside Drive
Hodges Street
Horn Avenue
Horn-in-the-West Drive
Howard Street
Hunting Hills Lane
Hunting Road
Iris Lane
Ivy Drive
Johnson Street
Kimberly Drive
Laurel Drive
Leola Street
Linney Street
Longvue Drive
Market Hills Drive
Martin Luther King Jr. Street
Mary Street
Moretz Drive
Morningside Drive
N Depot Street
North Ridge Circle
North Street
Oak Street
Oakdale Drive
Oakwood Drive
Olancha Avenue
Old Bristol Road
Orchard Street
Owens Drive
Palmer Drive
Park Street
Perkins Street
Perry Street
Pheasant Ridge
Pine Street
Poplar Hill Drive
Quail Drive
Queen Street
Racquet Road
Rhododendron Lane
Robin Lane
Rogers Drive
Russell Drive
S Depot Street
Shadowline Drive
Sheridan Avenue
Skyview Drive
Stadium Drive
Straight Street
Summit Street
Sunnyside Drive
Sunset Drive
Tanglewood Drive
Temple Drive
Tracy Circle
University Circle
University Hall Drive
VFW Drive
W Hilltop Drive
W King Street from College Street to Green Street (NCDOT)
W Virginia Street
Wallace Circle
Watauga Drive
Westbrook Drive
Wildwood Lane
Windy Drive
Wintergreen Lane
Wood Circle
Woodland Drive
Yosef Drive
Zeb Street
25 miles per hour limit
Brookshire Road within Town limits (NCDOT)
Deerfield Road
Eastview Drive within Town limits (NCDOT)
Faculty Street
Industrial Park Drive
Junaluska Road within Town limits (NCDOT)
Meadowview Drive
N Water Street (NCDOT)
New Market Boulevard
Perkinsville Drive
Wilson Drive
 
35 miles per hour limit
Old E King Street
State Farm Road
 
(Prior Code, Ch. 73, Sch. IX) (Ord. passed 7-20-2004; Ord. passed - -; Ord.
passed 12-16-2019; Ord. passed 7-16-2020)
TITLE VIII: PUBLIC NUISANCES; OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
80.   PUBLIC NUISANCES
         
81.   ABANDONED, JUNKED AND NUISANCE VEHICLES
         
82.   NOISE CONTROL
         
83.   SMOKING
         
84.   ANIMAL CONTROL AND CRUELTY
         
85.   AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING AND PUBLIC URINATION PROHIBITED
         
86.   RESERVED
         
87.   RESERVED
         
88.   RESERVED
         
89.   MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
CHAPTER 80: PUBLIC NUISANCES
Section
   
80.01   Authority
   
80.02   Administration and enforcement
   
80.03   Definitions
   
80.04   Responsibility for violations
   
80.05   Nuisances declared
   
80.06   Duty to investigate possible nuisances
   
80.07   Notice of existence of nuisance; summary abatement
   
80.08   Appeal of determination of nuisance; abatement
   
80.09   Abatement of nuisances by town
   
80.10   Cost of nuisance abatement to be charged to owner of property
   
80.11   Lien created upon failure to pay nuisance abatement costs
   
80.12   Notice to chronic violators
   
80.13   Administrative fee
   
80.14   Procedures in chapter not exclusive
 
   
80.99   Penalties
§ 80.01 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the town's authority to define,
prohibit, regulate, and abate acts, omissions, or conditions detrimental to the
health, safety, or welfare of its citizens or the peace and dignity of the town
and to define and abate nuisances pursuant to G.S. §§ 160A-174 and 160A-175; to
summarily remove, abate, or remedy everything in the town limits or within one
mile thereof that is dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or public
safety pursuant to G.S. § 160A-193; and to provide annual notice to chronic
violators pursuant to G.S. § 160A-200.1.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 80.02 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   This chapter shall be administered and enforced by such person(s) as may be
designated by the Town Manager, referred to herein as the “code enforcement
officer.”
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 80.03 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless otherwise defined herein, words used in this chapter that are defined
in
Chapter 91 of this Code (“Storage and Collection of Solid Waste and
Recyclables”) shall have the meanings provided in
Chapter 91.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 80.04 RESPONSIBILITY FOR VIOLATIONS.
   Any person whose intentional acts or omissions results in a violation of
this chapter is responsible for the violation as provided herein. Any person
who is a “responsible person” with respect to real property where a nuisance is
or was maintained is responsible to abate the nuisance and/or may be subject to
penalties as specified herein. For purposes of this chapter, a “responsible
person” includes any person who has ownership, legal control of, or actual
possession of the property in question, including an owner, lessee, sublessee
and/or occupant, as well as the invitees of any such person.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 80.05 NUISANCES DECLARED.
   Each of the following enumerated and described conditions, if created,
allowed, and/or maintained with respect to any building, structure, dwelling,
dwelling unit or parcel of land, is hereby found, deemed and declared to
constitute a detriment, danger and hazard to the health, safety, morals and
general welfare to the inhabitants of the town and/or is unsightly,
unattractive and contributes measurably to visual blight within the town, and
is found, deemed and declared to be a public nuisance wherever the same may
exist and the creation, maintenance or failure to abate any such nuisance is
hereby declared unlawful.
   (A)   Between June 1 and September 30 of each year, growth of grass or weeds
over eight inches in height in an area normally maintained as a lawn. For
purposes of this section, a lawn is an area of open, grass-covered land that
normally is mowed regularly to keep it short, as opposed to an area that is
maintained in a natural state or cultivated with shrubs, herbs, flowers,
vegetables, or other garden plants.
   (B)   Grass, weeds, vines, shrubs, or other vegetation over eight inches in
height encroaching upon or over a sidewalk, greenway, or the curb or edge of
the pavement of an abutting street.
   (C)   Any condition that blocks or obstructs the natural flow of branches,
streams, creeks, surface waters, ditches or drains, except as permitted per
lawfully-approved development plans; provided, that if the obstruction is
caused by natural forces and does not pose an imminent danger or peril to the
public, the property owner and any other responsible person shall have a
reasonable opportunity to clear the obstruction before it shall be deemed a
nuisance.
   (D)   Any stormwater retention or impoundment device that is not operating
properly.
   (E)   Nuisance vehicles as defined by
Chapter 81 of this code; provided, the process for abating a nuisance vehicle
shall be as provided in
Chapter 81.
   (F)   Any of the following that either: (i) Is visible from one or more
adjacent streets or sidewalks, from public property, or from one or more other
private properties; or (ii) poses a danger to the health or welfare of the
public or adjacent residents or businesses; provided, that an accumulation of
solid waste shall not constitute a public nuisance if it is (i) properly stored
in appropriate receptacles or maintained for collection in accordance with the
requirements of
Chapter 91 of this code ("Storage and Collection of Solid Wastes And
Recyclables"), and (ii) in the case of solid waste placed for special
collection, arrangements are made within one business day of the accumulation
being created for the town's Public Works Department to collect the solid
waste.
      (1)   Any accumulation of solid waste, including any manner of refuse,
scrap materials, or junk.
      (2)   A collection place, storage or accumulation of lumber, bricks,
blocks, nails, building hardware, roofing materials, scaffolding, masonry
materials, electrical supplies or materials, plumbing supplies or materials,
heating and air conditioning supplies or material or any other type of old or
unusable building supplies (especially those with nails, staples or sharp
objects and edges), unless such materials are collected for purposes of an
improvement or repair being made to that same property or pursuant to a
legitimate plan to make an improvement or repair to that same property within
six months of when the accumulation is first created.
      (3)   A collection place, storage or accumulation of any amount of
garbage, garbage bags, food and kitchen waste, litter, animal waste, trash, or
other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind; provided, that nothing in this
subdivision shall be construed to prevent the generally accepted use of a
properly maintained compost pile or storage of animal manure being used as
fertilizer for lawns, gardens or other agricultural or horticultural purposes.
      (4)   Deteriorated or dilapidated sheds, outbuildings, garages or other
uninhabited structures that have collapsed, partially collapsed or are likely
to collapse and pose a danger of fire, present a risk of injury to neighborhood
children who are likely to be attracted to the place, or otherwise pose a
danger to adjacent property owners or the public.
      (5)   The non-temporary use of carports, open porches, decks, patios and
other non-enclosed outdoor areas that are visible from the street as a storage
or collection place for boxes, appliances, furniture (not including outdoor
furniture used for their ordinary purposes), tools, equipment, junk, garbage,
old, worn out, broken or discarded machinery and equipment, cans, containers,
household goods or other similar conditions that increase the likelihood of a
fire, may conceal dangerous conditions, or create an unattractive condition or
visually blighted property.
      (6)   A collection place, storage or accumulation of any amount of old,
worn out, broken or discarded machinery, vehicle parts, tires, tire rims and
tubes, metal products, old clothes, rags, furniture, stoves, refrigerators,
appliances, cans and containers, household goods, mattresses, boxes, paper,
plumbing or electrical fixtures, glass products, brush, limbs, fencing
materials, wood products (not including firewood) or similar materials.
      (7)   A collection of combustible items such as mattresses, boxes, paper,
automobile tires and tubes, garbage, trash, brush, old clothes, rags, or any
other combustible materials of a like nature.
   (G)   Any improper or inadequate drainage on private property that causes
flooding or interferes with the use of or endangers in any way the streets,
sidewalks, parks or other municipal property of any kind.
   (H)   Failure to clean or clear a public street of mud and debris related to
a construction, timbering, or other similar land use project within 12 hours
after notification by the town for major and minor thoroughfares or within 24
hours after such notification for collector and local streets; however, if it
is found by the town that the situation poses a clear and present danger or
hazard to traffic or the general public, such cleaning or clearing may be
required to take place as soon after notification as practicable.
   (I)   Failure to remove a dead or partially fallen tree that poses an
obvious and imminent threat to a dwelling located on another property or to the
traveling public (e.g., motorists, bicyclists or pedestrians).
   (J)   Failure to remove any tree or tree limb or any concentration of
branches which have fallen due to an act of nature or having been cut, except
in an area maintained as a natural area. For purposes of this provision, a
"natural area" means any area that is not maintained as a lawn or paved,
graveled, hardscaped, or otherwise improved.
   (K)   Failure to remediate an accumulation of gravel or similar materials
deposited from private property onto a town street or sidewalk after the owner
or occupant of the property has been warned of such accumulation by the town
within the prior 24 months.
   (L)   Any condition that is defined as a nuisance in Chapter 96 of this code
("Streets, Sidewalks, and Other Public Ways; Encroachments"), including but not
limited those related to obstruction of or depositing injurious materials upon
streets or sidewalks; drainage; and obstruction of sight distances.
   (M)   The establishment, continuance, maintenance, or use of any building or
place for social gatherings or business which, by reason of the conduct of
those persons in attendance, results in any one or more of the following
conditions or occurrences: public drinking or drunkenness; public urination or
defecation; the unlawful sale, furnishing, or consumption of alcoholic
beverages or illegal drugs; the unlawful deposit of trash or litter on public
or private property; the destruction of public or private property; the
generation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic that obstructs the free flow of
residential traffic or interferes with the ability to provide emergency
services; excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise that disturbs the
repose of the neighborhood; public disturbances, brawls, fights or quarrels;
repeated activities that violate other local ordinances; acts which create and
constitute a breach of the peace as defined in G.S. § 19-1.1; or any other
activity resulting in conditions that unreasonably annoy, injure or endanger
the safety, health, comfort or repose of neighboring residents or businesses.
Any owner, tenant, or other responsible person of any premises who sponsors,
conducts, hosts, invites, suffers, permits, or continues to allow a nuisance
gathering as described in in this division, any person attending such a
nuisance gathering, and any owner, tenant or other responsible person who fails
to take reasonable steps to prevent a subsequent nuisance gathering is in
violation of this section. 
   (N)   Any condition that is specifically defined as a nuisance pursuant to
any other provision of this Code; provided, that this subdivision does not
apply to conditions declared to be nuisances under Chapter 50 ("Water and
Sewer") and any such conditions shall be governed by the provisions of that
Chapter.
   (O)   Any other condition specifically declared to be a danger or
prejudicial to the public health, safety, and general welfare of inhabitants of
the town and declared to be a public nuisance by a code enforcement officer and
affirmed to be a public nuisance by the town council. The code enforcement
officer may declare a nuisance and provide notice to abate the violation(s)
prior to the nuisance declaration by the town council. Such notice shall state
the condition existing, the location of the violation and that the town council
will be requested, after public hearing at which the person notified may appear
and be heard, to declare that the conditions existing constitute a danger to
the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare of the town inhabitants
and a public nuisance. After such declaration by the town council, in the form
of an ordinance, the condition shall be abated as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord. passed 4-10-2024)
§ 80.06 DUTY TO INVESTIGATE POSSIBLE NUISANCES.
   If an authorized enforcement officer shall have reasonable cause to believe
there is a violation of this chapter, he or she shall have the right to enter
on any premises within the town ordinance making jurisdiction at any reasonable
hour in order to determine if there is a violation.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 80.07 NOTICE OF EXISTENCE OF NUISANCE; SUMMARY ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Notice of existence and opportunity to abate nuisance. 
      (1)   Upon a determination that a public nuisance as described in this
chapter exists, the code enforcement officer shall notify in writing the
property owner and, to the extent actually known to the code enforcement
officer, any other responsible person of the condition constituting the public
nuisance and shall order the prompt abatement thereof.
      (2)   The notice of violation shall notify the recipient of the
following:
         (a)   That condition(s) exist on the property which constitute a
public nuisance;
         (b)   The condition(s) existing and the Code provision(s) that are
violated by such condition(s);
         (c)   The location of such condition(s);
         (d)   That the property owner and any other responsible person are
ordered to abate the public nuisance, and that, unless the condition is abated
within the prescribed period, the conditions constituting a nuisance will be
abated by the town and the cost of abatement shall constitute a lien against
the premises, may be collected in the nature of a civil action, and may result
in civil penalties;
         (e)   A statement that civil penalties and an administrative fee of
one hundred dollars $100 will be assessed for a second and any subsequent
notice of violation issued under this chapter within 12 months of the first
such notice of violation.
   (B)   Manner of notice.
      (1)   The notice of a violation of this chapter shall be served on the
property owner by:
         (a)   Personal delivery of such notice;
         (b)   By mail sent by both regular first class mail and by certified
mail, return receipt requested to the address then on file in the county
property tax assessor's office; or
         (c)   By electronic mail, if the property owner confirms receipt of
the notice by electronic mail.
      (2)   Any such notice may be served by any authorized representative of
the town manager, his or her designee, the code enforcement officer, or by any
police officer of the town. If service cannot otherwise be made on a property
owner, the property shall be posted with the notice. Notice shall be served in
the same manner upon any other responsible person of whom the code enforcement
officer is actually aware.
   (C)    Opportunity for owner or other responsible person to abate the
nuisance. Except as provided at division (D) of this section, the town
ordinarily shall allow 15 calendar days from the receipt of such written notice
for abatement of the nuisance. However, for good cause expressed in the written
notice to abate, the code enforcement officer may provide a shorter or longer
time for the abatement.
   (D)   Summary abatement.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions or any
other provision of this Chapter, if, in the opinion of the Town Manager, his or
her designee, or the code enforcement officer, an unlawful condition is such
that it poses imminent danger or peril to public, the town may, with or without
prior notice, proceed to abate the same, and the cost thereof shall be charged
against the property owner.
   (E)   Any defect in the method of giving the notice required by this
section, or in the form thereof, or the giving of such notice to an improper
person, shall not prevent the town, in any case where the work of abating an
unlawful condition upon any property is borne by the town, from collecting the
cost thereof from the owner, nor shall it affect the validity of the lien on
the property for such cost, nor shall it subject the town to any liability.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 80.08 APPEAL OF DETERMINATION OF NUISANCE; ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Within the period for abatement specified on the notice of violation,
the property owner or other responsible person may request in writing a review
of the nuisance determination by the Town Manager. Unless the unlawful
condition is dangerous so as to require summary abatement per the preceding
section, such written request shall stay the abatement of the nuisance by the
town until the completion of the review by the Town Manager or his or her
designee. In the event no appeal is taken, the town may proceed to abate the
nuisance.
   (B)   Within ten days of receiving a request for review, the Town Manager
shall hold a hearing to review the nuisance determination. At this hearing, all
interested persons shall be heard and may offer evidence and be represented by
an attorney. The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner to determine
whether there is a sufficient legal and factual basis to affirm the nuisance
determination, and the rules of evidence shall not apply; provided, that the
decision of the Town Manager shall be based upon substantial and reliable
evidence. If, following the hearing, the Town Manager upholds the findings, and
declares the condition existing on the property to be a danger and hazard to
the health, safety, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the town and a
public nuisance, the Town Manager shall issue a written order directing the
property owner or other responsible person to abate the nuisance within 15 days
and/or, if the nuisance is not abated by the property owner, directing the town
to abate the condition constituting a nuisance.
   (C)   Rather than reviewing an appeal, the Town Manager, in his or her sole
discretion, may for good cause refer the review of any notice of violation to
the Town Council.
   (D)   If a nuisance is found to exist, the responsibility for abatement
shall rest with the property owner and any other responsible person,
notwithstanding that the nuisance is found to exist, wholly or in part, within
a town easement which crosses private property.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the property owner or other
responsible party from abating the nuisance in question in accordance with the
notice of violation prior to any requested review pursuant to this section.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 80.09 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES BY TOWN.
   (A)   If any person, after having been ordered to abate a public nuisance
described in this chapter, fails, neglects or refuses to abate or remove the
condition constituting the nuisance by the date specified in the notice of
violation, the town may cause the condition to be removed or otherwise remedied
by having employees of the town or a private contractor hired by the town to go
upon such premises and remove or otherwise abate such nuisance under the
supervision of an officer or employee designated by the Town Manager or his
designee. The cost of abatement shall be paid by the property owner.
   (B)   Any person who has been ordered to abate a public nuisance may, within
the time allowed by this article, request in writing that the town remove such
condition causing the nuisance. If the town abates the nuisance, the costs of
abatement shall be paid by the person making the request.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 80.10 COST OF NUISANCE ABATEMENT TO BE CHARGED TO PROPERTY OWNER.
   Upon the completion of abatement by the town, the Town Manager, his or her
designee, or the code enforcement officer shall deliver to the finance director
a statement showing the actual cost of the abatement of the unlawful condition
plus any additional charges, in accordance with the schedule of fees and
charges established by the town Council. The finance director shall thereupon
mail to the owner of the subject property a bill covering the cost, if with
reasonable diligence the name and address of such owner can be ascertained,
with instruction that such charges are due and payable within 30 days from the
receipt thereof. In the event the costs for abatement are not paid within 30
days after receipt of the statement of charges, such charges may be recovered
by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 80.11 LIEN CREATED UPON FAILURE TO PAY NUISANCE ABATEMENT COSTS.
   In the event charges for the removal or abatement of the public nuisance are
not paid within 30 days after receipt of the statement of charges, such charges
shall become a lien against the real property upon which such costs are
incurred. The amount of such lien shall be added to the tax roll and collected
as unpaid ad valorem taxes.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 80.12 NOTICE TO CHRONIC VIOLATORS.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, a chronic violator is a person who owns
property with respect to which, in the previous calendar year, the town gave
notice of violation for a public nuisance violation at least three times under
any provision of this chapter.
   (B)   At the beginning of each calendar year, the code enforcement officer
shall notify each person who was a chronic violator that, if the violator's
property is found to be in violation of this chapter in this calendar year, the
town shall, without further notice, take action to remedy the violation, and
the expense of the action shall become a lien upon the property and shall be
collected as unpaid taxes. The notice shall be sent by registered or certified
mail. When service is attempted by registered or certified mail, a copy of the
notice may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if
the registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail
is not returned by the post office within ten days after the mailing. If
service by regular mail is used, a copy of the notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 80.13 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE.
   (A)   Fee assessed for second and subsequent violations. Any person who is
issued a second notice of violation under this chapter within 12 months of the
first notice of violation issued hereunder shall be subject to an
administrative fee of $100 in addition to any other charge. For each additional
nuisance notice of violation occurring prior to the expiration of a 12-month
period following issuance of the first nuisance notice of violation, the person
shall be subject to an administrative fee of $100. The person may also be
assessed any costs incurred in obtaining service of the public nuisance notice
including legal publication.
   (B)   Appeal of administrative fee. An appeal of an administrative fee
demand for payment must be filed in writing with the Town Manager within ten
days after service of the written demand for payment. The written appeal shall
provide the reasons the petitioner contends that the administrative fee was
wrongly applied and any supporting documentation.
      (1)   Within ten days of receiving a request for review, the Town Manager
shall hold a hearing to review the civil penalty. At this hearing, all
interested persons shall be heard and may offer evidence and be represented by
an attorney. The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner and the rules
of evidence shall not apply; provided, that the decision of the Town Manager
shall be based upon substantial and reliable evidence. The Town Manager may
reduce the penalty if the Town Manager determines that:
         (a)   The appellant has acted in good faith; and
         (b)   The failure of the appellant to avoid a second or subsequent
violation is the result of circumstances beyond the appellant's control; or
         (c)   There are other circumstances which make the assessment of the
administrative fee unfair in that particular case.
      (2)   Rather than reviewing an appeal, the Town Manager, in his or her
sole discretion, may for good cause refer the review of an administrative fee
to the Town Council.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 80.14 PROCEDURES IN CHAPTER NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The procedures set forth in this article shall be in addition to any other
remedies that may now or hereafter exist under law for the abatement of public
nuisances.
   (A)   Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prevent the town from
proceeding in a criminal action against any person violating the provisions of
this article as provided in G.S. § 14-4.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the town's authority
to summarily remove, abate, or remedy any condition within the town limits or
within 1 mile thereof that is dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or
public safety as provided in G.S. § 160A-193.
   (C)   In addition to or in lieu of proceeding under any other provision(s)
of this chapter, the town may file a legal action to abate a nuisance as
provided at G.S. § 160A-175.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 80.99 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Penalty for failure to comply with abatement order.  Any person
failing to comply with an order of abatement issued pursuant to this article,
where no appeal is taken within the prescribed time, or after ratification of
the order on appeal, shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $50
per day for so many days as the person remains in violation until such date as
the nuisance is abated, up to a maximum of ten days.
   (B)   Penalty for second and subsequent violations. Upon second and
subsequent violations of the same provision of this chapter by a person within
12 months of that person receiving a notice of violation under this chapter, a
civil penalty of $100 shall be assessed upon the issuance of the notice of
violation. If the nuisance is not abated within the prescribed time period, the
person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to $500. In
addition, the offender shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of
$100 per day for so many days as the person remains in violation until such
date as the nuisance is abated, up to a maximum of ten days. For purposes of
this division, the “same provision” of this chapter means any one of §§
80.05(A) through (O) of this chapter; and a violation of any of the subparts of
§
80.05(F) shall be considered a violation of the same provision (that is, §
80.05(F)) of this chapter.
   (C)   Appeal of civil penalty. An appeal of a civil penalty must be filed in
writing with the Town Manager within ten days after service of a written demand
for payment. The written appeal shall provide the reasons the petitioner
contends that the civil penalty was wrongly applied and any supporting
documentation.
      (1)   Within ten days of receiving a request for review, the Town Manager
shall hold a hearing to review the civil penalty. At this hearing, all
interested persons shall be heard and may offer evidence and be represented by
an attorney. The hearing shall be conducted in an informal manner and the rules
of evidence shall not apply; provided, that the decision of the Town Manager
shall be based upon substantial and reliable evidence. The Town Manager may
reduce the penalty if the Town Manager determines that:
         (a)   The appellant has acted in good faith; and
         (b)   The failure of the appellant to correct a violation is the
result of circumstances beyond the appellant's control; or
         (c)   There are other circumstances which make the amount of the
presumptive civil penalty unfair in that particular case.
      (2)   Rather than reviewing an appeal, the Town Manager, in his or her
sole discretion, may for good cause refer the review of a civil penalty to the
Town Council.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
CHAPTER 81: ABANDONED, JUNKED AND NUISANCE VEHICLES
Section
   
81.01   Definitions
   
81.02   Administration and enforcement
   
81.03   Abandoned vehicles unlawful; removal authorized; abandoned vehicles on
private property
   
81.04   Nuisance vehicles unlawful; removal authorized
   
81.05   Removal of abandoned or nuisance vehicles; pre-towing requirements
   
81.06   Exceptions to prior notice requirement
   
81.07   Responsibility for costs of removal
   
81.08   Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements
   
81.09   Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of
vehicle
   
81.10   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings
   
81.11   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle
   
81.12   Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property
   
81.13   Protection against criminal or civil liability
   
81.14   Exceptions
   
81.15   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle
Statutory Reference:
   See also G.S. §§ 160A-303, 160A-303.2
§ 81.01 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Is a vehicle that:
      (1)   Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or
ordinance prohibiting parking;
      (2)   Is left on a public street or highway for longer than seven days or
is determined by law enforcement to be a hazard to the motoring public;
      (3)   Is left on property owned or operated by the town for longer than
24 hours; or
      (4)   Is left on private property without the consent of the owner,
occupant or lessee of such property for longer than two hours.
   AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL(S). The Police Department or the code enforcement
officer, respectively, designated to authorize the removal of vehicles under
the provisions of this chapter.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. The town employee(s) designated by the Town
Manager to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle that:
      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked;
      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it was
originally intended to move; or
      (3)   Does not display a current license plate lawfully upon that
vehicle.
   MOTOR VEHICLE AND VEHICLE. All machines designed or intended to travel over
land by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.
   NUISANCE VEHICLE. A junked motor vehicle on public or private property that
is determined and declared by the code enforcement officer to be a health or
safety hazard to neighboring residents or businesses or to the public,
including but not limited to a vehicle found to:
      (1)   Be a point of concentration of gasoline, oil or other flammable or
explosive materials;
      (2)   Have accessible areas of confinement that cannot be opened from the
inside, such as trunks, hoods, etc.;
      (3)   Be in danger of falling or turning over;
      (4)   Be a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste, or
any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind;
      (5)   Have exposed sharp parts or edges of metal or glass; or
      (6)   Otherwise pose a health and safety hazard as determined by the code
enforcement officer.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 81.02 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The police department and the code enforcement officer(s) shall be
responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. The police
department shall be responsible for administering the removal and the
disposition of vehicles determined to be abandoned on the streets and highways
within the town and on property owned by the town. The code enforcement officer
(s) shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of
abandoned and nuisance vehicles located on private property.
   (B)   If the appropriate inspecting officer(s) have probable cause to expect
a violation of this chapter, they shall have the right to enter on any premises
within the town limits at any reasonable hour in order to determine if any
vehicle is in violation of this chapter.
   (C)   The town may, on an annual basis and with prior approval of the Town
Council, contract with private tow truck operators to remove, store and dispose
of abandoned vehicles and/or nuisance vehicles in compliance with this chapter
and applicable state laws.
   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the legal
authority or powers of officers of the town police department or fire
department in enforcing other laws or otherwise carrying out their duties.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 81.03 ABANDONED VEHICLES UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED; ABANDONED VEHICLES ON
PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be an abandoned
vehicle.
   (B)   Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the town may
determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed.
   (C)   Notwithstanding prior subdivision (B), if an abandoned vehicle is
located on private property, it shall be towed only at the direction of the
property owner. Town officials will assume no responsibility for the removal of
abandoned vehicles from private property.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
Cross reference:
   See also Towing and Booting (
Chapter 73) for regulations governing non-consensual towing from private
parking lots.
§ 81.04 NUISANCE VEHICLES UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to
remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle.
   (B)   Upon investigation, the code enforcement officer may determine and
declare that a vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle, and
order the vehicle removed.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 81.05 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED OR NUISANCE VEHICLES; PRE-TOWING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as set forth in §
81.06, an abandoned or nuisance vehicle that is to be removed shall be towed at
the direction of the town only after notice to the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of the vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle, if
the names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person entitled to
the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle is located, can be ascertained in the exercise
of reasonable diligence, notice to remove the vehicle within 15 days from
receipt of the notice shall be given by certified mail or by hand delivery by
the appropriate authorizing official. The person who mails or hand delivers the
notice shall retain a written record to show the names and addresses to which
the notice was mailed or delivered and the date of such mail or delivery.
   (B)   If such names and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to
be removed is an abandoned vehicle, or if notice attempted in accordance with
division (A) above is refused by addressee, notice shall be given by affixing
on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice
indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the town no sooner than 15 days
for a nuisance vehicle, or seven days for an abandoned vehicle, after the
notice is affixed or mailed, unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal
possessor prior to that time. Notice may be given in such a manner concurrently
with notice given in accordance with subdivision (A) above, even where such
notice is properly given and accepted by the addressee.
   (C)   With respect to abandoned or nuisance vehicles for which notice is
required to be given, if the registered owner or person entitled to possession
does not remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the
vehicle is an abandoned or nuisance vehicle, such appeal shall be made in
writing and delivered to the Town Manager within seven days of the owner's
receipt of notice of removal. The appeal shall be heard by the Town Manager
within ten days of receipt of the appeal. Further proceedings to remove the
vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided. In the event the
owner or person entitled to possession fails to reasonably pursue the appeal,
the appeal shall be deemed abandoned and the vehicle ordered removed.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 81.06 EXCEPTIONS TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENT.
   The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an abandoned or
nuisance vehicle may, as determined by the authorizing official, be omitted in
those circumstances where there is special need for prompt action to eliminate
a traffic obstruction or otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and
welfare. Such findings shall be entered by the authorizing official in the
appropriate daily records. Circumstances justifying the removal of a vehicle
without prior notice include:
   (A)   Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For a vehicle left on the public
streets and highways, a law enforcement officer may determine that immediate
removal of such vehicle is warranted if the vehicle is:
      (1)   Obstructing traffic;
      (2)   Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting
parking;
      (3)   Parked in a no stopping or standing zone;
      (4)   Parked in a loading zone;
      (5)   Parked in a bus zone; or
      (6)   Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed under
any state or local law.
   (B)   Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to an abandoned or
nuisance vehicle left on property other than the streets and highways, such a
vehicle may be removed without giving prior notice only in circumstances where
the authorizing official finds a special need for prompt action to protect and
maintain the public health, safety and welfare. By way of illustration and not
of limitation, such circumstances include those in which a vehicle is blocking
or obstructing ingress or egress to a businesses or residence, poses a traffic
hazard, or is causing damage to public property or to the private property of
another.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 81.07 RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS OF REMOVAL.
   (A)   Owner responsible for removal costs. Except as provided at division
(B), if an abandoned vehicle or nuisance vehicle is removed by or at the
direction of the town, the vehicle owner shall pay all reasonable costs
incidental to the removal and storage of such vehicle and incidental to
locating the owner thereof.
   (B)   Town to pay costs of removing nuisance vehicles in certain cases. If a
vehicle is declared to be a nuisance vehicle, the property owner may, upon
written request and waiver of any claim for damages, request that the town
remove the vehicle at no expense. In order to have a vehicle removed at no
expense to the property owner, a signed consent form and vehicle title of
ownership must be given to the town and the towing company. If the above-stated
requirements are not provided to the town, civil penalties shall be issued for
a maximum of 10 days for each day the vehicle remains in violation. If the
vehicle remains on the property in excess of 10 days, the violation and civil
penalties may be handled as a civil action in small claims court and the
vehicle may be ordered to be removed from the property.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 81.08 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; POST-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any abandoned or nuisance vehicle which has been ordered to be removed
may, as directed by the town, be removed to a storage garage or area by the tow
truck operator or towing business contracting to perform such services for the
town. In accordance with G.S. § 20-219.11, whenever such a vehicle is removed,
the authorizing official shall immediately notify the last known registered
owner of the vehicle, such notice shall include the following:
      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;
      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;
      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
      (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and
      (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause
hearing on the removal.
   (B)   If the vehicle has a North Carolina registration plate or
registration, notice shall be given to the owner within 24 hours; if the
vehicle is not registered in this state, notice shall be given to the owner
within 72 hours from the removal of the vehicle. This notice shall, if
feasible, be given by telephone. Whether or not the owner is reached by
telephone, notice shall be mailed to his last known address unless he or his
agent waives this notice in writing.
   (C)   Whenever an abandoned or nuisance vehicle is removed, and such vehicle
has no valid registration or registration plates, the authorizing official
shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle identification
number, to determine the last known registered owner of the vehicle and to
notify him or her of the information set forth in divisions (A)(1) through (A)
(5) of this section.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 81.09 RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OR FINAL DISPOSITION OF THE
VEHICLE.
   (A)   After the removal of an abandoned vehicle or nuisance vehicle, the
owner or any person entitled to possession is entitled to a hearing for the
purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing the vehicle as
provided at G.S. § 20-219.11. A request for hearing must be filed in writing
with the county magistrate designated by the chief district court judge to
receive such hearing requests. The magistrate will set the hearing within 72
hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing will be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 20-219.11.
   (B)   The only issue at this hearing is whether or not probable cause
existed for the towing. If the magistrate finds that probable cause did exist,
the tower's lien continues. If the magistrate finds that probable cause did not
exist, the tower's lien is extinguished.
   (C)   Any aggrieved party may appeal the magistrate's decision to district
court.
   (D)   The town shall pay the towing and storage charges if the court's final
decision is that no probable cause existed for the tow.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 81.10 REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.
   Unless such vehicle is being detained by police as evidence, in accordance
with G.S. § 20-219.12 the vehicle owner may obtain possession of a removed
vehicle by paying the towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting
a bond for double the amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator
or towing business having custody of the removed vehicle.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 81.11 SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.
   (A)   Consent of owner. With the consent of the registered owner, the town
or tow truck operator may dispose of any vehicle without holding it for any
prescribed period of time.
   (B)   Sale of vehicle. An abandoned or nuisance vehicle shall be held for a
period of at least 30 days, during which time the owner may claim it by
exhibiting proof of ownership to the town or towing business having custody of
the vehicle and by paying the costs incidental to its towing and storage. After
being held for 30 days, a vehicle may be sold in accordance with the provisions
of G.S. §§ 44A-4, 44A-5, and 44A-6, provided that, if the town is responsible
for collecting towing or removal fees, no hearing in addition to the probable
cause hearing described in §
81.09 shall be required. If no one purchases the vehicle at the sale, and if
the value of the vehicle is less than the amount of the lien, the town may
destroy the vehicle.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 81.12 CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   As a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private
property if the owner, occupant or lessee of such property could have the
vehicle removed under applicable law. In no case will a vehicle be removed by
the town from private property without a written request of the owner, occupant
or lessee, except in those cases where a vehicle is a nuisance vehicle which
has been ordered removed by the code enforcement officer. The town may require
any person requesting the removal of an abandoned or nuisance vehicle from
private property to indemnify the town against any loss, expense or liability
incurred because of its removal, storage or sale.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 81.13 PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.
   No person shall be held to answer in a civil or criminal action to any owner
or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned or nuisance
vehicle for disposing of such vehicle as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 81.14 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to a vehicle:
   (A)   Which is located in a bona fide automobile graveyard or junkyard, as
defined in G.S. § 136-143, in accordance with the Junkyard Control Act, G.S. §§
136-141 et seq.;
   (B)   Which is in an enclosed accessory building;
   (C)   Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a
lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the
enterprise; or
   (D)   Which is an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful place and manner.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 81.15 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any
storage facility any vehicle which has been impounded pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter unless and until all towing and impoundment fees
which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees, have been paid. Any person who
violates this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a
fine of up to $500 for each violation.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
CHAPTER 82: NOISE CONTROL
Section
   
82.01   Statement of policy; interpretations
   
82.02   General prohibition
   
82.03   Noises prohibited at all times
   
82.04   Noises prohibited at certain times
   
82.05   Noises that generally do not violate this chapter
   
82.06   Special provisions concerning live, recorded or amplified music
originating from commercial establishments and live music venues in the Town's
B-1, B-2, B-3, and U-1 zoning districts
   
82.07   Responsible parties
 
   
82.99   Enforcement; penalties
§ 82.01 STATEMENT OF POLICY; INTERPRETATIONS.
   (A)   Statement of policy. It is the policy of the Town of Boone to maintain
a peaceful community while recognizing that certain noises are generated by the
acceptable economic and recreational activity of a vibrant community. The goal
of the town is to encourage such activity while ensuring that time periods
during which many residents are customarily at rest or have an expectation of
peaceful enjoyment of their residences are not disturbed by unacceptable levels
or types of noise.
   (B)   Interpretations and Definitions.  For purposes of this chapter, the
following interpretations and definitions shall apply.
      (1)   When the word REASONABLE is used herein, it shall be evaluated with
reference to the normal expectations for sound during normal waking hours
versus the normal expectations for sound during normal sleeping hours, with a
higher level of sound acceptable during the day and a lower level of sound
acceptable during the night. It shall also be evaluated with reference to the
location involved, with a higher level of noise expected and tolerated if
generated within a business or university district within the town and a lower
level of noise expected and tolerated if generated within a residential
district within the town.
      (2)   A REASONABLE PERSON is one who is moderate, fair and sensible.
Although enforcement of this chapter shall often be the result of a complaint
received by the Town, in each instance where a complaint is received and the
standard of "reasonableness" invoked, a Boone police officer answering the
complaint shall separately determine, based upon his or her investigation and
in light of the circumstances of the situation, whether the noise in question
is at an "unreasonable" level.
      (3)   A person's TEMPORARY OR USUAL PLACE OF ABODE OR PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT
shall not include locations on the campus of Appalachian State University and
located in the U-1 zoning district, as they relate to noises which originate
from areas on campus located in the U-1 zoning district.
      (4)   Whether a sound is AUDIBLE WITHIN A PERSON'S TEMPORARY OR USUAL
PLACE OF ABODE shall be determined with one or more windows of the complaining
party open, assuming weather conditions during which it is reasonable and
customary for one or more windows to be open.
      (5)   Noise is DISTURBING if it is perceived by a person of ordinary
sensibilities as interrupting the normal peace and calm of an area.
      (6)   UNREASONABLY LOUD NOISE shall mean noise which is substantially
incompatible with the time and location where created or heard to the extent
that it brings about an actual or imminent interference with peace, rest, or
good order.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 82.02 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make, allow, continue or assist
to be made, allowed or continued:
      (1)   Any unreasonably loud noise; or
      (2)   Any noise which unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensibilities, within the jurisdictional limits of the town; or
      (3)   Any noise which is so harsh, prolonged, unnatural, or unusual in
time or place as to occasion unreasonable discomfort to any persons residing,
visiting or working in the area from which said noises emanate, or as to
unreasonably interfere with the peace and comfort of such residents or their
guests, or operators or customers in places of business, or as to detrimentally
or adversely affect such residences or places of business.
   (B)   Factors for determining whether noise is unreasonably loud or
disturbing include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The proximity of the sound to sleeping facilities, whether
residential or commercial;
      (2)   The proximity of the sound to the noise sensitive areas;
      (3)   The land use, nature, and zoning of the area(s) from which the
sound emanates and the area where it is received or perceived;
      (4)   The time of day or night the sound occurs;
      (5)   The duration of the sound; and
      (6)   Whether the sound is recurrent, intermittent, or constant.
   (C)   Non-applicability within ASU campus areas. This chapter shall not be
enforced with respect to violations alleged to disturb persons located on the
campus of Appalachian State University and in the U-1 zoning district as a
result of noises that originate from areas on campus located in the U-1 zoning
district.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 82.03 NOISES PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES.
   The following noises are declared to be unreasonably loud or disturbing
noises in violation of §
82.02 and are prohibited at all times. This enumeration shall not be construed
to be an exclusive list of noises which violate §
82.02, nor shall satisfying any requirements of this section render a sound in
itself reasonable
   (A)   Noises intended to disturb.  The creation of noise for the primary
purpose of disturbing another person, such purpose gleaned from the
circumstances surrounding the generation of the noise;
   (B)   Horns, signaling devices, sirens, and the like. The sounding of any
horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle,
except as a warning or danger signal; or the sounding of such device repeatedly
or for an unreasonable period of time; or the use of any siren upon any
vehicle, other than a bona fide police, fire or other emergency vehicle or
equipment.
   (C)   Television sets, radios, musical instruments, or amplification and
playing devices, and the like.  The outdoor use, operation, or playing of any
television set, radio, musical instrument or sound amplifying device, or other
machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound, including but
not limited to devices designed for playing music and other material from
records, compact discs, MP3's and the like, in a manner or at a volume which
would or does annoy or disturb a person of reasonable sensibilities within his
or her temporary or usual place of abode or place of employment.
   (D)   Yelling, shouting, and the like. The frequent, constant, or continual
yelling or shouting, in a manner or at a volume which would or does annoy or
disturb a person of reasonable sensibilities within his or her temporary or
usual place of abode or place of employment.
   (E)   Animals.  The frequent, constant, or continual noise from any animal,
such as the continual; frequent, chronic and intermittent; or uncontrolled
barking of a dog outside, at a volume level or for a period of time which would
or does annoy or disturb a person of reasonable sensibilities within his or her
temporary or usual place of abode or place of employment.
   (F)   Vehicles. The use of any motorized vehicle so out of repair, or so
loaded, altered or operated as to create grating, grinding, rattling or other
noise which would or does annoy or disturb a person of reasonable sensibilities
within his or her temporary or usual place of abode or place of employment, or
the operation of a motorized vehicle with a defective, altered, or missing
muffler.
   (G)   Loading, unloading, opening boxes.  The creation of an unusual and
unreasonable level of noise in connection with loading or unloading any
vehicle, the opening and destruction of boxes, bales, crates, and other
containers, or the prolonged deposit of solid waste materials or recyclables
into containers or receptacles, at a noise level which would or does annoy or
disturb a person of reasonable sensibilities within his or her temporary or
usual place of abode or place of employment.
   (H)   Alarms. Car, home and similar types of alarms which are activated and
not discontinued promptly after the person in control of the alarm is advised
or discovers that the alarm has been activated, unless the alarm is allowed to
continue because said person believes that a crime is being committed.
   (I)   Compression release engine brakes or air brakes (aka “Jake Brakes”).
The noise caused by the release or use of compression release engine brakes,
sometimes referred to as air brakes or “Jake Brakes.”
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 82.04 NOISES PROHIBITED AT CERTAIN TIMES.
   The following noises are declared to be in violation of §
82.02 if generated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. and are
prohibited between those hours. This enumeration shall not be construed to be
an exclusive list of actions or noises that violate §
82.02 nor shall satisfying any requirements of this section render a sound in
itself reasonable.
   (A)   Outdoor use of television sets, radios, music amplification and
playing devices, and the like.  The outdoor use, operation, or playing of any
television set, radio, musical instrument, phonograph, sound amplifying device
or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound.
   (B)   Indoor use of musical instruments, sound amplification, and the like.
The indoor use, operation or playing of a musical instrument or sound
amplifying device at such volume or in such manner as to be audible within
another person's temporary or usual place of abode; provided, if the place of
abode is within an apartment building or other multi-family housing structure,
the sounds covered by this section originate within the same apartment
building, and the owners and/or tenants of all apartments within the apartment
building are members of a property owner's association, renter's association,
or like organization, which has adopted rules governing noise within the
apartment building, such rules will govern such sounds within the apartment
building; provided further that such rules do not supersede or excuse any
requirements of this chapter relative to noises originating from within the
apartment building, but heard elsewhere. For this exemption to apply, said duly
adopted rules must be on file with the Boone Police Department.
   (C)   Yelling, shouting, and the like. Yelling, shouting, whistling, or
singing outdoors at a volume which is audible within another person's temporary
or usual place of abode.
   (D)   Parties.  Noise from parties or gatherings of people, including but
not limited to the noise from many voices speaking at once, drunken
conversation, yelling, shouting, singing, music, breaking glass, or fireworks,
which is audible within another person's temporary or usual place of abode. For
purposes of this paragraph, a “party” is considered any gathering of people,
whether at a fixed location or otherwise, for social interaction.
   (E)   Fireworks. The use of fireworks or other noisemakers which produce
sound audible within another person's temporary or usual place of abode, except
as allowed pursuant to a valid pyrotechnics permit issued under applicable law.
   (F)   Vehicles. The prolonged idling or running of a motor vehicle for a
period of time exceeding what is reasonably needed to “warm” a vehicle's engine
before use, which is audible within another person's temporary or usual place
of abode.
   (G)   Loading or unloading commercial vehicles; the deposit or disturbance
of solid waste materials and recyclables. Noise made in connection with the
loading or unloading of any commercial vehicle or the deposit, collection or
disturbance of solid waste materials or recyclables, at a sound level audible
within another person's temporary or usual place of abode.
   (H)   Construction activity.  Noise resulting from construction activity
audible within another person's temporary or usual place of abode, unless
conducted by a governmental entity or its contractor and specifically
authorized by the Boone Town Council following general notice to the public and
a public hearing. For purposes of the notice required by this section and all
subsequent sections, it shall be sufficient that the specific topic of the
public hearing is included in the agenda of the meeting during which it is to
take place and the agenda, with the item listed, is posted in advance of the
meeting on the town's official website.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 82.05 NOISES THAT GENERALLY DO NOT VIOLATE THIS CHAPTER.
   The following noises and activities are exempt from the provisions of this
chapter unless they produce a risk of serious or unnecessary bodily harm:
   (A)   Town work. The sounds produced by town vehicles, employees and
contractors engaged in:
      (1)   Critical and/or emergency town duties such as removing snow,
repairing damaged water or sewer lines, responding to fires, responding to
vehicle accidents, and the like; or
      (2)   The normal day-to-day operations of the town; provided, that such
activities are exempt only if conducted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:
00 p.m., unless explicitly authorized by the Town Council following general
notice to the public and a public hearing.
   (B)   Community events.
      (1)   The normal and customary sounds emanating from a non-recurring
community event conducted by a governmental entity, school, church, or similar
non-commercial entity, so long as the event with which the noise is associated
begins no earlier than 6:00 a.m. and ends no later than 10:00 p.m. For purposes
of this paragraph, "non-recurring" shall refer to an event which occurs no more
than four times during any calendar year. However, an event can lose its status
as a community event under this division if multiple complaints from different
sources are received about the noise level emanating from the event, and upon
investigation, the police determine that the noise levels ten feet or more from
the property boundaries of the property upon which the event is conducted, or
with respect to events such as parades which utilize the public streets, ten
feet or more from the curb or edge of the street pavement when no curb exists,
violate the standards set out in §
82.06. If an event loses its status as a "community event" it shall no longer
enjoy the presumption under this section that it does not violate the chapter.
      (2)   Any event or series of events specifically authorized in advance by
the Boone Town Council following general notice to the public and a public
hearing may be allowed as a community event, including one for which noise
exceeding the limits of §
82.06 is predicted, upon a finding that such event provides a benefit to the
citizens of Boone and the public at large which exceeds the potential
detrimental effects of the noise it may generate. Before approving such event
or series of events, the Town Council shall confirm that notice of the public
hearing was posted at least seven days prior to the hearing on the town's
website and in every other place at which the town has posted notice of the
meeting during which the public hearing is to take place. The applicant for
designation as a community event shall provide a schedule of the starting and
ending time of the event, a description of the noise-generating activities
which are expected from the event, a summary of all steps which will be taken
to mitigate any negative noise impacts of the event, and the applicant shall
describe the expected benefits to the citizens of Boone and the public at large
which will be derived from the event.
   (C)   Sporting events associated with Watauga High School or Appalachian
State University. The normal and customary sounds emanating from a sporting
event held on the campus and associated with Watauga High School or Appalachian
State University will not be considered noises or activities which violate this
chapter, so long as the event with which the noise is associated does not begin
prior to 6:00 a.m. and has been scheduled to end by 11:00 p.m., and any crowd
associated with the event is expected to disperse by 11:30 p.m., even if due to
unexpected delays, overtime periods and the like, the event extends past 11:00
p.m. and the crowd does not disperse until after 11:30 p.m. This exemption,
however, does not relieve people leaving such an event from minimizing any loud
talking, shouting, and the like, which may be heard in places of abode in the
vicinity of the event, and should any person fail to heed a request by a Boone
police officer to lower the volume of such noise, that person may be cited and
fined pursuant to §
82.02.
   (D)   Remote vehicle entry or key. The use of a remote vehicle entry or key
causing an audible "beep" when used simply to lock or unlock a vehicle prior to
or following the reasonable use of the vehicle.
   (E)   Ordinary use of power tools.  The ordinary use of a noise-causing
tool, such as a lawnmower, weed trimmer, circular saw, chain saw, and the like,
if used on weekdays between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or dusk
(whichever is later) or on weekends between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or dusk
(whichever is later), so long as the tool is being used for a legitimate
maintenance or construction purpose associated with the property upon which it
is utilized and the person using such tool takes all practical steps to
minimize its disturbing noise impacts on others.
   (F)   Emergency work. Emergency work performed for the purpose of preventing
or alleviating physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an
existing or imminent peril. This emergency exception includes maintenance,
backup or upkeep strictly necessary to keep emergency equipment, such as
generators, in operating order. In addition, this exception only applies for
the shortest duration of time reasonably required to address the emergency.
   (G)   Public demonstrations. Noise resulting from parades, lawful picketing
or other public demonstrations protected by the U.S. Constitution or federal
law or for which a permit has been granted by the town, provided that such
demonstrations are held between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or dusk
(whichever is later) on weekdays, or between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. or dusk
(whichever is later) on weekends.
   (H)   Safety signals. Noise of safety signals, warning devices, and
emergency pressure relief valves, provided such signals are used in a manner
consistent with promoting public health and safety.
   (I)   Emergency vehicles. Noise resulting from the lawful operation of any
authorized emergency vehicle.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 82.06 SPECIAL PROVISIONS CONCERNING LIVE, RECORDED OR AMPLIFIED MUSIC
ORIGINATING FROM COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS AND LIVE MUSIC VENUES IN THE TOWN'S
B-1, B-2, B-3, AND U-1 ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   During the days and times set out immediately below, a live music
venue or commercial establishment located in the town's B-1, B-2, B-3 or U-
1 zoning district may emit live, recorded or amplified music not exceeding the
stated decibel limits, subject to the rules for measurement provided. For
purposes of this section, a "live music venue" is an establishment that has the
legal right to present live performances of music or amplification of recorded
music to members of the public, or an establishment located in the U-1 zoning
district which has the permission of Appalachian State University to present
live performances of music or amplification of recorded music.
      (1)   Monday through Wednesday:
         (a)   70 dB from 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
         (b)   60 dB from 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
      (2)   Thursday through Saturday:
         (a)   60 dB from 2:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.
         (b)   70 dB from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.
         (c)   85 dB from 10:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.
         (d)   75 dB from 10:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m.
      (3)   Sunday:
         (a)   60 dB from 2:00 a.m. to 10:00 a.m.
         (b)   85 dB from 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
         (c)   70 dB from 8:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m.
   (B)   Rules for measurement. For purposes of this section, sound shall be
measured using the following rules:
      (1)   Devices used for measurement.  Measurements of decibel levels shall
be made with a sound level meter designated at least as “Type II” meeting ANSI
S1.4-1971 requirements (referring to “American National Standard Specification
for Sound Level Meters,” Acoustical Society of America, New York, NY)
(hereinafter referred to as "decibel meter").
      (2)   Settings of decibel meter when sound measured.  The sound
measurement shall be made with the decibel meter using the A-weighted scale,
set on “slow” response.
      (3)   Location of measurement. Measurements taken to determine compliance
with this section shall be made at or within ten feet outside any property line
for the property upon which the measured activity is taking place.
      (4)   Duration of measurement to establish violation. In order to
establish a violation of this section, the duration of measurement(s) which
must be registered by the decibel meter must equal or exceed a level
continuously exceeding the established limits for 15 continuous seconds, or for
two or more periods within a 60-second period, each exceeding the established
limits for five continuous seconds.
      (5)   Time of measurement. Except for sounds created or broadcast outside
the commercial establishment or live music venue, and unless the door of a
commercial establishment or live music venue is open for periods exceeding
times needed for normal ingress and egress, such as when a door is propped
open, measurements shall be taken with the door closed.
   (C)   Associated sounds authorized by this section.  So long as the live,
recorded or amplified music does not exceed the limits of this section for
establishing a violation, associated sounds of a commercial establishment or
live music venue, including amplified speech from performers and disc jockeys,
and the customary and expected crowd noises related to a performance, such as
applause, cheering for the performer, conversations among spectators, and
similar sounds, shall not be a basis for finding a violation under this
section.
   (D)   Sounds not authorized by this section.  This section does not excuse
people who have left the premises of a commercial establishment or live music
venue, temporarily or otherwise, from compliance with this chapter. PREMISES
for purposes of this section refers, when such activities are conducted
outdoors, to the borders of the property upon which the live, recorded or
amplified music is created or broadcast. A person, for example, who has left an
indoor music venue to smoke a cigarette on the public sidewalk outside the
venue is subject to the full enforcement of this chapter. Similarly, otherwise
prohibited noise created by an employee of the establishment or live music
venue, such as that caused by depositing empty bottles or cans in recycling
containers in the middle of the night, is not excused by this section, and such
noise production shall subject the offending individual to enforcement in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (E)   Responsibility for violation.  The owner of the commercial business
establishment or live music venue shall be responsible for a violation of this
section, or if none can be determined, the owner of the property shall be
responsible. Before the owner of the property is cited, however, the town shall
determine whether there is any current lease of record registered in the
Watauga County Registry, and if so, the lessee or tenant shall stand in the
place of the owner and shall be responsible. An entity such as a limited
liability company or corporation may not evade responsibility for repeat
violations by altering its structure, and if there is any identity or overlap
between the ownership, membership, or shareholders of a cited sole
proprietorship, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other
entity, and the ownership, membership or shareholders of a subsequently cited
sole proprietorship, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or
other entity operating in the same location, or in the case of the outdoor
emission of live, recorded or amplified music, in any location within the
corporate limits, the entities shall be considered one and the same.
   (F)   Written notice of warning or violation.  A person or entity
responsible for a violation under this section shall be issued a written
warning or notice of the violation stating the amount of the civil penalty, as
appropriate. Such written notice may be delivered to the person in charge of
the commercial establishment or live music venue at the time of the violation,
or, if none is present, to any employee of the commercial establishment or live
music venue present at the time of the violation. Alternatively or in addition,
in the case of an entity which has an agent for service of process registered
with the North Carolina Secretary of State, a written warning or notice of the
violation may be mailed to such agent at the registered address by regular mail
or certified mail, return receipt requested.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 82.07 RESPONSIBLE PARTIES; NOTICE.
   (A)   Any person who creates or assists in creating an unreasonably loud or
disturbing noise or other violation of this chapter is responsible for
remedying the violation and may be held liable for civil or criminal penalties
under this chapter.
      (1)   A person shall be deemed to create or assist in creating the
unreasonably loud or disturbing noise or other violation if that person owns,
manages, leases, occupies, or operates any residence, business, or location at
which the noise is generated.
      (2)   In those instances where the violating noise is the result of the
actions of a group of persons, such as a late-night party, all persons present
shall be liable for the appropriate civil penalties, whether or not they
individually created the offending noise.
   (B)   Notice. Written warning or a citation or notice of violation may be
served in person, by first class mail, or by email. A property owner who does
not occupy the property from which the violating noise is generated may be
served by first class mail to the address currently on file with the county tax
assessor. A person who occupies or otherwise is in possession of the property
may be served by posting.
   (C)   Exception. The persons responsible for a violation of §
82.06 regarding live, recorded or amplified music and the manner of notice to
be made on the same shall be as specified in §
82.06.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 82.99 ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES.
   (A)    The Town Manager, Chief of Police or their designee(s) shall have
responsibility for the enforcement of the noise regulations contained herein.
Nothing in this section shall prevent the Town Manager or Chief of Police or
their designee(s) from obtaining voluntary compliance by way of warning, notice
or education.
   (B)   Initiation of enforcement.  The provisions of §
82.03(A) (noises intended to disturb) and §
82.06 (live, recorded or amplified music) shall be enforced only as the result
of the receipt of a complaint. All other provisions of this chapter may be
enforced either as the result of the receipt of a complaint or as the result of
the observations of any law enforcement officer or other employee or official
of the town.
   (C)   Initial warning(s) required. Before a citation may be issued and
penalties assessed against a person pursuant to divisions (D) and (F) below,
that person shall be given written warning(s) within any rolling 12-month
period as follows:
      (1)   Two warnings shall be given before a citation is issued for a
violation of §
82.06 regarding live, recorded or amplified music.
      (2)   One warning shall be given before a citation is issued for a
violation of §
82.03 regarding noises prohibited at all times, except no warning shall be
given for failure to discontinue an alarm in violation of §
82.03(H).
      (3)   One warning shall be given before a citation is issued to a person
who is a responsible person hereunder but was not present at the property when
the noise was made (such as a property owner, property manager, lessee or
occupant of a property from which offending noise issued).
      (4)   No warnings shall be required with respect to any other violation
of this chapter.
   (D)   Civil penalties. A violation of this chapter shall subject the
violator to a civil penalty in the amount of $100; provided, that subsequent
violations within any 12-month rolling period shall subject the violator to the
following civil penalties: a second violation in any rolling 12-month period
shall subject the violator to a civil penalty in the amount of $200, and a
third and any subsequent violation in any rolling 12-month period shall result
in the assessment of a $500 civil penalty.
   (E)   Appeal of civil penalty. Appeal of a civil penalty amount may be made
to the Town Manager or designee as provided at §
10.99 of this Code by filing an appeal stating with specificity the grounds for
the appeal and the reasons the penalty should be reduced or abated. In
considering the appeal, the Town Manager or designee may consider the
following:
      (1)   The gravity of the violation;
      (2)   Any action taken or not taken by the violator to avoid and/or
correct the violation;
      (3)   The cost of the action to correct the violation; and
      (4)   Any previous violations committed by the violator, on the same or
different site.
   (F)   Criminal penalties. A person committing more than two violations of
this chapter during any rolling 12-month period shall also be guilty of a Class
3 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500, in addition to the civil
penalties imposed.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord. passed 11-16-2021)
CHAPTER 83: SMOKING
Section
   
83.01   Findings, purpose and authority
   
83.02   Definitions
   
83.03   Smoking and vaping is prohibited in all places where smoking is
prohibited under state law
   
83.04   Smoking and vaping is prohibited in public places, in town buildings,
in town vehicles and on certain town grounds
   
83.05   Littering of smoking and vaping refuse prohibited
 
   
83.99   Penalty
§ 83.01 FINDINGS, PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Findings. The town seeks to protect the health and well-being of its
employees and the general public. Secondhand smoke has been proven to cause
cancer, heart disease and asthma attacks in both smokers and non-smokers. In
2006, a report issued by the United States Surgeon General concluded that,
based upon the scientific evidence, there is no risk-free level of exposure to
secondhand smoke. In addition, there is scientific consensus that e-cigarettes
pose substantial risks to both users and other persons exposed to secondhand
vapor and to e-cigarette products, including but not limited to risks
associated with exposure to airborne particulates and toxins, exposure to toxic
e-liquids, and explosion of e-cigarettes. Further, the 2016 Surgeon General’s
Report on E-Cigarette Use on Youth and Young Adults has stated that e-
cigarettes use has become a public health concern and has recommended that e-
cigarettes be included in smoke-free policies.
   (B)   Intent. The town seeks to protect the health and well-being of
children by banning, to the extent possible, smoking in their presence. It is
further the intent of the town to protect the health of all individuals in
public places, places of employment and working in or visiting town buildings
from the risks related to secondhand smoke and vaping. It is further the intent
of the town to protect the health of individuals driving or riding in town-
controlled passenger vehicles assigned permanently or temporarily to town
employees for official town business.
   (C)   Authority. This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority provided
in G.S §§ 130A-491 et seq. and § 160A-174(a).
(Prior Code, § 97.01) (Ord. passed 12-17-2009; Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord.
passed 12-15-2020)
§ 83.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BAR. An establishment with a permit to sell alcoholic beverages pursuant to
divisions (1), (3), (5) or (10) of G.S. § 18B-1001.
   BUS SHELTER. An ENCLOSED AREA that serves as a shelter for persons waiting
at a bus stop.
   BUS STOP. A designated location where a passenger bus regularly stops to
collect or discharge passengers. A bus stop may have a bus shelter or may be
designated only by signage.
   CHILD. Any person under the age of 18.
   CHILD CARE FACILITY. Any nursery, day care center, preschool or other
facility engaged in the practice of providing care for children.
   CIGAR BAR.
      (1)   An establishment with a permit to sell alcoholic beverages pursuant
to divisions (1), (3), (5) or (10) of G.S. § 18B-1001 that satisfies all of the
following:
         (a)   Generates 60% or more of its quarterly gross revenue from the
sale of alcoholic beverages and 25% or more of its quarterly gross revenue from
the sale of cigars;
         (b)   Has a humidor on the premises; and
         (c)   Does not allow individuals under the age of 21 to enter the
premises.
      (2)   However, revenue generated from other tobacco sales, including
cigarette vending machines, shall not be used to determine whether an
establishment satisfies the definition of CIGAR BAR.
   EMPLOYEE. A person who is employed by an employer or who contracts with an
employer or third person to perform services for an employer or who otherwise
performs services for an employer with or without compensation.
   E-CIGARETTE. Any electronic oral device that employs a mechanical heating
element, battery, or electronic circuit regardless of shape or size and that
can be used to heat a liquid nicotine solution or any other substance, and the
use or inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term shall include any such
device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette,
e-cigar, e-pipe, or under any other product name or descriptor.
   EMPLOYER. An individual person, business, association, political subdivision
or other public or private entity, including a non-profit entity, that employs
or contracts for or accepts the provision of services from one or more
employees.
   ENCLOSED AREA. An area with a roof or other overhead covering of any kind
and walls or side coverings of any kind, regardless of the presence of openings
for ingress and egress, on all sides or on all sides, but one.
   LODGING ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment that provides lodging for pay to the
public.
   PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT. Any enclosed area under the control of an employer
whose employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including,
but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and
class rooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is not a
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT unless it is used as a child care facility or health care
facility.
   PRIVATE CLUB. A country club or an organization that maintains selective
members, is operated by the membership, does not provide food or lodging for
pay to anyone who is not a member or a member’s guest and is either
incorporated as a non-profit corporation in accordance with G.S. Ch. 55A or is
exempt from federal income tax under the Internal Revenue Code, as defined in
G.S. § 105-130.2(1). For the purposes of this chapter, PRIVATE CLUB includes
country club.
   PRIVATE RESIDENCE. A private dwelling that is not a child care facility, as
defined in G.S. § 110-86(3) and not a long-term care facility, as defined in
G.S. § 131E-114.3(a)(1).
   PRIVATE VEHICLE. A privately owned vehicle that is not used for commercial
or employment purposes.
   PUBLIC PLACE. An enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which
the public is permitted. Without limiting the foregoing but rather by way of
clarification and illustration: Public places include all buildings and other
structures that (i) have a roof or other overhead covering and at least three
walls or other side coverings; and (ii) are places in to which the public is
invited or permitted. Public places can be on publicly or privately owned
property. Examples of public places are banks, retail stores, grocery stores,
bowling alleys, waiting rooms, lobbies, and bus shelters. For purposes of this
chapter, public places do not include government-owned buildings other than
those owned by the town.
   RESTAURANT. A food and lodging establishment that prepares and serves drink
or food as regulated by the Commission pursuant to G.S. Ch. 130A, Art. 8, Part
6.
   SMOKING. The use or possession of a lighted cigarette, lighted cigar,
lighted pipe or any other lighted tobacco product.
   STATE GOVERNMENT. The political unit for the state, including all agencies
of the executive, judicial and legislative branches of government.
   STATE GOVERNMENT BUILDING. A building owned, leased as lessor or the area
leased as lessee and occupied by state government.
   STATE VEHICLE. A passenger-carrying vehicle owned, leased or otherwise
controlled by the state and assigned permanently or temporarily to a state
employee or state agency or institution for official state business.
   TOBACCO SHOP. A business establishment, the main purpose of which is the
sale of tobacco, tobacco products and accessories for the products, that
receives no less than 75% of its total annual revenues from the sale of
tobacco, tobacco products and accessories for the products and does not serve
food or alcohol on its premises.
   TOWN. The Town of Boone, North Carolina, a municipal corporation.
   TOWN GROUNDS. An unenclosed area owned, leased or occupied by the town,
including all areas in the town’s street rights-of-way and other easement
areas, sidewalks, greenways, and multi-modal paths.
   TOWN SIDEWALK. A sidewalk owned or maintained by the Town of Boone.
   TOWN VEHICLE. A vehicle owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the town
and assigned permanently or temporarily to an employee(s) of the town, its
agencies, institutions or facilities for official town business, designed, used
or intended for use carrying passengers.
   VAPE (VAPING). The use of an e-cigarette.
   WALLS/SIDE COVERINGS. A solid material enclosing 50% or more of a side of a
structure.
(Prior Code, § 97.02) (Ord. passed 12-17-2009; Ord. passed 2-16-2010; Ord.
passed 12-16-2019; Ord. passed 12-15-2020)
§ 83.03 SMOKING AND VAPING IS PROHIBITED IN ALL PLACES WHERE SMOKING IS
PROHIBITED UNDER STATE LAW.
   (A)   Smoking and vaping are prohibited in all places where smoking is
prohibited under state law, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   State government buildings and vehicles;
      (2)    State government buildings, except when used for medical or
scientific research to the extent that smoking is an integral part of the
research, but in those instances confined to the area where the research is
being conducted;
      (3)   State vehicles; and
      (4)   All enclosed areas of restaurants, lodging establishments and bars,
except:
         (a)   In a designated smoking guest room in a lodging establishment;
provided that, no greater than 20% of a lodging establishment’s guest rooms may
be designated smoking guest rooms;
         (b)   A cigar bar if smoke from the cigar bar does not migrate into an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited pursuant to G.S. Ch. 130A; provided
that, a cigar bar that begins operation after 7-1-2009 may only allow smoking
if it is located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the cigar bar
and smoke from the cigar bar does not migrate into an enclosed area where
smoking is prohibited and otherwise complies with state law; or
         (c)   A private club.
(Prior Code, § 97.03) (Ord. passed 12-17-2009; Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord.
passed 12-15-2020) Penalty, see §
83.99
§ 83.04 SMOKING AND VAPING PROHIBITED IN PUBLIC PLACES, IN TOWN BUILDINGS, IN
TOWN VEHICLES AND ON CERTAIN TOWN GROUNDS.
   (A)   In addition to those places where smoking is prohibited under state
law and except for those places exempted under division (B) below, smoking and
vaping are prohibited in each of the following locations:
      (1)   Inside every public place, including buildings, bus shelters, and
other structures that are defined as public places herein;
      (2)   Inside all town buildings;
      (3)   On the following grounds and other un-enclosed locations:
         (a)   On every town sidewalk within 15 feet of any public entrance to
a public place during all times when the public place is open to the public;
         (b)   Within 15 feet of any public entrance to any town or local
government building during all times when that building is open to the public;
         (c)   At any location on town grounds that is within 15 feet of a bus
stop, including on a town sidewalk or in a town street right-of-way;
         (d)   From 10:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. each day of the week, on any town
sidewalk adjacent to West King Street between Burrell/North Water Street to the
west and Appalachian Street to the east;
         (e)   Within 15 feet of any child who is on town grounds;
         (f)   Except where expressly allowed and posted as designated smoking
areas, within or on the grounds of any town property, including but not limited
to: any town playground; any town park or garden, including but not limited to,
the Greenway trail system, Daniel Boone Native Gardens, Strawberry Hill
Arboretum, Horn in the West property and Jimmy Smith Park; the grounds of the
Jones House and the downtown post office; and
         (g)   Within any area designated and posted by the owner or tenant of
private property as a no-smoking area.
      (4)   In any town vehicle.
   (B)   Exemptions. The foregoing provisions of division (A) shall not be read
or interpreted to restrict or prohibit smoking or vaping in the following
places:
      (1)   A private residence as defined above;
      (2)   A private vehicle;
      (3)   A tobacco shop if smoke from the business does not migrate into an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under state law, except for a tobacco
shop that began operation after 7-1-2009, which is exempt only if it is located
in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the tobacco shop and smoke from
the shop does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited
pursuant to state law and it otherwise complies with the reporting requirements
under state law;
      (4)   All of the premises, facilities and vehicles owned, operated or
leased by any tobacco products processor or manufacturer or any tobacco leaf
grower, processor or dealer;
      (5)   A designated smoking guest room in a lodging establishment, so long
as no greater than 20% of the lodging establishment’s guest rooms are
designated smoking guest rooms;
      (6)   A cigar bar, if smoke from the cigar bar does not migrate into an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited pursuant to state law, except for a
cigar bar that began operation after 7-1-2009, which is exempt only if it is
located in a freestanding structure occupied solely by the cigar bar and smoke
from the cigar bar does not migrate into an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited pursuant to state law and it otherwise complies with the reporting
requirements under state law;
      (7)   A private club; and
      (8)   A motion picture, television, theater or other live production set,
but this exemption applies only to an actor or performer portraying the use of
tobacco products during the production.
(Prior Code, § 97.04) (Ord. passed 12-17-2009; Ord. passed 2-16-2010; Ord.
passed 12-16-2019; Ord. passed 12-15-2020) Penalty, see §
83.99
§ 83.05 LITTERING OF SMOKING OR VAPING REFUSE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone to deposit any portion or component of an e-
cigarette or a cigarette, cigar, or other smoking device or any refuse related
to smoking or vaping, except in a receptacle appropriate for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 97.05) (Ord. passed 12-17-2009; Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord.
passed 12-15-2020) Penalty, see §
83.99
§ 83.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of prohibition on smoking or vaping. After an initial
warning, any person continuing to smoke or vape in violation of §
83.04 shall be guilty of an infraction and the person committing the infraction
is subject to a fine of $50. Conviction of an infraction under this section
shall have no consequence other than payment of the penalty and a person
smoking or vaping in violation of this chapter shall not be assessed court
costs.
   (B)   Additional sanctions for employees. In addition to any penalty under
division (A), any town employee who violates this chapter while on duty for the
town shall be subject to disciplinary action consistent with the town's
personnel policy.
   (C)   Violations by persons who manage, operate or control a public place.
The Director of the Appalachian District Health Department may take the
following actions and may impose the following administrative penalties on a
person who manages, operates or controls a public place or place of employment
and fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter. However, nothing
herein shall be construed to in any way limit or negate the powers conferred
upon the Director of the Appalachian District Health Department under state
law, it being the intent of this chapter to authorize enforcement actions by
the Director to the full extent permissible:
      (1)   First violation. Provide the person in violation with written
notice of the person’s first violation and notification of action to be taken
in the event of subsequent violations;
      (2)    Second violation. Provide the person in violation with written
notice of the person’s second violation and notification of administrative
penalties to be imposed for subsequent violations; and
      (3)    Subsequent violations. Impose on the person in violation an
administrative penalty of not more than $200 for the third and subsequent
violations. Each day on which a violation of this chapter occurs shall be
considered a separate and distinct violation.
   (D)   Violation for littering smoking or vaping refuse. Violations of §
83.05 shall be enforced as follows:
      (1)   After an initial written warning, a second violation of this
chapter within any 12-month rolling period by any person shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $50 and each subsequent violation
within a 12-month rolling period shall subject the offender to a civil penalty
for each violation of $100.
      (2)   In addition to the civil penalties, a fourth and any subsequent
violation within a 12-month rolling period shall be guilty of an infraction
punishable by a fine in the amount of $50.
(Prior Code, § 97.99) (Ord. passed 12-17-2009; Ord. passed 2-16-2010; Ord.
passed 12-16-2019; Ord. passed 12-15-2020)
CHAPTER 84: ANIMAL CONTROL AND CRUELTY
Section
   
84.01   Adoption of county ordinance by reference
   
84.02   At large dogs prohibited
   
84.03   Confinement of animals in vehicles
 
   
84.99   Penalty
§ 84.01 ADOPTION OF COUNTY ORDINANCE BY REFERENCE.
   The County Animal Control Ordinance is hereby adopted by reference and made
a part of this code of ordinances, the same as if set forth in full herein.
Copies of the ordinance shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk
and shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours.
(Prior Code, § 100.01) (Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 84.02 AT LARGE DOGS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AT LARGE. A dog shall be considered to be AT LARGE when it is off the
property of its responsible person and not on a leash or under physical
restraint by the responsible person.
      DOG. A canine of either sex or neutered, including domesticated dogs and
any member of the Canis genus not customarily domesticated by humans or any
hybrids thereof, including, but not limited to, wolves, foxes and wolf-dog
hybrids.
      RESPONSIBLE PERSON. The person as may own the dog in question or may have
assumed or been assigned responsibility or control for the dog in question by
the owner or who otherwise is exercising responsibility or control over the dog
in question.
   (B)   Within the corporate limits of the town, no dog may be at large.
(Prior Code, §
100.02) (Ord. passed 5-2-2004; Ord. passed 12-16-2019) Penalty, see §
84.99
§ 84.03 CONFINEMENT OF ANIMALS IN VEHICLES.
   (A)   No domestic animal, household pet or wild animal in captivity may be
confined in a motor vehicle under conditions that are likely to cause
suffering, injury or death to the animal due to heat, cold, lack of adequate
ventilation, or other endangering conditions. Such confinement shall be
considered improper and illegal (hereafter “improper confinement”). Without
limiting the foregoing, it shall be presumed that an interior temperature
exceeding 109° F causes an unacceptable level of suffering by any such animal,
and constitutes improper confinement in violation of this section.
   (B)   After making a reasonable effort in the immediate vicinity of the
vehicle to locate the owner or operator of a vehicle in which a suffering,
injured or dying animal is improperly confined, taking into consideration the
condition of the animal, a law enforcement or duly authorized Animal Control
Officer may enter a closed vehicle by any reasonable means under the
circumstances to remove the animal, and may take such animal to an appropriate
facility for its care or maintenance.
(Res. passed 12-18-2014; Ord. passed 12-16-2019) Penalty, see §
84.99
§ 84.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Violation of §
84.02 shall constitute an infraction chargeable to the responsible person or
the owner of the dog, if the owner and responsible person are different persons
and shall subject the responsible person or owner to a penalty of $50.
Violators shall be issued written notice of the violation, which must be paid
within 30 days after the receipt of the notice. If the violator does not pay
the penalty within 30 days, the town may recover the penalty and all
subsequently accruing penalties, in a civil action. In the event that it is
necessary for the town to institute a civil action to collect the penalty, the
violator shall be responsible for all court costs and attorney’s fees incurred
by the town.
      (2)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall retain information
containing the identities of all violators of §
84.02 for a period of no less than three years after their respective
violations and he or she shall periodically, upon request by the Town Council,
provide the information to the Town Council.
   (C)   (1)   Violation of §
84.03 shall subject the person improperly confining an animal to a civil
penalty of $50 and shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor pursuant to G.S. §
14-4(a), with a fine of up to $50. Any repeat violation within a 36-month
period shall subject the person to a civil penalty of $100, and shall
constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor, with a fine of up to $500.
      (2)   All expenses incurred for the care or maintenance of a seized
animal must be paid by the violator, and such amounts may be recovered by the
town in a civil action. In the event that it is necessary for the town to
institute a civil action to collect such penalty, the violator shall be
responsible for court costs and attorney’s fees incurred by the town.
(Prior Code, § 100.02) (Ord. passed 5-2-2004; Res. passed 12-18-2014; Ord.
passed 12-16-2019)
CHAPTER 85: AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING AND PUBLIC URINATION PROHIBITED
Section
   
85.01   Definitions
   
85.02   Public urination
   
85.03   Urination within buffers of protected waterways
   
85.04   Aggressive begging, panhandling or soliciting
 
   
85.99   Penalty
§ 85.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGGRESSIVE BEGGING, PANHANDLING OR SOLICITATION. A verbal or non-verbal
request for money or other property of value, accompanied by:
      (1)   An act or acts that a reasonable person would consider hostile or
intimidating;
      (2)   The act of blocking the free passage of the person to whom the
panhandling, begging or solicitation is directed;
      (3)   Repeating the request for money or other property of value within a
five-minute period after having been refused by the person to whom the
panhandling, begging or solicitation is
directed; or
      (4)   Any other behavior that a reasonable person would interpret as
intended to intimidate or coerce a person into acceding to a request for money
or other property of value.
   PERENNIAL WATERS. Those waterways designated as such on the most recent
versions of U.S. Geological Survey 1:24,000 scale topographic maps.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Those establishments, parks, buildings or facilities open for
the use of the public or open for service to the public, including, but not
limited to, privately owned and operated retail stores and restaurants, as well
as public buildings within the corporate limits of the town.
   PUBLIC SIDEWALK. Any area open to public use as a pedestrian public way,
whether paved or otherwise designated or recognized for use of pedestrian
traffic and which is owned or maintained by the town.
   PUBLIC URINATION. Urination, other than in a bathroom or temporary facility
such as a “port-a- john” which is intended for urination, within 50 feet of any
public place or in plain view of members of the opposite sex, minor children,
pedestrian traffic or vehicular traffic.
(Prior Code, § 101.01) (Ord. passed 3-18-2004)
§ 85.02 PUBLIC URINATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in public urination within the
corporate limits  of the town.
(Prior Code, § 101.02) (Ord. passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see §
85.99
§ 85.03 URINATION WITHIN BUFFERS OF PROTECTED WATERWAYS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate, other than in a bathroom or
temporary facility such as a “port-a-john” which is intended for urination,
within 50 feet of any perennial waters within the corporate limits of the town.
(Prior Code, § 101.03) (Ord. passed 3-18-2004) Penalty, see §
85.99
§ 85.04 AGGRESSIVE BEGGING, PANHANDLING OR SOLICITING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in aggressive begging,
panhandling or soliciting within the corporate limits of the town or to engage
in any begging, panhandling or soliciting:
   (A)   Within 50 feet of view of an outside automated teller machine (ATM)
which is accessed from or immediately adjacent to a public sidewalk;
   (B)   While standing, walking or sitting on a street, highway or other
roadway; the shoulder or curb of a street, highway or other roadway; the median
of a street, highway or other roadway; or from any other place where the target
of the begging, panhandling or soliciting is a person(s) in a motor vehicle; or
   (C)   Within 50 feet of view of a bank entrance, during the hours of ATM or
bank operation, respectively.
(Prior Code, § 101.04) (Ord. passed 3-18-2004; Ord. passed 1-19-2006) Penalty,
see §
85.99
§ 85.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction,
pursuant to G.S. § 14-4(b), punishable by a penalty of up to $50.
(Prior Code, § 101.99) (Ord. passed 3-18-2004)
CHAPTER 86: RESERVED
CHAPTER 87: RESERVED
CHAPTER 88: RESERVED
CHAPTER 89: MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES
Section
Cleanliness of premises; Littering; Solid Waste
   
89.01   Definitions
   
89.02   Cleanliness of premises required
   
89.03   Littering prohibited
   
89.04   Transportation of solid waste
   
89.05   Burning, dumping or burying solid wastes prohibited
Weapons
   
89.20   Discharge of firearms and air rifles prohibited
   
89.21   Possession of firearms or air rifles prohibited on town-owned property
Alcoholic Beverages Regulations
   
89.35   Definitions
   
89.36   Display of alcoholic beverages prohibited
   
89.37   Public consumption prohibited
   
89.38   Possession of open container prohibited
   
89.39   Exceptions
 
   
89.99   Penalty
CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES; LITTERING; SOLID WASTE
§ 89.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LITTER. All discarded human-made refuse, including, but not limited to,
garbage, trash, junk, and other solid wastes.
   PREMISES. The unenclosed areas of a parcel of property, including yards,
driveways, sidewalks, alleys, rights-of-way, grass strips and curbs up to the
edge of the pavement of any public street.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any town property, including public buildings and the
grounds appurtenant thereto, municipal parking lots, public parks, playgrounds,
recreational areas, and athletic fields, and any public street, sidewalk,
alley, greenway or other public place.
   REFUSE.  Garbage, trash, and any other solid wastes.
   SOLID WASTES. Wastes that are non-gaseous and non-liquid (except that,
liquid wastes resulting from the processing of food are deemed solid wastes for
the purposes of this chapter).
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 89.02 CLEANLINESS OF PREMISES REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, or person in control of
any property within the town to permit to remain on such property any empty
bottles, empty cans, junk, household appliances, furniture, trash, filth,
debris, dead animals, garbage, trash, rubbish or other refuse or solid waste of
any kind whatsoever, unless such solid wastes are stored in containers or
maintained for collection in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 91 of this Code. It shall be the duty of any owner, occupant, and
person in control of any property within the town to keep the premises of such
property in a clean, healthy, wholesome and sanitary condition at all times.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant, or person in control of
any property within the town to fail to store refuse in containers as specified
in
Chapter 91 of this code so as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly
litter in and about their premises or establishments, or fail to immediately
clean up any spillage and overflow as it occurs.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any construction and/or demolition contractor
to fail to provide on-site refuse receptacles, bulk containers or detachable
containers for loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building
material and other trash produced by those working on the site. All material
shall be containerized by the end of each day and the site shall be kept in a
reasonably clean and litter-free condition. The number of refuse receptacles,
bulk containers or detachable containers shall be determined by the size of the
job. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris deposited upon any
public property or the private property of another as a result of construction
or demolition shall be immediately removed by the contractor. Construction
sites shall be kept clean and orderly at all times.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 89.03 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit any refuse on
any public property or on the property of another without authorization to do
so, or to place refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by
the elements upon any public property or upon the property of another.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of any dog or other
animal to allow fecal matter excreted by or from said animal to be placed or
deposited upon any public property or upon the property of another without
authorization to do so. It shall also be unlawful to allow such matter to be
placed or deposited in such a manner that it may be carried or deposited by the
elements upon any public property or upon the property of another.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 89.04 TRANSPORTATION OF SOLID WASTE WITHIN TOWN.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or cause to be transported
within the town any solid wastes unless the solid wastes are so secured that no
solid wastes escape from the transporting vehicle. In addition, any garbage so
transported shall be carried in closed containers that prevent the escape of
noxious odors or liquids.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 89.05 BURNING, DUMPING OR BURYING SOLID WASTES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or cause to be burned any
refuse.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to dump upon any public property
or property of another within the town any refuse, dead animals, decaying
vegetable or animal matter or other solid wastes or offensive materials.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bury or cause to be buried any
refuse.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
WEAPONS
§ 89.20 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND AIR RIFLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Subject to division (B) below, no person may discharge any firearm
within the town.
   (B)   Division (A) above shall not apply to persons acting in justifiable
self-defense or pursuant to the lawful directions of a law-enforcement officer,
nor to law-enforcement officers acting in a lawful performance of their duties.
Division (A) above shall not apply to the discharge of firearms within fully
enclosed and indoor shooting ranges, constructed and operating in compliance
with the State Building Code, the town's Uniform Development Ordinance, the
federal Occupational Health and Safety Act, as amended, and its regulations,
the National Fire Protection Association Standards and State Fire Code, and
other laws and regulations as may be established or exist which dictate the
construction and operational standards which an indoor shooting range must
meet. No indoor shooting range may exist within the town unless the owner of
the indoor shooting range (hereinafter, "proprietor") has submitted to the
Chief of Police operating rules concerning employee and invitee or licensee
(patron) use of the indoor shooting range, and the Chief of Police has, in
writing, issued an opinion that the rules adequately protect the safety of the
public and those rules are fully implemented and enforced.
   (C)   No person may discharge or shoot within the town any air rifle, air
pistol, B-B gun or similar weapon (hereinafter, collectively "air rifle")
within 100 yards of any building or house or gathering of people, except in a
fully enclosed and indoor facility, constructed and operating in compliance
with the State Building Code, the town's Uniform Development Ordinance, the
federal Occupational Health and Safety Act, as amended, and its regulations,
the National Fire Protection Association Standards and State Fire Code, and
other laws and regulations as may be established or exist which dictate the
construction and operational standards which the indoor facilities must meet.
No facility may exist within the town unless its proprietor has submitted to
the Chief of Police operating rules concerning employee and invitee or licensee
(patron) use of the indoor shooting range, the Chief of Police has, in writing,
issued an opinion that the rules adequately protect the safety of the public,
and those rules are fully implemented and enforced.
   (D)   No indoor shooting range or facility for the discharge of any air
rifle may operate within the town where the proprietor is not also the owner of
the real property upon which it is situated unless:
      (1)   The proprietor designates a person who is a resident of the county
as a person who has full authority to act on behalf of the proprietor in
responding to complaints concerning the operation of the shooting range or
facility, and that person's name and contact information is posted at the
shooting range or facility in plain view of the public so that it may be read
without a person having to enter the shooting range or facility in order to do
so; and
      (2)   The proprietor obtains and maintains liability insurance covering
injuries and property damage to persons using the shooting range or facility in
an amount no less than $2,000,000 per injury and claim and provides proof of
the insurance to the town upon request.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
Statutory Reference:
   See also, G.S. 160A-189
§ 89.21 POSSESSION OF FIREARMS OR AIR RIFLES PROHIBITED ON TOWN-OWNED
PROPERTIES.
   (A)   Except as provided in the following divisions of this section, no
person may possess a firearm or air rifle in any town-owned building or on the
grounds or parking areas of any such building.
   (B)   The Town Manager or designee shall post all town-owned buildings and
the grounds and parking areas of such buildings with signage notifying persons
that concealed handguns are prohibited in those buildings and areas. Only where
such postings have been made shall the foregoing prohibition of division (A) on
possession of firearms be effective with respect to a person carrying a
concealed handgun pursuant to a valid concealed-carry permit.
   (C)   Division (A) above shall not apply to law enforcement officers acting
in lawful performance of their duties, to any person specifically authorized by
the Town Manager to possess a firearm in town-owned buildings or on the grounds
or parking areas of such buildings, or to private persons acting in justifiable
self-defense or pursuant to the lawful directions of a law-enforcement officer.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit a person from
storing a firearm within a motor vehicle while the vehicle is on the grounds or
parking area of a town building.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
Cross-reference:
   See also with respect to prohibitions on firearm possession in town parks
and other recreational facilities, see Town Code §§
100.01 and
100.03
Statutory Reference:
   See also G.S. 14-409.40(f), G.S. 14-415.13 and G.S.160A-189
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES REGULATIONS
§ 89.35 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MALT BEVERAGE. Beer, lager, malt liquor, ale, porter and any other brewed or
fermented beverage containing at least 0.5%, and not more than 15% alcohol by
volume. Any MALT BEVERAGE containing more than 6% alcohol by volume shall bear
a label clearly indicating the alcohol content of the MALT BEVERAGE. See also
G.S. § 18B-101(9).
   OPEN CONTAINER. A container whose seal has been broken or a container other
than the manufacturer's unopened original container.
   UNFORTIFIED WINE. Any wine of 16% or less alcohol by volume made by
fermentation from grapes, fruits, berries, rice or honey; or by the addition of
pure cane, beet or dextrose sugar; or by the addition of pure brandy from the
same type of grape, fruit, berry, rice or honey that is contained in the base
wine and produced in accordance with the regulations of the United States. See
also G.S. § 18B-101(15).
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
Statutory reference:
   Local ordinance, authority, see G.S. § 18B-300(c)
§ 89.36 DISPLAY OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall display any alcoholic beverages on any public property
within the town unless the alcoholic beverage is contained in its original
factory-sealed container.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 89.37 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an occupant of a motor
vehicle to consume malt beverages and/or unfortified wine on public property
within the town.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 89.38 POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not an occupant of a motor
vehicle to possess any open container of malt beverage and/or unfortified wine
on public property within the town.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 89.39 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Possession and consumption of malt beverages and/or unfortified wine
shall be permitted at the Jones House Community Center, Daniel Boone Gardens,
Daniel Boone Park and at Town Council-approved special events; provided,
however:
      (1)   Appropriate permits must be obtained as required by law for the
possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages;
      (2)   The sponsor of the event or gathering where possession and
consumption of malt beverages and/or unfortified wine is to occur must obtain
appropriate liability insurance to protect against personal injury and property
damage; and
      (3)   Approval must be obtained in advance from the Town Manager, and
such approval may be conditioned upon appropriate safety measures.
   (B)   Nothing herein shall be interpreted to require the town to apply for
required permits or insurance coverage unless the town itself is the sponsor of
the event.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 89.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided below, a violation of any provision of
this chapter shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $50
and shall constitute an infraction and be subject to a fine of not more than
$50 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both.
   (B)   Discharge of a firearm in violation of §
89.20(A) of this chapter shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor and be subject
to a fine of not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or
both.
   (C)   The town may seek to enforce a violation of this chapter through any
appropriate equitable action.
   (D)   Each day that a violation continues after the offender has been
notified of the violation shall constitute a separate offense.
   (E)   A second or subsequent violation of the same provision of this chapter
in the same 12-month period shall result in assessment of a civil penalty in
the amount of $100 for the second violation and $250 for the third and any
subsequent violation.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019; Ord. passed 4-15-2021)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
90.   BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS
         
91.   STORAGE AND COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTES AND RECYCLABLES
         
92.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
         
93.   RESERVED
         
94.   SPECIAL EVENTS
         
95.   RESERVED
         
96.   STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC WAYS; ENCROACHMENTS
         
97.   TREES AND SHRUBS
         
98.   BIRD SANCTUARY
         
99.   RESERVED
         
100.   PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS
         
101.   STATES OF EMERGENCY
CHAPTER 90: BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
90.01   Purpose
   
90.02   Definitions
   
90.03   Duties of the alarm user
   
90.04   Penalties; enforcement; appeal
   
90.05   Severability; allocation of revenue
§ 90.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users to properly
use and maintain the operational effectiveness and proper utilization of alarm
systems and to reduce or eliminate false alarms which may unduly divert police
resources.
   (B)   This chapter governs systems intended to summon law enforcement and
provides for penalties and procedures for violations.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2015)
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM. Any electronic or mechanical device which emits any signal, whether
electronic, audible, silent or recorded, and which is designed, used, or
intended for the detection of an unauthorized intrusion or attempted intrusion
into a building, structure or premises or to signal an actual or attempted
robbery.
   ALARM COMPANY. A business, individual, partnership, corporation or other
entity that sells, leases, maintains, services, repairs, alters, replaces,
moves, installs or monitors an alarm system in an alarm site. Alarm companies
referenced in this chapter shall hold a current alarm systems business license
issued by the North Carolina Alarm Systems Licensing Board.
   ALARM DISPATCH REQUEST. A notification to a law enforcement agency that an
alarm, either manual or automatic, has been activated at a particular alarm
site.
   ALARM SITE. A single fixed premises or location served by an alarm system or
systems. Each tenancy, if served by a separate alarm system in a multi-tenant
building or complex shall be considered a separate alarm site.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, device or
series of devices, including, but not limited to, systems interconnected with a
radio frequency method such as cellular or private radio signals, which emit or
transmit a remote or local audible, visual or electronic signal indicating an
alarm condition and intended to discourage crime and summon law enforcement.
ALARM SYSTEM does not include:
      (1)   An alarm installed on a vehicle or person unless the vehicle or
personal alarm is permanently located at a site; and
      (2)   An alarm designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises that
does not have a sounding device which can be heard from the exterior of the
alarm site.
   ALARM USER. Any person, firm, association or corporation of any kind in
control of any building, structure or facility wherein an alarm is installed,
operated and maintained. In the case of a tenancy, the tenant shall be
considered the sole alarm user at the alarm site.
   CANCELLATION. The process by which an alarm user or an alarm company
providing monitoring verifies with the alarm user or responsible party that a
false dispatch has occurred and that there is not an existing situation at the
alarm site requiring law enforcement.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Boone Police Chief or his or her designee.
   DURESS ALARM. An alarm system signal generated by the manual activation of a
device intended to signal a life threatening situation or a crime in process
requiring law enforcement response.
   FALSE ALARM. An alarm signal or dispatch request to a law enforcement agency
that elicits a police response when a situation requiring an immediate response
does not in fact exist and the responding officer finds no evidence of a
criminal offense or attempted criminal offense after having completed a timely
investigation of the alarm site. An alarm will not be considered false if it is
determined that the alarm was caused by:
      (1)   A natural or man-made catastrophe, or other “Act of God” such as a
tornado, flood, earthquake, or other similarly violent conditions.
      (2)   Vandalism causing physical damage to the property.
      (3)   Attempted entry of a location causing visible, physical, or other
evidence of damage to the location which has caused the alarm to sound.
      (4)   Failure of electrical power not caused by the alarm user.
   HOLDUP ALARM. A silent alarm signal generated by the manual activation of a
device intended to signal a robbery in progress.
   KEY HOLDER. An alarm user representative with full access to an alarm site
and the alarm system contained therein and who is available to respond to the
alarm site.
   MONITORING. The process by which an alarm company receives signals from an
alarm system and relays an alarm dispatch request to the municipality for the
purpose of summoning law enforcement response to the alarm site.
   VERIFICATION. Communication, by the alarm company or its representative,
with the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephonic or other means before
requesting law enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to determine the validity of
an alarm.
   VERIFIED RESPONSE. A specific status in which an alarm system is categorized
wherein an alarm company must verify the validity of an alarm through video,
audio, or a person on site before the alarm company may contact law enforcement
and/or law enforcement will respond.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2015)
§ 90.03 DUTIES OF THE ALARM USER.
   (A)   An alarm user shall:
      (1)   Maintain the premises and the alarm system in a manner that will
minimize or eliminate false alarms; and
      (2)   Make every reasonable effort to have a key holder respond to the
alarm system’s location within 30 minutes when notified to deactivate a
malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the premises, or to provide
alternative security for the premises.
   (B)   An alarm user shall have their alarm company inspect and/or repair the
alarm system as needed and upon being placed in “verified response” status as
outlined in §
90.04 Penalties; Enforcement; Appeal.
   (C)   An alarm user who is having an alarm system monitored shall:
      (1)   Receive training from the alarm company on the proper use of the
alarm system prior to the alarm user authorizing the alarm company to request
the dispatch of law enforcement and insure that training is provided to all of
the alarm user’s employees;
      (2)   Confirm with the alarm company and/or monitoring company that
contract information for key holders are current;
      (3)   Communicate with the alarm company and/or monitoring company to
assure that the alarm dispatch requests to the municipality are being provided
in a manner and form determined by the Chief of Police;
      (4)   Communicate with the alarm company and/or monitoring company to
assure that cancellations to the municipality are in a manner and form
determined by the Chief of Police.
      (5)   Shall be adequately trained as to the proper use of the duress or
holdup alarm if so equipped.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2015)
§ 90.04 PENALTIES; ENFORCEMENT; APPEAL.
   (A)   An alarm user shall be subject to warnings, fines and verified
response status depending on the number of false alarms emitted from an alarm
system within any rolling 180 days period based upon the following schedule:
      (1)   First and second false alarms, warning citation issued with no
fine.
      (2)   Third false alarm, civil citation, $50 fine.
      (3)   Fourth false alarm, civil citation, $100 fine, alarm system placed
on “verified response” status.
      (4)   Fifth and subsequent alarms must be verified before police
notification, $100 fine if false.
   (B)   If cancellation occurs prior to law enforcement arriving at the scene,
that is not a false alarm for the purpose of warnings or fines and no fines
will be assessed.
   (C)   Notifications of warnings and fines will be made via Town of Boone
civil citation and left with an alarm user, responding key holder, posted on
the alarm site, or delivered in a similar manner at a later date. Fines, when
applicable, are payable 30 days from the date of issuance.
   (D)   Notifications that an alarm system has been placed on “verified
response” status will be delivered in the form of the citation as well as a
notification letter delivered electronically, by regular mail, or in person, to
the alarm user or a key holder. The associated fine is payable 30 days from the
date of citation issuance. An alarm user who receives notification that their
alarm system is in verified response status must notify their alarm company of
this condition in order to prevent the alarm company form contacting law
enforcement unless the validity of the alarm is independently verified.
   (E)   A alarm system placed on “verified response” will remain in that
status until all outstanding fines are paid and the alarm user delivers to the
Chief of Police documentation of correction of any problem condition.
Documentation may take the form of a letter from the alarm user and/or a letter
from an alarm company that provided service in response to false alarms. The
Chief of Police will review the provided documentation and notify the alarm
user of additional steps necessary or of removal from verified response status.
   (F)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to the civil penalties set forth. Any violation of this chapter shall
be deemed a non-criminal violation and shall not be a misdemeanor or infraction
pursuant to G.S. § 14-4 or §
10.99 of the Town of Boone Code of Ordinances.
   (G)   If payment is not received or equitable settlement reached within 180
days after demand for payment is made, the matter shall be referred to the Town
Attorney for initiation of a civil action in the name of the town in the
appropriate division of the general court of justice of Watauga County for
recovery of the penalty. In the event it is necessary for the town to institute
a civil action to collect a civil penalty for the violation of any provision of
any town ordinance, the offender shall pay all court costs, including filing
fees, fees for service of process, and other expenses incurred in the
litigation, such as costs of depositions, copying expenses and charges, and
reasonable attorney’s fees incurred by the town.
   (H)   An alarm user may appeal the assessment of a fine or verified response
status to the Chief of Police. The filing of an appeal with the Chief of Police
stays the assessment of the fine or suspension until a final decision is made.
The alarm user shall file a written appeal to the Chief of Police by setting
forth the reasons for the appeal within ten days after receipt of notification
of a false alarm. The Chief of Police will deliver a decision to the alarm user
in writing.
   (I)   Businesses, such as financial institutions and other establishments,
which utilize robbery or panic alarms, will not be placed on “verified
response” status. Established robbery alarm response protocol will be followed.
However, the civil fine schedule listed above will apply to false robbery,
panic, and/or hold-up alarms.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2015)
§ 90.05 SEVERABILITY; ALLOCATION OF REVENUE.
   (A)   If this chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstance
is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or
applications of the chapter which can be given separate effect and to this end
the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.
   (B)   All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be General Fund
revenue of the Town of Boone.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2015)
CHAPTER 91: STORAGE AND COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTES AND RECYCLABLES
Section
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Property owners to provide containers
   
91.03   Size, number and type of solid waste and recycling containers required
for multifamily and commercial properties
   
91.04   Properties served by cubic yard containers and recycling containers
   
91.05   Properties not served by cubic yard containers
   
91.06   Special collections
   
91.07   Authority of Administrator
   
91.08   Interference with stored solid wastes or recyclables
   
91.09   Payment for service
 
   
91.99   Penalties
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The person or persons designated by the Town Manager to
administer and/or enforce this chapter.
   BUSINESS TRASH. Any accumulation of dust, paper and cardboard, excelsior,
rags or accumulations other than garbage or household trash incident to the
ordinary conduct of stores, offices and similar businesses.
   CUBIC YARD CONTAINER. Receptacle a minimum of four cubic yards in size which
is water- tight with a close-fitting lid used for the temporary storage of
solid waste that is capable of being serviced by an automatic equipped
collection vehicle.
   GARBAGE. Waste consisting of animal or vegetable foodstuffs resulting from
the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food.
   HOUSEHOLD TRASH. Any waste accumulation of paper, sweepings, dust, rags,
bottles, cans or other matter of any kind, other than garbage, which is usually
attendant to housekeeping.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. All waste, including solids, semi-solids, sludges and
liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing
enterprises.
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A dwelling or combination of dwellings on a single
lot consisting of three or more dwelling units.
   PREMISES. The areas of a property not enclosed within a building, including
yards, sidewalks, alleys, rights-of-way, grass strips and curbs up to the edge
of the pavement of any public street.
   RECYCLABLES. Include but are not limited to the following items that are
empty and contain no food debris: clear, green and brown container glass,
aluminum foil, aluminum cans, empty aerosol cans, cardboard, paper milk and
juice cartons, steel food cans, #1 through #7 plastic containers, mixed paper,
office paper, food boxes, newsprint with inserts, magazines, catalogs, phone
books, junk mail, office ledger and pasteboard.
   RECYCLING CONTAINER. A receptacle which is equipped with a close-fitting lid
used for the temporary storage of recyclables between scheduled pickups capable
of being serviced by hand or by the town's contracted hauler's automatic
equipped collection vehicle.
   REFUSE. Solid waste accumulations consisting of garbage, household trash,
yard trash and/or business trash, as defined in this section.
   SOLID WASTE CONTAINER. A water-tight receptacle which is equipped with a
close-fitting lid used for the temporary storage of solid waste that is capable
of being serviced by hand or by an automatic equipped collection vehicle.
   SOLID WASTES. Wastes that are non-gaseous and non-liquid (except that liquid
wastes resulting from the processing of food are deemed solid wastes for the
purposes of this chapter.)
   WASTES. All useless, unwanted or discarded materials resulting from
domestic, industrial, commercial or community activities.
   YARD TRASH. Waste accumulation of lawn, grass or shrubbery cuttings or
clippings, bushes, limbs and dry leaf rakings free of dirt, rocks, large
branches and bulky or non-combustible material.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 91.02 PROPERTY OWNERS TO PROVIDE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   The owner of every property within the town shall be responsible for
providing adequate solid waste containers in accordance with this chapter to
store the solid wastes generated by activities taking place on that property
between scheduled pickups.
   (B)   The owner of every property with one or more multi-family dwellings
shall provide containers in accordance with this section to store recyclables
generated by activities taking place on the property between scheduled pickups.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 91.03 SIZE, NUMBER AND TYPE OF SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING CONTAINERS REQUIRED
FOR MULTIFAMILY AND COMMERCIAL PROPERTIES.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this section and after consultation with
the owner of the property concerned, the Administrator shall determine the
size, number and type of solid waste and recycling containers that must be
provided for multifamily and commercial properties within the town. In making
this determination, the Administrator shall consider the type of activities on
the property and the amount of solid waste likely to be generated by those
activities, as well as the welfare of the occupants and neighbors of those
property and the town's need to facilitate collection and minimize the costs of
this service. A list of container sizes and types can be obtained at the Public
Works office.
   (B)   Unless the Administrator determines that the topography of the
premises requires alternative measures, the owner(s) of a property with one or
more multi-family dwelling shall provide one or more cubic yard containers so
that the following criteria relating to capacity are satisfied:
      (1)   One-eighth cubic yards of storage capacity is provided per bedroom;
provided that the minimum sized cubic yard container shall be four cubic yards;
and
      (2)   If more than one cubic yard container is required, the owner shall
provide the smallest number of cubic yard containers capable of satisfying the
requirements stated in division (B)(1) of this section.
   (C)   Unless the Administrator determines that the topography of the
premises requires alternative measures, the owner of a property with one or
more multi-family dwellings shall provide recycling containers so that the
following criteria relating to capacity are satisfied. Each recycling container
area shall accommodate the placement of an adequate number of 96-gallon
recycling containers. The type and number of recyclable materials may change as
the town's Public Works Department's recycling program changes.
   (D)   Unless the Administrator determines that the topography of the
premises requires alternative measures, when any non-residential premises
requires more than four of the containers described in division (F), one or
more cubic yard containers of an appropriate size will be required.
   (E)   When cubic yard containers are required by the Administrator, only
cubic yard containers compatible with private collection equipment currently in
use will be approved.
   (F)   The owners of all premises not required to be served by cubic yard
containers shall provide at least one 32-gallon or larger container made of
galvanized metal, plastic, rubber or other material resistant to rust,
corrosion or rapid deterioration. Each required container shall be water-tight
and provided with handles and a tight-fitting cover. Owners may rent or lease a
96-gallon roll-out waste container from the town's contracted hauler that is
compatible with the hauler's lift equipment.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 91.04 PROPERTIES SERVED BY CUBIC YARD CONTAINERS AND RECYCLING CONTAINERS.
   With respect to properties served by cubic yard containers:
   (A)   The location of cubic yard containers shall be determined by the
Administrator after consultation with the owner of the property concerned. In
making this determination, the Administrator shall consider the needs of the
occupants for safe and convenient access to the location for deposit and the
private hauler's ease of access to the location for collection;
   (B)   Solid waste and recycling materials shall be collected from the
approved location on a schedule determined by the Administrator;
   (C)   Screening shall be provided around containers.
   (D)   All solid wastes shall be stored in cubic yard containers pending
collection.
   (E)   All cubic yard containers shall be cleaned periodically to minimize
offensive odors and the tops or openings to all cubic yard containers shall be
kept securely fastened at all times pending collection;
   (F)   All enclosures and screens shall be well maintained and replaced as
needed;
   (G)   Recycling containers shall be located in the same area as the solid
waste container site where reasonably possible;
   (H)   If locating the recycling area at the solid waste container site
proves impractical for new construction or in connection with the renovation or
expansion of an existing multi-family dwelling, a recycling area shall be
located in an accessible area on the property as determined by the
Administrator; and
   (I)   Screening, enclosures, container types, placement of containers and
the like shall comply with all applicable specifications established by the
town's Public Works Department and with any requirements of the town's Unified
Development Ordinance ("UDO").
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 91.05 PROPERTIES NOT SERVED BY CUBIC YARD CONTAINERS.
   With respect to properties not served by cubic yard containers:
   (A)   Refuse shall be stored on the premises of a property pending
collection only in solid waste containers meeting the requirements of this
chapter.
   (B)   Garbage, animal wastes (such as pet feces and cage and litter box
wastes) and human wastes (such as diapers) shall be stored in watertight bags
or containers before being placed in solid waste containers for collection.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, solid waste containers
may not be stored between scheduled pickups between a street and the side of a
dwelling facing the street unless the solid waste containers are stored within:
      (1)   A completely enclosed structure such as a garage or shed; or
      (2)   An opaque enclosure specifically designed for storing solid waste
containers that is enclosed on all four sides and on the top so as to prevent
entry of animals, and that is located outside of the street right-of-way unless
an appropriate encroachment agreement has been obtained for the enclosure.
   (D)   Solid wastes shall be placed adjacent to the street for collection on
the scheduled collection day or after dark on the preceding day. After
collection, all solid waste containers and all uncollected solid wastes shall
be removed to a storage location that complies with division (C) above by 9:00
a.m. on the day following the collection day.
   (E)   If the Administrator determines that because of physical infirmity,
the occupant of a property cannot without undue hardship transport the solid
wastes from the storage location required by division (C) above to the
collection point required by division (D) above, the Administrator may
authorize the occupant to store solid wastes at a convenient location away from
the curb between scheduled pickups or provide on-premises pickup.
   (F)   Containers that do not meet the requirements of this chapter may be
treated as solid wastes and collected as such.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 91.06 SPECIAL COLLECTIONS.
   (A)   Solid wastes generated by single-family and duplex residential
customers that are too bulky, heavy or cumbersome to be collected by the town
as part of its regular collection service may be collected by the town pursuant
to a request made to the Administrator as a “special collection.” Special
collections will be collected only in accordance with this section and any
policies adopted by the Administrator, and may include yard waste (including
grass cuttings, hedge clippings, tree debris and tree trimmings, shrubbery and
similar items less than eight inches in diameter and ten feet in length);
containers weighing more than 75 pounds; furniture and household furnishings,
white goods, and similar items.
   (B)   To the extent practical, special collection items must be placed
within ten feet of the curb, may not impede the public way, and must be clear
of overhanging obstructions.
   (C)   Yard waste must be kept separate from and shall not be mixed with any
other type of solid waste for purposes of collection by the town.
   (D)   No materials such as trees, logs, stumps, shrubbery or underbrush
resulting from land being cleared shall be collected by the town. Proper
collection and disposal of such material shall be the responsibility of the
contractor or builder or, in the event that the contractor or builder fails to
remove such material, the responsibility of the owner of the property.
   (E)   A property owner or occupant who deposits special collection items
must call the town's Public Works department within one business day of making
the deposit to arrange for a special collection pick-up.
   (F)   The town reserves the right to refuse any request made pursuant to
this section and the failure of the town to provide this service shall not
relieve any person of any of the obligations imposed by any provision of this
code.
   (G)   Each single-family and duplex residential property is entitled to a
limited number of free special collection pickups per calendar year pursuant to
the current policies of the Public Works Department. Any special collection
pickup over that number of free pickups shall be charged to the occupant or
property owner at the rates provided on the current schedule of rates and fees
of the Department. If an occupant who is not the property owner fails to pay
the special collection charges, the charges shall be chargeable to and paid by
the property owner.
   (H)   In the event a property owner or occupant fails to arrange for a
special collection as required per division (E), the town may collect the solid
wastes and charge the pick-up against the property owner or occupant as
provided at division (G).
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 91.07 AUTHORITY OF ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The Administrator shall establish collection routes and schedules and
may alter these routes and schedules from time to time. A copy of the current
routes and schedules shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
Notice of any changes in the routes or schedules shall be made known to
affected citizens and placed on the Town's website at least ten days before the
changes are to become effective.
   (B)   Whenever this chapter authorizes the Administrator to make a
discretionary determination, all persons affected by that determination shall
comply with it within 15 calendar days after receiving written notice of the
determination and the reasons for it. Thereafter, a failure on the part of any
person receiving the notice to comply with the determination shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 91.08 INTERFERENCE WITH STORED SOLID WASTES OR RECYCLABLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, displace or otherwise
interfere with solid waste containers or collect, pick up or cause to be
collected or picked up solid wastes or recyclable materials stored or prepared
for collection without the consent of the owner, lessee or occupant of the
property where those containers or solid wastes are located.
   (B)   From the time of placement at the curb of recyclable items in a
container for collection by the town or its designated contractor, the
materials shall become and be the property of the town.
   (C)   Any resident may donate or sell recyclable items to any person,
whether operating for profit or not for profit. However, no person may, under
any circumstances, pick up recyclables stored or prepared for collection from
the curbside in the town.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 91.09 PAYMENT FOR SERVICE.
   Except for special collections as provided at §
91.06 and any charges and fees assessed pursuant to the town's current schedule
of charges and fees, there shall be no charge for solid waste and recycling
collection for single-family and duplex residential dwellings. All other
customers shall be charged for solid waste and recycling collection pursuant to
the current policies and schedule of fees adopted by the town.
(Ord. passed 12-16-2019)
§ 91.99 PENALTIES.
   (A)   Penalty for first violation. A civil penalty of $50 shall be assessed
upon any property owner or occupant responsible for a first violation of this
chapter within any 12-month period.
   (B)   Penalty for second and subsequent violations. Upon second and
subsequent violations of a provision of this chapter by a person within 12
months of that person receiving a notice of violation under this chapter, a
civil penalty of $100 shall be assessed for the violation.
   (C)   The town may refuse to empty any solid waste or recycling container or
refuse to pick up any special collection deposit that is in violation of any
requirement of this chapter.
   (D)   Each day that a violation continues uncorrected shall constitute a
separate violation.
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Fire Department duties
   
92.02   Interfering with firefighters; loitering around Fire Department
   
92.03   Riding on Fire Department vehicles prohibited
   
92.04   Damaging, removing or interfering with Fire Department equipment
prohibited
   
92.05   Fire protection outside town limits
   
92.06   False fire alarms, damage to fire alarm or response equipment
prohibited
   
92.07   Annual fire inspections required
   
92.08   Fees and charges
Fire Prevention and Protection
   
92.15   NC Fire Prevention Code adopted by reference
   
92.16   Design of automatic sprinkler, standpipe, fire alarm and fixed fire
extinguishing systems
   
92.17   Building permit plan review
   
92.18   Fire lanes
   
92.19   Display of address numbers
   
92.20   Fire hydrant protection policy
   
92.21   Knox Box requirements
Permit Requirements
   
92.35   Open burning
   
92.36   Fire safety special use permits
   
92.37   Fire safety user permits
   
92.38   Fire protection systems
   
92.39   Appeals
 
   
92.99   Enforcement; penalties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 FIRE DEPARTMENT DUTIES.
   The duties of the Fire Department are to preserve and care for fire
apparatus and equipment; to have charge of fighting and extinguishing fires and
responding to other emergencies; to investigate fires and other hazardous
situations; to seek out and have corrected all places and conditions dangerous
to the safety of the town and its citizens from fire and related hazards; to
enforce the NC Fire Prevention Code; and to make annual reports to the Town
Council concerning these duties. The Chief of the Fire Department may adopt
such rules, regulations and organization of personnel, job titles and job
duties as are necessary and proper for the operation of the Department.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019)
§ 92.02 INTERFERING WITH FIREFIGHTERS; LOITERING AROUND FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   No person shall obstruct or interfere with any Fire Department personnel
engaged in the performance of their duties, nor loiter about a Fire Department
station. It shall be unlawful for persons to congregate in the streets, lanes,
alleys or squares adjacent to a fire so as to interfere with the operations of
the Fire Department. Fire Department personnel engaged in a firefighting
operation may declare a safety zone around the fire within which no
unauthorized person may enter.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.03 RIDING ON FIRE DEPARTMENT VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not authorized to do so to ride
or attempt to ride in or on any fire apparatus or other vehicle of the Fire
Department.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.04 DAMAGING, REMOVING OR INTERFERING WITH FIRE DEPARTMENT EQUIPMENT
PROHIBITED.
   No person shall willfully or carelessly break, destroy, carry away or
interfere with any of the apparatus, equipment or implements belonging to the
Fire Department.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.05 FIRE PROTECTION OUTSIDE TOWN LIMITS.
   With the approval of Town Council, the Fire Department may enter into
contracts with neighboring fire departments for mutual aid or with the county
with respect to fire districts.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019)
§ 92.06 FALSE FIRE ALARMS, DAMAGE TO FIRE ALARM OR RESPONSE EQUIPMENT
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Unless there is a fire, a reasonable apprehension of fire, or other
circumstances justifying the making of an alarm of fire, it shall be unlawful
for any person to make a false alarm of fire or to break the glass key
protector or to pull the slide, arm or lever of any station or signal box of
any fire alarm system.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage a portable fire
extinguisher or to willfully interfere with, damage, deface, molest or injure
any part or portion of any fire alarm, fire detection, smoke detection or fire
extinguishing system.
   (C)   The Fire Department may impose penalties and/or response fees and
charges upon fire alarm users who have three or more false alarms caused by
equipment malfunction within a 30-day period.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.07 ANNUAL FIRE INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.
   All businesses and multi-tenant residential dwellings must obtain an annual
fire inspection and user permit in accordance with state law and this chapter.
This requirement does not apply to one- or two-family dwellings.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019)
§ 92.08 FEES AND CHARGES.
   Fire Department permit fees and all other fees and charges shall be assessed
as provided per the town's current adopted schedule of fees.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019)
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
§ 92.15 NC FIRE PREVENTION CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to
life and property from fire, explosion or exposure to hazardous materials, the
NC Fire Prevention Code, as currently adopted and published by the NC State
Building Code Council, together with all appendices and as such may be amended
from time to time (hereinafter, “Fire Code”), is hereby adopted by reference
and is set forth herein as the Fire Code for the town. Any amendment to the
Fire Code shall be effective in the town as of the date such amendment is
declared in effect by the NC State Building Code Council. A copy of the Fire
Code is kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk and is available for
public inspection during regular business hours.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019)
§ 92.16 DESIGN OF AUTOMATIC SPRINKLER, STANDPIPE, FIRE ALARM AND FIXED FIRE
EXTINGUISHING SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Plans and specifications for automatic sprinkler systems, standpipe
systems, fire alarm systems and fixed fire extinguishing systems must meet the
requirements of the Fire Code. Applicants proposing to install or renovate such
systems must submit plans and specifications to the fire department for plan
review, and may proceed with installation or renovation only upon approval and
issuance of a permit by the Fire Department.
   (B)   The water demand for any sprinkler and/or standpipe system shall not
be greater than 90% of the available water supply.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.17 BUILDING PERMIT PLAN REVIEW.
   Except in the case of one- and two-family residential dwellings, all
building plans submitted to the Boone Planning and Inspections Department for
the issuance of a building permit shall be reviewed by the Fire Department for
compliance with this chapter and the Fire Code.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019)
§ 92.18 FIRE LANES.
   (A)   Fire lanes required. The Fire Department shall have authority
consistent with the Fire Code to designate fire lanes necessary for fire
apparatus accessibility.
   (B)   Marking.
      (1)   The perimeter of every designated fire lane shall be marked with a
solid four-inch yellow stripe. The interior of this area shall be marked with
four-inch yellow stripes at 45-degree angles to the perimeter stripe or curbing
at four feet on center. The wording “FIRE LANE” shall be painted by stencil in
the interior of the stripping.
      (2)   A “no parking” sign of the type specified in the following figure
shall be installed adjacent to the fire lane at the beginning and end of the
fire lane perimeter:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2043.png]
 
      (3)   Additional signs shall be posted at intervals not exceeding 75
feet.
   (C)   All fire lanes previously designated and described pursuant to this
chapter prior to this amendment shall remain as fire lanes and be maintained as
such. Parking a motor vehicle in or otherwise obstructing a required fire lane
is prohibited at all times.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.19 DISPLAY OF ADDRESS NUMBERS.
   (A)   In accordance with the Fire Code, NC Building Code and this ordinance,
all new and existing buildings shall display their assigned address numbers.
   (B)   One and two family dwellings shall display address numbers as required
by §§
150.01 and
150.02, The minimum size of the numbers shall be not less than four inches
height.
   (C)   Commercial buildings shall display address as required by the Fire
Code with numbers not less than six inches in height. The address numbers shall
be placed either in the approximate center of the building or on the street end
of the building so that it is clearly visible from either the public or private
street by which it is accessed. These numbers shall be of a contrasting color
to the background of which they are attached and located in a manner as to be
readily identified by emergency personnel at all times.
   (D)   It shall be the responsibility of the Fire Department to enforce the
displaying of assigned address numbers in accordance with the Fire Code and
town ordinances.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.20 FIRE HYDRANT PROTECTION POLICY.
   The following policy shall be utilized in the installation of water mains,
water supplies and hydrant installations for fire protection. All such
installations must conform with the Fire Code.
   (A)   Introduction. In order to provide adequate fire protection to the
town, the following policy has been adopted to ensure adequate water supply for
fire protection. This policy is informed by Fire Department experience;
National Fire Codes; ANSI Standards; AWWA Standards; Fire Insurance Regulations
from the State Department of Insurance (I.S.O.); and practices of the town's
Public Works Department. The primary goals of the policy are to attain adequate
fire protection of life and property, set forth an orderly development of a
fire hydrant protection system and set forth the guidelines and rules for the
fire hydrant protection system. This policy will be made available to all
persons by the Fire Department upon request. It is recommended that all persons
who wish to locate business or residential properties in the jurisdiction of
the town request a copy of this policy prior to application for building
permits.
   (B)   New development; building renovations, additions and changes of use.
      (1)   The following guidelines shall apply to new buildings for which a
building permit is required, new subdivisions, or any new commercial,
industrial or residential construction project.
         (a)   The Fire Department shall review all new development building
plans to determine fire hydrant protection requirements for the proposed
development. Sufficient information as required by the Fire Department shall be
submitted to determine the criteria for water flow quantity and hydrant number,
location and spacing.
         (b)   Hydrants shall be installed in accordance with this Chapter and
Chapter 50 of this code and shall be available for service prior to the
beginning of building construction except as specifically provided in this
section.
         (c)   For new subdivisions where a performance guarantee is accepted
for completion of water utilities in lieu of actual completion of the utility
work prior to acceptance of the final plat, single-family dwelling construction
may begin without hydrants and water mains being ready for service.
Construction sites shall be limited so as not to cause an undue fire hazard,
with the Fire Department being notified prior to the beginning of each
construction. No dwelling shall be occupied until all fire protection
requirements have been met and are ready for service. For those new
subdivisions where water mains are not available, the Fire Department may
approve alternative fire protection measures, which may include but are not
limited to draft points, proper road construction to allow for tanker
operations, water fill points and the like.
         (d)   Hydrants shall be installed at the expense of the owner or
developer of the development served by the hydrant, including, but not limited
the expense of:
            1.   Extension of town-owned water lines in order to provide
service for the new development as required by this policy;
            2.   Addition of fire hydrants to existing water lines;
            3.   Private fire lines; and
            4.   Upgrading of existing lines to provide the necessary water
flow capacity for the building or project.
      (2)   In the case of building additions, renovations, changes of use and
the like, the existing water system may be deemed adequate for the existing
building if there are hydrants with flow certified as adequate by the Fire
Department. If changes to the building require additional water flow
requirements to meet Fire Code requirements, the owner or developer shall
provide and bear the expense of such additional capacity.
   (C)   Existing development. The following guidelines shall apply to existing
industrial, commercial and multi-family residential buildings and subdivisions.
      (1)   The Fire Department shall determine areas in public rights of way
that are deficient in fire hydrant protection. A plan of correction shall be
developed in accordance with monies available.
      (2)   Where existing development poses a danger to life and property due
to fire hydrant deficiencies existing on private property, the Fire Department
may require the deficiency to be corrected in such fashion and time as it may
direct. Any associated expense shall be borne by the owner of the development.
   (D)   Required fire flow.
      (1)   The water flow available for fire protection (“fire flow”) required
to provide adequate fire protection in the town will be determined in
accordance with Chapter 50 of this code. The required fire flow must assure
sufficient water flow for fire protection while also maintaining normal usage
for other water users in the area without interruption or damage to other
users' systems.
      (2)   Fire flow requirements may be increased by the Fire Department to
account for any condition that may warrant an increase in fire flow to provide
adequate fire protection, including but not limited to factors such as the
siting of adjacent buildings, storage of hazardous materials, occupancy
classification, etc.
      (3)   Four-hour fire separation walls may be considered as dividing a
building into separate fire areas for the purpose of determining fire flow. For
purposes of this section, a “fire area” is the total floor area in square feet
for all floor levels within the exterior walls or under the horizontal
projection of the roof of a building.
      (4)   The minimum fire-flow requirements for one- and two-family
dwellings shall be 1,000 GPM, except that this requirement may be reduced by
50% if the building is equipped with an approved sprinkler system.
      (5)   The minimum fire flow requirement for buildings other than one- or
two-family dwellings may be reduced by 50% if the building is equipped with an
approved sprinkler system. However, the flow requirement shall not be reduced
below the requirements of the sprinkler system as determined per NFPA 13.
      (6)   Hydrants installed to meet the provisions of the fire flow
requirements shall be calculated at providing 1,500 GPM each. If the required
fire flow does not exceed the hydrant flow calculation by 500 GPM or more, then
an additional hydrant shall not be required.
      (7)   A hydrant is required within 100 feet of each connection to an
approved sprinkler system requiring Fire Department hose connection.
      (8)   Additional hydrants may be required as necessary for adequate fire
protection of a building due to accessibility limitations or other
circumstances.
   (E)   Fire hydrant installation. The following guidelines shall apply to the
installations of all new hydrants and replacements of existing hydrants.
      (1)   Hydrants shall be installed in accordance with
Chapter 50 of this code.
      (2)   Upon completion of installation, each hydrant shall be flushed of
all sediment or debris that may hinder its operation. The caps will then be
greased and the hydrant set ready for service. The Fire Department will then be
notified of the completion of the installation and that the hydrant is in
service and ready for an inspection.
      (3)   All completed hydrant installations must be inspected by the Fire
Department for compliance with all applicable requirements.
      (4)   All hydrants shall be painted to match the existing hydrants in the
town. Unless otherwise specified, this color shall be Top #7216 white
reflective or equivalent and an oil-based red paint for barrel and caps.
   (F)   Hydrant spacing.
      (1)   Hydrants shall be located as close as possible to street
intersections or areas of direct vehicular access. Hydrant spacing may not
exceed 500 feet, and commercial and multi-family developments may require
additional hydrants to compensate for long hose lays and/or greater water
demand.
      (2)   Where possible, hydrants shall be located no closer than 50 feet
from a building, except that if the probable collapse zone of a building
exceeds 50 feet, then hydrants shall be located out of this zone when possible.
      (3)   Hydrants should be located close to street access so as to
facilitate easy hook-up.
      (4)   Hydrants located in areas designated for parking shall be afforded
some type of protection from collision of vehicular traffic. Where a curb
protects the hydrant from normal parking and is marked for no parking, no other
type of protection is needed.
      (5)   Where a hydrant is located on a street with side-street parking, at
least one parking space shall be marked at the hydrant to provide for no
parking. In shopping centers and similar parking areas, at least one parking
space in front of or behind the hydrant (whichever provides access), shall be
designated as no-parking and for Fire Department access only. The area around
the hydrant shall be marked in yellow and designated in letters “No Parking.”
      (6)   A clear space of three feet shall be maintained around the
circumference of fire hydrants, except as otherwise approved by the Fire
Department. Unobstructed access to hire hydrants must be maintained at all
times.
   (G)   Water supply lines for hydrants. Installation of piping for supply of
water to a hydrant or protection system shall be in accordance with Chapter 50
of this code.
      (1)   Hydrants installed on existing water lines will be tested by the
Fire Department to ensure that the existing line can supply an adequate flow of
water as needed per I.S.O. fire flow requirements.
      (2)   It shall be the responsibility of the developer, property owner or
person in charge of the development project to submit plans of construction of
the water lines or hydrant location and spacing to the Fire Department and
Public Works Department for approval prior to installation. All new supply
lines shall be inspected prior to being covered to ensure compliance with the
submitted plans.
      (3)   Once the system is completed, a final inspection will be conducted.
This inspection will also include a flow test to ensure proper fire flow
adequacy.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.21 KNOX BOX REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A Knox Box key entry system is required in all new and existing
commercial and multi-tenant residential structures containing automatic
sprinkler systems or fire alarm systems.
   (B)   An authorization order form can be obtained from the Fire Department
or the applicant can go online to: www.knoxbox.com to place their order for an
approved Knox Box.
   (C)   The owner and/or tenant of the building is responsible for ensuring
that all required and current entry keys for that business are in the Knox Box
at all times.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019)
PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
§ 92.35 OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   Consistent with state law, debris burning of any kind is not permitted
within the town limits. DEBRIS for this purpose include leaves, branches and
other plant growth as well as garbage, paper, tires, building materials, and
any other type of human-made or human-processed materials of any kind.
   (B)   Except as may be prohibited from time to time pursuant to the issuance
of burning bans, ordinary and customary use for leisure purposes of fire pits,
barbecues, outside fireplaces, chimineas and similar apparatus are permitted
within the Town limits, and do not require permitting.
   (C)   Bonfires burned with appropriate firewood for purposes of group
festivities are permitted with the advance approval of and a permit from the
Fire Department.
   (D)   Burning bans.
      (1)   In the event the NC State Forest Service issues a ban on all
outdoor burning, no open burning may be conducted in the town.
      (2)   A burning ban may be issued by the Fire Department in the event
that atmospheric conditions or local circumstance make open fires hazardous.
         (a)   Atmospheric conditions that may warrant a burning ban include,
but are not limited to:
            1.    Extended periods of low humidity (below 50%);
            2.   High winds;
            3.   Elevated temperatures; and
            4.   Lack of substantial rainfall.
         (b)   Local conditions that may warrant a burning ban include, but are
not limited to:
            1.   Flammable and/or combustible liquid spills or leaks close to a
burning site;
            2.   A hazardous materials incident where the proximity of the burn
site could cause a possible ignition source or prove hazardous to operations
controlling the incident; and
            3.   The proximity of adjacent structures or other hazards.
      (3)   In the event a burning ban is issued, whether by the NC State
Forest Service or the Fire Department, the local media shall be notified by the
Fire Department at the time the burning ban is issued and when it is lifted.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.36 FIRE SAFETY SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   (A)   Definition. A FIRE SAFETY SPECIAL USE PERMIT is a permit required by
the Fire Department authorizing certain one-time or occasional activities or
assemblies that pose hazards to persons or property. A special use permit will
be issued for a specific event, operation and/or a specified time period.
Examples of special use permits include blasting permits, insecticide fogging,
craft shows, tent assemblies and the like.
   (B)   Permit issuance and display requirements shall be in accordance with
the Fire Code.
   (C)   A special use permit shall be required for the following activities
and events:
      (1)   Fireworks for public display;
      (2)   Tents for public usage exceeding 800 square feet with sides or
1,800 square feet in size with open sides;
      (3)   Use of inflatable air structures with a gross area (footprint)
exceeding 800 square feet;
      (4)   Temporary kiosks;
      (5)   Insecticide fogging or fumigation, except in one- and two-family
residential dwellings;
      (6)   Blasting (explosives);
      (7)   Special assemblies of persons, including but not limited to:
         (a)   Haunted houses;
         (b)   Craft shows/festivals;
         (c)   Merchandising shows; and
         (d)   Mall exhibitions; and
      (8)   Any other type of activity or event that is determined by the Fire
Department to pose similar risk to persons or property.
   (C)   Procedure for issuance of permit. It will be the responsibility of the
person or organization, requiring a special use permit to contact the Fire
Department to fill out a special use permit application. The fee necessary for
the permit will be collected upon submission. The permit will not be issued
until an inspection has been conducted and all applicable regulations have been
met.
   (D)   Permit conditions. A special use permit must be posted for public view
during the specified time period or event. Special use permits are not
transferable or renewable.
   (E)   Revocation. The Fire Department may revoke a permit if it determines
that the permit holder has violated any provision of the Fire Code, town code
or any stated condition of the permit. In the event that a permit is revoked,
the permit holder will not be entitled to a refund of the permit fee. The
special activity or event authorized per the permit shall cease immediately
upon revocation of the permit.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.37 FIRE SAFETY USER PERMITS.
   (A)   User permit; definition. A FIRE SAFETY USER PERMIT is a permit
required by the Fire Department in connection with its duties to safeguard life
and property in connection with:
      (1)   The hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling
or use of structures, materials, or devices;
      (2)   Conditions hazardous to life, property or public welfare in the
occupancy of structures or premises;
      (3)   Fire hazards in the structure or on the premises arising from
occupancy or use;
      (4)   Matters related to the construction, extension, repair alteration
or removal of fire suppression or alarm systems; and
      (5)   Conditions affecting the safety of fire fighters and emergency
responders during emergency operations.
   (B)   Permits required. Permits shall be obtained from the Fire Department
pursuant to the procedures and considerations set forth herein and in Chapter 1
of the Fire Code, and will be issued on an individual basis upon demonstration
of compliance with the applicable Fire Code regulations.
   (C)   Application for permit. Applications for permits shall be submitted to
the Fire Department together with the appropriate fees and such information and
documentation as may required by the Fire Department.
   (D)   Review and issuance. An on-site inspection shall be conducted to
determine compliance with applicable provisions of the Fire Code. If an
application for a permit is rejected, the applicant shall be advised, in
writing, of the reasons for the rejection.
   (E)   Revocation. The Fire Department may revoke a permit upon determination
that the permit holder or any agents or employees of the permit holder, has
violated any provision of the Fire Code or any stated condition of the permit.
The Fire Department shall advise the permit holder, in writing, of the reason
for the revocation.
   (F)   Non-transferable. All permits issued shall not be transferable.
Permits shall be valid only as specified on the permit for the time period, use
and/or project specified. User permits will be valid for a period of one year
from the date of issuance unless otherwise specified in the permit.
   (G)   Fee administration. In the event that a use or occupancy requires more
than one annual user permit, multiple permits may be combined into a single
permit, and the highest fee required for any one of these permits shall be
charged.
   (H)   Inspections. An inspection shall be conducted by the Fire Department
to determine if the occupancy or use is in compliance with the Fire Code. The
Fire Department will conduct as many inspections as necessary to assure
compliance with the Fire Code and approval for the user permit. Once the
occupancy is approved for the permit, the Fire Department will mail the user
permit to the occupant.
   (I)   Permit displayed. The applicant must display the issued user permit so
that the public or other users can confirm that the occupancy or use has met
Fire Code requirements.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.38 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
         (A)   Permit required. A permit must be obtained from the Planning and
Inspections Department for the installation, modification, renovation or
removal of any fire protection equipment such as fire alarm systems, fire
sprinkler systems, hood suppression systems, and standpipe systems.
   (B)   Plans required. Plans, blueprints and hydraulic calculations for the
system being installed, modified, or renovated shall be submitted to the Fire
Department for review and approval prior to the issuance of a permit. No work
may commence until a permit has been issued. Three sets of all plans,
blueprints and/or hydraulic calculations shall be submitted.
   (C)   Permit issuance. Once the plans are approved, a permit will be issued
by the Planning and Inspections Department.
   (D)   Inspection required.
      (1)   The Fire Department must be notified at least 24 hours in advance
to schedule any inspections. Inspections required include:
         (a)   Inspection of pressure testing of all piping;
         (b)   Rough-in inspection of all piping that may be concealed;
         (c)   Inspection of all underground piping prior to covering;
         (d)   Inspection of all hydrants; and
         (e)   Final inspection and complete system testing.
      (2)   An approved/stamped set of drawings must be maintained on the job
site for inspections, and the contractor is responsible to have the necessary
personnel present to conduct any tests.
   (E)   Materials test and certification. Once a fire protection system has
been approved by the Fire Department, the contractor is responsible for issuing
a materials test and certification letter to the Fire Department. This letter
shall state that the system has been installed in accordance to the appropriate
NFPA standards and manufacturer's recommendations; has been successfully
tested; that all materials used are approved for their use; and that the system
is in full operation. A letter shall be submitted for any fire protection
system work for which a permit has been issued.
   (F)   Inspection report and finalization. The Fire Department will complete
an inspection report after each inspection conducted on a fire protection
system. The contractor will be notified of system deficiencies and when all
necessary requirements have been met for each fire protection system. Once all
requirements have been met and all fees paid, the Fire Department may then
consider the permit complete and final and note such on the permit.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.39 APPEALS.
   A permit holder or an applicant for a permit may appeal an action taken by
the Fire Department in connection with its enforcement of the Fire Code as
provided at G.S. §§ 143-140 through 143-141. Such actions may include refusal
to issue or revocation of a permit; interpretation of the requirements of the
Fire Code; or imposition of civil penalties. Any appeal relating to a matter
not arising under the Fire Code may be taken as provided in
Chapter 10 of this Code.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019)
§ 92.99 ENFORCEMENT; PENALTIES.
   (A)   The Fire Code, incorporated by reference into this chapter, and all
other provisions of this Chapter shall be enforced by the Fire Department. All
Fire Department personnel designated to enforce the Fire Code shall be
certified by the State Code Officials Qualification Board.
   (B)   Except as specifically provided in this §
92.99, the general penalty provisions of §
10.99 of this code apply to any violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Violation of any provision of this chapter that poses an imminent
threat to life or property shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the
amount of $500 to be recovered by the town.
   (D)   Violation of any provision of this chapter, except for those
violations set forth in division (C) above or division (E) below, shall subject
the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $100 to be recovered by the
town.
   (E)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
92.06(A) or (B) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to
exceed $500, imprisonment for not more than six months, or both.
(Ord. passed 9-19-2019)
CHAPTER 93: RESERVED
CHAPTER 94: SPECIAL EVENTS
Section
   
94.01   Application of regulations
   
94.02   Permit required
   
94.03   Permit application
   
94.04   Staff review
   
94.05   Insurance requirement
   
94.06   Fees; cost incurred by town
   
94.07   Standards for issuance of permit
   
94.08   Street closing
   
94.09   Sponsor responsible for cleanup
§ 94.01 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   This chapter applies to all street fairs, festivals, carnivals, parades,
marches, rallies, demonstrations and other activities or public events that
require the temporary closing or obstruction of all or a portion of any street
or other public right-of-way or that substantially hinders or prevents the
normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic along any street or other public
right-of-way. Any activity covered by this chapter shall hereafter be referred
to as “a special event”.
(Ord. passed 12-10-2025)
§ 94.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person may run, operate or sponsor a special event in any public street
or right-of-way without a permit obtained from the Town Clerk in accordance
with this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-10-2025) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.03 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Applications for a permit required by this chapter shall be submitted on a
form provided by the Town Clerk and shall contain the following information:
   (A)   Name, address and telephone number of the person, organization or
entity seeking to conduct or sponsor the event;
   (B)   Name, address and telephone number of the individual in charge of the
event;
   (C)   The proposed date and time period when the event will be conducted;
   (D)   A sketch-map showing:
      (1)   The area where the event is to take place;
      (2)   Any streets to be closed or obstructed;
      (3)   Any barriers or traffic-control devices that will be erected;
      (4)   The location of any concession stand, booth or other temporary
structures or facilities; and
      (5)   The location of proposed fences, stands, platforms, benches or
bleachers.
   (E)   The approximate number of people expected to attend the event;
   (F)   When applicable, a request that the town provide specified services
and/or that the town close identified streets or portions of streets for a
particular period;
   (G)   Sufficient proof of liability insurance in accordance with §
94.05; and
   (H)   Any other information determined by the Town Clerk to be necessary to
ensure compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-10-2025)
§ 94.04 STAFF REVIEW.
   Upon receipt of the permit application, the Town Clerk shall circulate it to
the Police Chief, the Fire Chief, the Public Works Director and other
appropriate persons for their comment. The Clerk may arrange to have a
conference on the application with the applicant and one or more department
heads.
(Ord. passed 12-10-2025)
§ 94.05 INSURANCE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided per division (B) below, the Town Clerk shall
require as a condition precedent or subsequent to issuance of the permit that
the applicant obtain and provide adequate proof of the following insurance:
      (1)   Comprehensive general liability insurance or comparable special
events liability insurance in this state with coverage that includes the entire
area of the event with the policy limits of not less than $1,000,000 per
occurrence, $2,000,000 aggregate; the town shall be named as an additional
insured on the policy.
      (2)   Liability insurance of at least $1,000,000 per vehicle covering any
and all vehicles used for the special event operations.
      (3)   In the event alcohol is being served at a special event, liquor
liability insurance of at least $1,000,000 per occurrence.
   (B)   The Town Manager (or designee), in the Town Manager’s discretion, may
allow lesser coverage and/or coverage amounts or require greater coverage and/
or coverage amounts upon consideration of the specific nature and risks posed
by a particular special event.
(Ord. passed 12-10-2025)
§ 94.06 FEES; COST INCURRED BY TOWN.
   (A)   The applicant for a permit under §§
94.02 and
94.03, shall, prior to the issuance of a permit, pay a fee in the following
amount, as applicable, unless the fee is partially or fully waived by the Town
Council in accordance with this section:
      (1)   An event sponsored by the town, including July 4 parade, Christmas
parade, homecoming parade for Appalachian State University and homecoming
parade for Watauga High School or other event designated by the Town Council as
one that is sponsored by the town: no fee;
      (2)   An event not sponsored by the town which requires the temporary
closing or obstruction of all or a portion of any street for less than one
hour: $250;
      (3)   An event not sponsored by the town which requires the temporary
closing or obstruction of all or a portion of any street for one hour or more:
$1,500.
   (B)   The fees imposed by division (A) above may be partly or wholly waived
by action of the Town Council. In waiving the fees in part or in full, the Town
Council may consider, among others, the following factors:
      (1)   The capacity of the event sponsor to defray the costs of the fee
through admission fees, participation fees, advertising fees and/or sponsorship
contributions;
      (2)   The number of people the event is likely to bring into the town and
the expected economic impact of the event on the town and town merchants;
      (3)   The possible and expected impact of the event upon the town's image
and reputation;
      (4)   Any features of the event which will either reduce or increase the
normal expenditures of services and equipment which the town must utilize in
connection with the event; and
      (5)   Other factor as the Town Council may determine justifies the town's
bearing of a portion or the full costs of the extraordinary services or
equipment necessitated by the event.
(Ord. passed 3-18-2004; Ord. passed 12-10-2025)
§ 94.07 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Town Clerk shall issue the permit authorizing the event unless it
finds that:
      (1)   Conduct of the event will require the assignment of so many police
officers that the remainder of the town cannot adequately be protected;
      (2)   The event will interfere with the movement of emergency vehicles to
an extent that adequate police, fire or other emergency services cannot be
provided throughout the town;
      (3)   The applicant has failed to obtain any necessary permits or
licenses, including any required building permit or privilege license or the
applicant is otherwise in violation of any town ordinance;
      (4)   The event will work a severe hardship on persons occupying property
adjacent to the site, location or route of the event as a result of the denial
of access to property or for other substantial reasons;
      (5)   The event, if held at the time or at the location or along the
route proposed, will cause an unreasonable and unwarranted disruption to
vehicular or pedestrian traffic; or
      (6)   The applicant has failed to comply with any of the provisions of
this chapter, including the payment of any fees required.
   (B)   If a permit is issued in accordance with division (A) above, the Town
Clerk may attach to it any reasonable conditions.
   (C)   If the Town Clerk finds that he or she cannot issue the permit for
reasons specified in division (A) above, he or she may request the applicant to
modify its application to remove any objections to the issuance of the permit
and the applicant may do so without further notice or hearing.
   (D)   Any event conducted pursuant to a permit issued under this section
shall be conducted strictly in accordance with the terms of the permit,
including any conditions attached hereto.
   (E)   If the Town Clerk denies or revokes a special event permit, this
action shall be final unless the applicant or permittee shall, within two days
after the receipt of notice of the denial or revocation, file with the Town
Manager written appeal. The Town Manager shall, within 24 hours after the
appeal is filed, consider all evidence in support of or against the action
appealed and render a decision either sustaining or reversing the denial or
revocation.
(Ord. passed 12-10-2025)
§ 94.08 STREET CLOSING.
   (A)   If the Town Clerk finds that the permit should be issued and that, to
conduct the event, it is necessary to close a street or to reroute traffic, the
Town Council may pass a resolution authorizing this to be done. No resolution
shall be passed affecting streets that are part of the state street system
without the approval of the State Department of Transportation.
   (B)   The resolution shall identify the street or portion thereof to be
affected and shall indicate the date and time when the street or portion
thereof is to be closed or traffic thereon is to be limited in some way. The
resolution shall also direct the manager to have appropriate traffic-control
devices installed to give notice of the temporary traffic controls.
   (C)   No person may operate any vehicle contrary to the traffic-control
devices installed in accordance with division (B) above.
   (D)   The Town Clerk shall, by any adequate means, notify persons occupying
property abutting the street where the event is to take place of the contents
of any resolution passed in accordance with this section.
(Ord. passed 12-10-2025)
§ 94.09 SPONSOR RESPONSIBLE FOR CLEANUP.
   The sponsor of a special event shall be responsible for cleaning up any
litter caused by the event, removing all temporary obstructions and in general
returning the area where the event takes place to the condition that existed
prior to the event. The Town Clerk may require the sponsor to post a bond or
other sufficient security to guarantee compliance with this section.
(Ord. passed 12-10-2025)
CHAPTER 95: RESERVED
CHAPTER 96: STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND
OTHER PUBLIC WAYS; ENCROACHMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
96.001   Definitions
   
96.002   Obstructions prohibited
   
96.003   Overhanging or protruding trees, shrubs, fences, canopies, awnings,
signs and the like
   
96.004   Drainage-related interference with sidewalks and streets
   
96.005   Warnings required for obstructions
   
96.006   Depositing injurious materials on public ways
   
96.007   Required sight distances at intersections
   
96.008   Driveways
   
96.009   Town indemnified
   
96.010   Notice and abatement of nuisances
Authorization of Encroachments in the Public Way
   
96.025   Purpose and intent
   
96.026   Written authorization to encroach is required
   
96.027   Application for authorization to encroach
   
96.028   Procedure for consideration of and action on applications
   
96.029   Factors for review of applications
   
96.030   Indemnity, insurance and bonding requirements
   
96.031   Responsibilities of persons granted authorization to encroach
   
96.032   Authority to encroach is nonexclusive
   
96.033   Remedies
   
96.034   Rights of appeal
   
96.035   General conditions for use of public way
   
96.036   Exemptions
   
96.037   Collocation of small wireless facilities
Acceptance of Streets  for Maintenance by Town;
Request for Street or Right-of-Way Closure
   
96.045   Application for acceptance of infrastructure
   
96.046   Final acceptance; naming of new streets
   
96.047   Prerequisites to acceptance
   
96.048   Street closings and right-of-way vacations
 
   
96.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.001 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
the meaning given below unless the context clearly indicates or requires
otherwise.
   (B)   The terms abandoned, application, city (town) utility pole,
collocation, make-ready work, micro wireless, small wireless facility, utility
pole, wireless facility, wireless infrastructure provider, wireless provider,
wireless services, and wireless services provider have the meanings provided at
G.S. §§ 160A-400.51 et seq. or in the Federal Communications Commission Order
FCC 18-133, whichever is more inclusive or exacting.
      ADMINISTRATOR. The person or persons selected by the Town Manager or Town
Council to carry out the provisions of this chapter and the designee(s) of that
person or persons. If context requires, the Town Council may be deemed the
Administrator when it is considering whether to authorize a particular
encroachment.
      AUTHORIZATION. Permission from the Administrator to do work in the public
way or to maintain facilities in the public way and includes but is not limited
to a franchise, an easement, an encroachment agreement, a permit, or other
written approval. Multiple authorizations may be required for certain
activities.
      CAUSE TO BE OBSTRUCTED. An action(s) or omission(s) which, whether or not
intended to obstruct the ordinary use of a public way, nevertheless interferes
with a person's ordinary use of a public way to a degree that passage is
prevented or delayed for an unreasonable period of time.
      CONTRACTOR. Means and includes any of the following, licensed or
unlicensed, performing work on an owner's behalf: contractor; subcontractor; or
any employee or agent of a contractor, subcontractor, or owner.
      EMERGENCY. A condition that poses a clear and immediate danger to life or
health, or a significant loss of property, or requires immediate repair to
restore service to a group of users of such service.
      ENCROACH or ENCROACHMENT. Any excavation in the public way, or the
placing therein, thereover or below any pipes, poles, wires, fixtures or other
appliances or equipment of any kind, either on, above, or below the ground
surface. It also includes such digging and placing of pipes, poles, wires,
fixtures or other appliances or equipment of any kind on, above or below the
ground surface in areas in which the town has a utility or access easement,
unless such activity is permitted by the applicable easement.
      EXCAVATE or EXCAVATION. Without limitation any cutting, digging, grading,
tunneling, boring, or other alteration of the surface or subsurface material or
earth in the public way.
      FACILITIES. Poles, pipes, culverts, conduits, ducts, cables, wires,
fiber, amplifiers, pedestals, antennae, transmission or receiving equipment,
other electronic equipment, electrical conductors, manholes, appliances, signs,
poles, pavement structures, irrigation systems, landscaping, signs, mailboxes
and any other similar equipment, for public or private use.
      INTENTIONALLY OBSTRUCT. To act or fail to act with the purpose and effect
that passage is prevented or delayed.
      MINOR ENCROACHMENT. An encroachment as to which all of the following
requirements are met:
         (a)   The property owner owns the underlying fee;
         (b)   There is no disruption, even temporarily, of pedestrian,
vehicular, or other public use;
         (c)   There is no damage to a paved or concrete surface of a public
way; and
         (d)   There is no impact to the town's ability to construct, maintain
or operate a public way or public facilities located in the public way.
      OWNER. Any property owner, company owner, and/or any entity by which work
within the right-of-way has been ordered, or any entity on behalf of which any
work within the right-of-way is caused to be performed, or any agent thereof.
      PERSON. An individual, association, firm, partnership, limited liability
company, joint venture, corporation, government, utility, or other entity able
to engage in the activities described in this ordinance, whether for profit or
not for profit. The term does not include the town or the town's officials,
employees, representatives or agents acting pursuant to their official duties
on behalf of the town.
      PUBLIC SIDEWALK. Any area open to public use as a pedestrian public way,
whether paved or otherwise designated or recognized for use of pedestrian
traffic and which is owned or maintained by the town.
      PUBLIC WAY. Any area that is owned or maintained by the town and used or
reserved for use as a public street, highway, right-of-way, alley, trail,
greenway or other multi-modal path, sidewalk, curb, gutter, bike lane, bridge,
round-about, tunnel, causeway, or shoulder. Such areas include, without
limitation, drainage areas and dedicated areas without surface improvements
that are adjacent to improved areas, and areas where no roads or other
improvements have been constructed but which are dedicated for one or more of
the above uses. The public way encompasses the surface of the ground, and the
area above and below the ground.
      REPEAT VIOLATOR. A person who:
         (a)   Violates this chapter two or more times in any 12 month period;
or
         (b)   Violates this chapter two or more times in a period greater than
12 months but in such circumstances that an intentional violation can be
inferred.
      RESPONSIBLE PERSON. A person who has intentionally or negligently caused
or authorized the action which violates the prohibitions of this chapter and
the owner of the property from or upon which a violation extends, derives or
originates.
      UNREASONABLE PERIOD OF TIME. The time that a reasonable person prevented
or delayed in his or her attempt to use a sidewalk for pedestrian use would
consider as unreasonable.
      USER. A person that proposes to place facilities in the public way,
places such facilities, or owns or maintains such facilities. The term includes
but is not limited to encroachment permittees and franchisees.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019 ; Ord. passed 12-10-2025 )
§ 96.002 OBSTRUCTIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Except as otherwise authorized by statute, ordinance (including this
chapter), and/or in writing by the Administrator, or as required by the
performance of some function authorized or mandated by a statute or ordinance,
no person(s) may congregate, stand, sit or lie on a public way in a manner that
would intentionally obstruct or cause to be obstructed pedestrian traffic or
prevent the free ingress and egress by members of the public to and from
private or public buildings, memorials, parks or parking lots adjacent to or
accessed by public way within the town. Except as authorized by this chapter,
no person may intentionally obstruct or otherwise encroach upon a public way
within the town by placing or leaving any object(s) within the traveled portion
of the public way or as a result of any excavation or other construction or by
placement of barriers. A situation maintained in violation of this section is
hereby declared to be a public nuisance and is subject to the provisions of §
96.010 herein.
   (B)   Limited exception for temporary sidewalk sales. Partial obstruction of
a public sidewalk for a sidewalk sale is permissible only under the following
conditions:
      (1)   The obstruction takes place only during daylight hours.
      (2)   The sidewalk is only partially obstructed in a manner that does not
seriously inconvenience the public or threaten the public safety; in any event,
a minimum four-foot width of sidewalk must be left clear and unimpeded for
pedestrians. For purposes of this section, an obstruction shall be understood
to include any employee(s) who occupy the sidewalk in connection with the sale.
      (3)   The person or entity conducting the sidewalk sale is authorized to
do so by the fee owner(s) of the property on which the sale is being held.
   Temporary sidewalk sales may be prohibited on specific days by proclamation
issued by the Mayor according to law or by resolution adopted by the Town
Council.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019; Ord. passed 6-15-2021; Ord. passed 12-10-2025)
§ 96.003 OVERHANGING OR PROTRUDING TREES, SHRUBS, FENCES, CANOPIES, AWNINGS,
SIGNS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   No person may cause or allow any tree limb, bush, shrub or other
growth or similar obstruction to overhang a public street at a distance of less
than 12 feet above the traveled portion of the street or to overhang any other
public way at a distance of less than eight feet above the traveled surface.
   (B)    Except as authorized in writing under this chapter and permitted by
the Unified Development Ordinance and all other pertinent laws, regulations and
ordinances, no person may cause, authorize or allow any canopy, awning, sign or
similar obstruction to overhang a public way.
   (C)   No person may cause or allow grass, vines, weeds or other vegetation
to grow from property under his or her control over, onto or across any public
way.
   (D)   No person may leave any animal unattended on any public way or on any
town property.
   (E)   A situation maintained in violation of this section is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance and is subject to the provisions of §
96.010 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019)
§ 96.004 DRAINAGE-RELATED INTERFERENCE WITH PUBLIC WAYS.
   (A)   No person may cause or permit gutters, ditches, ducts or drainpipes to
be constructed, maintained, or placed on property under his or her control in a
manner that the water from the gutters, ditches, ducts or drain pipes empties
onto or runs across a public way.
   (B)   All owners of property abutting public ways shall prevent the washing
of dirt, grass, gravel or other material upon the public ways.
   (C)   A situation maintained in violation of this section is hereby declared
to be a public nuisance and is subject to the provisions of §
96.010 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019)
§ 96.005 WARNINGS REQUIRED FOR OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   All persons engaged in doing work that creates any dangerous condition
or obstruction in the public right-of-way of any street or sidewalk shall take
whatever action is necessary, including the placement of barricades and warning
signs or devices, to warn the traveling public of the condition or obstruction.
   (B)   No person may remove, destroy, injure or tamper with any barricade,
sign, lantern, torch or other device placed in any street or sidewalk to warn
or give notice to the traveling public of any dangerous condition or
obstruction.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019)
§ 96.006 DEPOSITING INJURIOUS MATERIALS ON PUBLIC WAYS.
   (A)   No person may throw or deposit upon any public way any glass bottle,
nails, tacks, wire, or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal,
vehicle or the public way itself.
   (B)   Any person who deliberately or inadvertently causes or allows any of
the materials specified in division (A) above to be deposited on any public way
shall immediately remove the materials or cause them to be removed. A situation
maintained in violation of this section is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and is subject to the provisions of §
96.010 herein
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019)
§ 96.007 REQUIRED SIGHT DISTANCES AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Clear sight triangle to be maintained. A sight triangle ten feet by 70
feet for the turn in each direction shall be maintained at all intersections of
driveways/streets with adjacent streets (see diagram below). No plantings,
fence, building, wall or other structure or objects shall be placed or
maintained in the sight triangle if such thereby materially obstructs vision
between two-and-half feet high and ten feet high above the upper face of the
nearest curb, or of the street centerline if no curb exists).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/eb57600603e5042657a5a4346921bf70a4c141dd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2023.png]
 
   (B)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Division (A) may not apply to all objects located within sight
distance areas insofar as some objects may not significantly obstruct the
required visibility of the driver. The driver may be able to see over, under or
around some objects within sight distance areas. Objects that may be required
within sight distance areas include fire hydrants, utility poles and traffic
control devices which are located to minimize visual obstruction. Other objects
12 inches in diameter and smaller, such as sign-posts, may be allowed within
sight distance areas if located individually or in combination so as to not
substantially restrict the driver's view.
      (2)   Trees located in sight distance areas may be removed only if they
constitute a clear hazard and there is no reasonable alternative to removal.
      (3)   It is recognized that in some cases conditions may exist that
prevent the reasonably practical attainment of desirable sight distance due to
social, economic, topographical or environmental considerations or because of
conditions pre-existing this amendment (adopted on September 17, 2019). In such
cases, the maximum practical sight distance shall be obtained.
   (C)   Removal of obstruction. The Administrator shall remove sight distance
obstructions located within the right-of-way of town-maintained streets. The
Administrator will notify the state department of transportation of sight
distance obstructions located within the right-of-way of state-maintained
roadways. The Administrator shall provide written notification to the property
owner(s) on which a sight distance obstruction exists on private property. The
property owner shall be responsible for the prompt removal of the obstruction
on their property and shall be solely liable for any and all consequences
resulting from their negligence and/or failure to remove the obstruction. A
sight-distance obstruction maintained in violation of this subsection is
declared to be a public nuisance and is subject to the provisions of §
96.010 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019)
§ 96.008 DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   No person may open, construct, alter or relocate any driveway across
or into any town-owned property or public way without having obtained a written
permit from the Administrator and complied with all requirements of the Town's
Unified Development Ordinance, the Town Code, and all current specifications
and other requirements of the town's Department of Public Works.
   (B)   Any person who receives a permit under this section shall be
responsible for repairing any damage to any public way caused by the driveway
construction.
   (C)   The Administrator shall review the driveway construction and design
plans and shall issue the permit unless the Administrator finds the driveway,
if constructed as proposed, will pose a danger to persons using a public way,
substantially interfere with or risk harm to public facilities (including
utility poles, traffic signal standards, water, sewer, or stormwater drainage
facilities, and the like), or fail to comply with any of the provisions of the
Town Code or the Uniform Development Ordinance, or any specifications and other
requirements of the Department of Public Works.
   (D)   No driveway may be constructed closer than three feet to a fire
hydrant or catch basin or closer than 30 feet to the right-of-way line of a
street that intersects with the street the driveway opens onto.
   (E)   If the driveway crosses a drainage ditch on a lot that abuts a street
without curb or gutter, then piping of sufficient size and strength (as
approved by the Administrator) shall be installed beneath the driveway surface
so the drainage capability of the drainage ditch is not impaired.
   (F)   This section shall not apply to driveways that open into state-
maintained streets to the extent that the state has approved the driveway.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019)
§ 96.009 TOWN INDEMNIFIED.
   Any person obtaining authorization under this chapter to encroach upon or
otherwise make use of the public right of way or other public property agrees
to all of the following as a condition of the authorization:
   (A)   To indemnify the town for and hold the town harmless from any expense
(including, but not limited to, attorneys' fees, litigation costs and
judgments) incurred as a result of claims made for damages arising out of
operations conducted by that person pursuant to that authorization;
   (B)   When required, to executes an indemnification agreement that at a
minimum provides that, to the extent permitted by law, the person shall be
responsible for all liability associated with the encroachment and agrees to
indemnify and hold harmless the town from and against any claim by any third
party based upon any action or omission occurring during construction and
maintenance of the encroachment or encroaching facility, as well as from and
against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action or other assertion
of responsibility, however denominated, for personal injury, damage to
property, losses and expenses, including court costs and attorney's fees,
arising out of or in any way related to the encroachment or encroaching
facility;
   (C)   Where pertinent, to name the town as an additional insured on its and/
or its contractors' general liability insurance policies applicable to the
encroachment or encroaching facility; and
   (D)   To waive all claims of liability or responsibility against the town
for any damage that may be caused to the encroachment or encroaching facility
as the result of the town carrying out any construction or maintenance
operation; and
   (E)   To be bound by such other and additional terms and conditions as the
town may impose, which shall be set forth in the relevant permit, encroachment
agreement, or franchise agreement.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019)
§ 96.010 NOTICE AND ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   Any circumstance or situation declared to be a public nuisance under the
provisions of this chapter shall be subject to summary abatement by the town
and/or notice and order to abate to the responsible person(s) pursuant to the
provisions of §§
80.07 through
80.14 and §
80.99 of this code, just as if the nuisance constituted a violation of
Chapter 80; and the provisions of §§
80.07 through
80.14 and §
80.99 are incorporated herein as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019; Ord. passed 4-13-2021; Ord. passed 12-10-2025)
AUTHORIZATION OF ENCROACHMENTS IN THE PUBLIC WAY
§ 96.025 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purposes for and intentions behind this division are as follows:
   (A)   The public ways are valuable public resources that have required, and
will continue to require, substantial investment by the town; and
   (B)   The town desires to structure and implement a fair and orderly process
for the application for, and granting of, authorization for private parties to
occupy and use public ways, consistent with applicable law, and which
appropriately accounts for the varied reasons that private parties seek such
authorization.
   (C)   The town desires to minimize inconvenience and disruption to the
public, provide for the orderly and efficient use of the public ways now and in
the future, and preserve adequate capacity for existing and future uses of the
public ways.
   (D)   The town intends to exercise, to the fullest extent permitted by
applicable law, its authority in regulating the occupation and use of public
ways.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019 ; Ord. passed 12-10-2025 )
§ 96.026 WRITTEN AUTHORIZATION TO ENCROACH REQUIRED EXCEPT FOR MINOR
ENCROACHMENTS.
   (A)   Except for minor encroachments, which do not require written
authorization, , or in the case of emergency, it shall be a violation of this
chapter for any person to encroach upon any public way or town property without
first receiving written authorization (i.e., an encroachment permit or work
permit) to do so from the Administrator pursuant to this chapter. Without
limitation, this requirement applies to town streets and other town property
and to any sidewalk and greenway maintained by the town.
   (B)   Exceptions. It shall not be a violation for a person to encroach upon
a public way or town property without first receiving written authorization to
do so from the Administrator in the following cases:
      (1)   In the case of minor encroachments as defined at § 96.001.
      (2)   In cases of encroachment upon a public way where the encroachment
is necessary as the result of excavation or other construction and the
encroachment is a singular encroachment that will last no longer than 24 hours
or will happen for no more than four hours a day for three days.
      (3)   In the case of emergency. In the event of an emergency, a person
may do such work as is necessary to address the emergency. Application shall
immediately be made for necessary authorizations from the town, notwithstanding
that work may have started or have been completed and all necessary fees shall
be paid.
      (4)   In the case of franchise operators. Persons that operate utilities
that the town may franchise under the authority of G.S. 160A-319 shall apply
for a franchise to be approved by the Town Council in accordance with the Town
Charter. Authorization to encroach upon a public way may be granted through the
terms of an appropriate franchise agreement.
      (5)   In any case where state law prohibits application of these
regulations.
   (C)   In situations not governed by a franchise agreement, authorization to
encroach shall be granted in appropriate cases through the terms of a non-
exclusive, revocable encroachment permit or encroachment agreement, signed by
the applicant and the Administrator, using whatever form the town devises and
is approved by the Town Attorney for that purpose.
   (D)   The Administrator shall develop standards and requirements for
authorizations, including but not limited to franchises, licenses, permits, and
other approvals, and may attach conditions to such authorizations. The
Administrator may also develop standards and requirements for doing work in the
public way when an authorization is not required.
   (E)   The Administrator shall charge such fees as are authorized by the Town
Council for applications for authorizations; review of information and plans;
issuance of authorizations; inspections and re-inspections; maintenance of
facilities in the public way; and for any other town review, oversight, or
administration of proposed, ongoing, or completed activities within the purview
of this chapter. The Administrator may allow persons to establish and fund
escrow accounts or other accounts with the town to which fees may be charged.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019 ; Ord. passed 12-10-2025 )
§ 96.027 APPLICATION FOR AUTHORIZATION TO ENCROACH..
   (A)   Application for authorization to encroach upon a public way shall be
submitted to the Administrator on whatever form is devised for that purpose. An
application must be submitted in conjunction with an application of a building
permit or zoning permit, if such is required under the town’s Unified
Development Ordinance, or if no such permit is required, at least ten calendar
days prior to the commencement of any proposed encroachment work.
   (B)   The applicant shall provide the following information concerning the
proposed encroachment:
      (1)   Identification of the public way at issue;
      (2)   A description of the nature of and purposes for the proposed
encroachment;
      (3)   A proposed construction schedule, duration, and sequence;
      (4)   A description of any insurance the person has, or would obtain if
granted authorization to encroach on the relevant public street or street
rights-of-way, that will cover the proposed activities in the public street or
street rights-of-way;
      (5)   The name, address and telephone number of the person the town may
contact concerning the application; and
      (6)   Such other information as the Administrator may determine to be
necessary or appropriate to evaluate the application or otherwise in
furtherance of the public interest.
   (C)   Installation of items in a public way. With respect to encroachment in
a public way for purposes of installing one or more items in the public way,
the applicant shall also provide the following:
      (1)   A description of the items the person desires to install in the
public way and the purposes those items would serve. No authorization shall be
granted for new equipment or facilities that are not expressly and individually
identified at the time of the application, including the specific location and
design characteristics of each facility.
      (2)   A description of how items shall be installed, including whether
any excavation in the public way will be required.
      (3)   Whether installation of the relevant items will disrupt traffic
flow or otherwise interfere with the use of any public way, and if so, what
precautions the applicant intends to take to minimize that disruption and to
protect human safety.
      (4)   A site plan with sufficient detail to show the proposed locations
of the items the applicant seeks to install in the public way, including any
manholes or overhead poles, the size, type and proposed depth of any conduit or
other enclosures, and the proximity of the applicant’s items, if installed, to
all existing poles, utilities, sidewalks, pavement, telecommunications or cable
systems, and other improvements existing in the relevant public ways.
   (D)   Excavation/construction. With respect to encroachment in a public way
for purposes of excavation or other construction, the applicant shall also
provide the following:
      (1)   A plan clearly and precisely describing any periods of time during
which the public way would be closed to use by the public. This plan must
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Administrator that the applicant has
taken all reasonable measures to minimize closure of the public way. Other than
temporary, unavoidable periods of closure to ensure public safety, public ways
must be left open and accessible to the public at all times.
      (2)   In the event of construction in close proximity to a sidewalk that
will result in more than temporary periods of sidewalk closure, the applicant
must provide an essentially functionally equivalent alternative for
pedestrians. This alternative may consist, for example, of an overhead covered
passageway so as to leave the sidewalk unobstructed and provide safe and
accessible passage, or an alternative, temporary sidewalk onsite where the site
allows of such. Directing pedestrians to walk in a roadway or to a sidewalk
across a street shall not be deemed a functionally equivalent alternative.
      (3)   Any person who receives a permit in accordance with this section
shall be responsible as soon as weather permits for restoring the street or
sidewalk where any excavation is made back into as good a condition as it was
prior to the excavation.
      (4)   Any permit issued in accordance with this section shall clearly
state the terms and conditions for any approved temporary closures of a public
way and/or any approved alternatives to be provided to pedestrians or other
users of a public way.
      (5)   With respect to any periods of time that the applicant is
practically unable to provide a functionally equivalent passageway, the
applicant shall pay a daily fee to the town as follows:
         (a)   For the first seven days of closure, $100 per day.
         (b)   For days eight to 30 of closure, $200 per day.
         (c)   For more than 30 days of closure, $500 per day.
   (E)   Business and other commercial applicants shall submit the following
additional information:
      (1)   A general description of the applicant's business; and
      (2)   A description of the services, if any, the applicant proposes to
provide to others through the infrastructure proposed to be installed in the
public way, identifying also the geographic scope in which such services would
be provided, and to whom they would be provided.
   (F)   Any person who must also receive a franchise from the town for their
intended business or activity may provide the information set forth above in
their franchise application.
   (G)   The Administrator may reject any application to encroach upon a public
way that is incomplete, fails to adequately protect the public health or
safety, or otherwise fails to comply with the terms of this chapter or other
applicable law.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019; Ord. passed 12-10-2025)
§ 96.028 PROCEDURE FOR CONSIDERATION OF AND ACTION ON APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   The authority to grant a private party authorization to encroach upon
a public way shall be exercised by the Administrator. In the Administrator's
discretion, however, any application for authorization to encroach may be
submitted to the Town Council for review and decision, with or without a
recommendation from the Administrator. In such cases, the grant of authority,
if given, will be made by adoption of a resolution by the Town Council. In any
case, the grant of such authority shall be conditioned upon such terms as shall
be specified in the relevant encroachment or franchise agreement.
   (B)   The Administrator may make such investigations and take or authorize
the taking of such other steps as the Administrator deems necessary or
appropriate to consider and act upon applications to encroach upon a public
way.
   (C)   The Town Council may set a public hearing to give the public an
opportunity to comment on an application to encroach upon a public way.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019 ; Ord. passed 12-10-2025 )
§ 96.029 FACTORS FOR REVIEW OF APPLICATION TO ENCROACH.
   (A)   In deciding whether to grant any application for authorization to
encroach upon any public way, the Administrator may consider such factors as it
deems appropriate and in the public interest, provided such factors are
consistent with applicable law, including without limitation:
      (1)   The willingness and ability of the applicant to meet construction
and physical requirements and to abide by all lawful conditions, limitations,
requirements and policies with respect to the encroachment;
      (2)   The ability of the applicant to maintain the property of the town
in good condition throughout the term of the relevant franchise or encroachment
agreement;
      (3)   Any services or uses of the public ways that may be precluded by
the grant of the requested authorization to encroach, and the adverse impact of
the proposed encroachment on the efficient use of the public streets and street
rights-of-way at present and in the future;
      (4)   The adequacy of the terms and conditions of the proposed
encroachment or franchise agreement to protect the public interest, consistent
with applicable law; and
      (5)   Any other factors or considerations that are deemed pertinent.
   (B)   Consistent with applicable law, the Administrator may develop and
implement policies and requirements to ensure that the public ways have
sufficient capacity reasonably to accommodate existing and future uses in a
rational and efficient manner. In evaluating an applicant for the right to
encroach upon a public way, the Administrator may consider an applicant's
proposals for addressing capacity needs and compliance with town policies and
requirements in that regard.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019 ; Ord. passed 12-10-2025 )
§ 96.030 INSURANCE AND BONDING REQUIREMENTS, OTHER CONDITIONS.
   Depending upon the extent of an applicant's proposed excavation,
construction or other activities in any public way, the Administrator may
require the applicant to secure and provide documentation of an appropriate
performance bond or letter of credit, and/or insurance covering such activities
pursuant to terms acceptable to the Administrator.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019 ; Ord. passed 12-10-2025 )
§ 96.031 RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERSONS GRANTED AUTHORIZATION TO ENCROACH.
   It shall be the responsibility of each person granted authorization to
encroach upon a public way to:
   (A)   Ensure that any excavation, construction or other work done by them or
on their behalf in the relevant public way is performed consistent with the
town's specifications and other requirements for construction activities,
including those relating to restoration.
   (B)   Restore land, utility lines, other improvements, ground cover, and
landscaping disturbed by excavation and construction in the public way to the
standards specified by the town.
      (1)   Where permanent restoration is temporarily impractical because of
weather or other circumstances, temporary restoration may be required.
      (2)   Restoration shall be accomplished within the time approved by the
Administrator.
      (3)   If restoration work proves to be inadequate over time, as
determined in the sole, reasonable discretion of the Administrator, the
encroacher shall perform such additional restoration work as the Administrator
may direct.
      (4)   Inspection and approval by the Administrator immediately after
installation does not constitute a waiver of the town's rights to determine
that the restoration work is not adequate over time and must be remedied.
   (C)   If requested due to a need for the town or its contractors to complete
any work in a public way, temporarily or permanently remove or relocate their
items located below or above the public way.
   (D)   Otherwise comply with the terms of their encroachment permit or
agreement or the encroachment provisions in their franchise agreement, and all
applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and other
directives of the town and any federal, state or local governmental authority
having jurisdiction over the person's activities in or near such public way.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019 ; Ord. passed 12-10-2025 )
§ 96.032 AUTHORITY TO ENCROACH IS NONEXCLUSIVE.
   Any grant of authorization to encroach upon a public way given by the
Administrator pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive. The town
specifically reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional rights
of access to the public way that it deems appropriate.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019; Ord. passed 12-10-2025)
§ 96.033 REMEDIES.
   (A)   In the event that any person encroaches upon a public way without
prior authorization by the Administrator, or violates the conditions of any
permit or other authorization issued pursuant to this chapter, or otherwise
violates any provision of this chapter, the Administrator may, in addition to
any other remedies provided by any other applicable law:
      (1)   Issue an order to the person commanding them to immediately cease
and desist their unpermitted or otherwise wrongful activities in the public
way, and to restore the affected area;
      (2)   Revoke any authorization previously granted for the encroachment;
      (3)   Issue a one-time civil penalty of $500 to each responsible person
or $1,000 to each repeat violator; or
      (4)   Any combination of the above-referenced remedies and any other
remedy authorized under G.S. 160A-175.
   (B)   Civil penalties authorized by this section shall be assessed against
each responsible person, including the owner on whose behalf work is being
performed and the contractor who is performing such work. In situations where
evidence is submitted to the Administrator's satisfaction that the work
performed constitutes emergency work, however, the Administrator may waive the
civil penalties. In such emergency situations, the entity performing the
emergency work must apply for the required permit as soon as reasonably
possible and pay the applicable permit fee.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019 ; Ord. passed 12-10-2025 )
§ 96.034 RIGHTS OF APPEAL.
   (A)   In cases where the Administrator denies a person's application to
encroach upon a public way, or is willing to grant that request but subject to
conditions or terms the applicant deems to be unsatisfactory, resulting in an
inability to finalize the requisite written authorization, the applicant may
seek review of the Administrator's decision before the Town Council. The
applicant must request a hearing before the Town Council in writing to the
Administrator within ten days of the applicant's notice of the decision at
issue. In such submission, the applicant must identify the issues or
disagreements the applicant has with the relevant decision. In such cases, the
Town Council shall make the final decision, through adoption of an appropriate
resolution.
   (B)   Any person subject to an enforcement action pursuant to §
96.033 above may appeal the enforcement action per §
10.98 of the Town Code.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019 ; Ord. passed 12-10-2025 )
§ 96.035 GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR USE OF THE PUBLIC WAY.
   The right to perform work or maintain facilities in the public way is
allowed subject to the conditions below, as supplemented by those set forth in
other sections of this chapter, standards adopted by the Administrator, and
requirements contained in an encroachment agreement or other written
authorization.
   (A)   The town does not warrant its legal interest in the public way.
Persons doing work in the public way and users may need to obtain approvals
from persons with property interests in the public way.
   (B)   An authorization does not convey any legal right, title, or interest
in the public way, and may be revoked or amended at will by the town.
   (C)   The town and its officials, officers, and employees are not liable for
any direct, indirect, or consequential damages that may result to private
facilities located in a public way as a result of the town's construction,
installation, inspection, maintenance, or repair of the public way or of public
improvements in the public way.
   (D)   Persons responsible for work in the public way or for items located in
the public way shall pay for all damage that results, directly or indirectly,
from such work or items.
   (E)   Non-enforcement of one or more provisions of an authorization does not
waive the town's right to enforce the provisions of the authorization.
   (F)   An authorization creates no third-party rights against the town.
   (G)   An authorization does not limit the town's exercise of its regulatory,
police, governmental, legislative, or contracting authority, including its
authority to enact and enforce against an authorized encroacher more strict
requirements then were previously applicable to the authorized encroachment. If
the terms of an authorization conflict with the terms of another authorization
or with an ordinance or other regulation adopted by the town, the stricter of
the applicable provisions shall control. The stricter provision shall not
control, however, if a later-issued permit, authorization, or ordinance
explicitly and specifically states that particular terms are to override prior,
less strict terms in an authorization.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019; Ord. passed 12-10-2025)
§ 96.036 EXEMPTIONS.
   The Administrator may exempt the town's contractors or the North Carolina
Department of Transportation (NCDOT) from particular requirements of this
chapter when substantial compliance has been assured or, in the case of NC DOT,
where the need for state infrastructure on town roads, or a joint undertaking
by the town and NC DOT, or the use of state-controlled areas of the public way
makes the application of such requirements unreasonable.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019 ; Ord. passed 12-10-2025 )
§ 96.037 COLLOCATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES IN PUBLIC WAYS.
   (A)   Collocation of small wireless facilities meeting the height
requirements of G.S. 160A-400.55(b) are subject to all requirements of the
town's Uniform Development Ordinance. In addition, small wireless collocations
require written authorization in a form approved by the town and are subject to
all the foregoing provisions of this chapter except where clarified or altered
by the terms of this section. For other small wireless facilities, see division
(B) below.
      (1)   General.
         (a)   Wireless providers may occupy and use the public way to
collocate small wireless facilities to provide wireless services upon, along,
over and under the public way in the town such that such collocations do not
inhibit other utility installations within the public way.
         (b)   The town retains its right to impose fees and charges to the
extent not prohibited by federal and state law.
         (c)   Wireless services providers shall pay taxes for
telecommunications services that are subject to taxation.
         (d)   Small wireless providers shall obtain approvals legally
necessary to use the public way from owners, other than the town, of property
interests in the public way or adjacent to the roadway system located within
the town.
         (e)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed or construed to stop or
limit the town from exercising any regulatory, police, governmental, or
legislative function pursuant to applicable law, which powers include, but are
not limited to, the authority to enact regulations, ordinances, rules, and
orders not prohibited by state or federal law that affect the public way or a
wireless provider's use of the public way.
         (f)   The terms of this section do not permit the wireless services
provider to operate a cable system or to provide cable service, as those terms
are defined by Section 602 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as
amended (47 U.S.C. Section 522), and the wireless services provider agrees that
it will not operate a cable system or provide cable service in the town unless
it obtains authorization from the town.
         (g)   This section only permits the wireless provider, upon obtaining
required approvals and permits, to place small wireless facilities in those
portions of the public way specifically approved by the Administrator.
         (h)   Collocation of small wireless facilities shall commence within
six months of permit issuance and shall be activated for use no later than one
year from the permit issuance date. Failure to commence collocation within six
months of permit issuance shall void said permit. A small wireless facility not
activated within one year of permit issuance shall be considered abandoned and
shall be removed from the public way at the wireless provider's sole expense.
         (i)   No more than 25 small wireless facilities may be included in a
single permit application.
         (j)   For general public safety and design purposes, documentation of
compliance with the structural, operational, and insurance requirements for
wireless communication facilities as found in the Unified Development Ordinance
shall be required for all small wireless facility installations, unless
superseded by this section.
         (k)   Historic preservation requirements of the Unified Development
Ordinance shall apply to all permit applications, as applicable.
      (2)   Requirements for new poles.
         (a)   If possible, poles shall be designed to accommodate small
wireless facilities for multiple wireless services providers.
         (b)   Poles shall be located a minimum of 15 feet from any tree,
measured to the tree-trunk center. Additionally, 80% of the root protection
zone shall remain undisturbed. The root protection zone shall either be a six-
foot radius around the tree or a one-foot radius for every inch of tree
diameter at breast height, whichever is greater. This minimum separation shall
not apply for a new pole that replaces an existing pole, where the new pole is
installed in the same place as, or immediate vicinity of, the existing pole.
         (c)   Poles shall be designed and installed with materials and
appearance consistent with existing poles in the adjacent public way, unless
materials and appearance are prescribed by other ordinance, law, or town
requirements.
         (d)   To the extent practicable, all accessory cables and equipment
shall be installed within the pole and/or placed underground per Town Code and
Unified Development Ordinance undergrounding requirements. If any equipment
cannot be installed underground, then it shall be installed on or at the base
of the pole and concealed with skirting compatible with, and integrated into,
the design of the pole.
      (3)   Pedestrian and vehicular movement requirements.
         (a)   No small wireless facility, structure, or associated equipment
shall impede or interfere with pedestrian or vehicular movement, circulation,
or visibility. Specifically, no small wireless facility, structure, or
associated equipment shall:
            1.   Extend into an existing or proposed sidewalk or walkway,
trail, bicycle parking area unless such extension provides at least eight feet
vertical clearance;
            2.   Extend into an existing or proposed driveway, or vehicular
parking area unless such extension provides at least 15 feet vertical
clearance.
            3.   Extend into any motor vehicle travel lane.
         (b)   No new installation shall be installed within sight distance
triangles pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and the Unified
Development Ordinance.
         (c)   Installations that replace existing poles or collocate onto
existing facilities already located within sight distance triangles shall not
locate or install equipment that diminishes visibility relative to existing
conditions. This requirement can be waived pursuant to Unified Development
Ordinance standards for alternative dimensions.
      (4)    Information required. Prior to applying for authorization to
install any portion of its small wireless facilities, a wireless provider shall
provide the following information to the Administrator in addition to what is
normally required for approval of an encroachment:
         (a)   The identity and corporate form of the wireless provider and
affiliates who will perform work in the town's public way;
         (b)   The name and contact information for the officer, agent, or
employee of the wireless provider responsible for communications with the town;
         (c)   A statement as to whether the services provided are
telecommunications services taxed under G.S. 105-164.4(a)(4c) or are video
programming taxed under G.S. 105-164.4(a)(6); and
         (d)   Attestation that small wireless facilities will be collocated on
the utility pole, town utility pole, or wireless support structure, and that
the small wireless facilities shall be activated for use by a wireless provider
to provide service no later than one year from the permit issuance date.
      (5)   Relocation of facilities.
         (a)   Wireless providers shall, at no cost to the town, relocate or
remove portions of its small wireless facilities located in the public way in
the event the public way is closed, or if the Administrator, in the
Administrator's sole discretion, determines that the location of a small
wireless facility interferes with the efficient provision of utility services
to town residents, or interferes with public safety and welfare, or conflicts
with any highway, sidewalk, trail, or utility project, or that the public way
can be better or more efficiently utilized by the removal and relocation or
consolidation of certain existing facilities. The Administrator shall provide
the wireless provider 180 days' written notice prior to the required relocation
or removal of small wireless facilities.
         (b)   Except in the case of emergency repairs, before the wireless
provider constructs, installs, upgrades, repairs or removes small wireless
facilities along a portion of the public way, wireless providers shall provide
notice to the Administrator per §
96.028.
      (6)   Construction, inspection, restoration, and removal.
         (a)   At the Administrator's request, as built maps in such further
detail as the Administrator may require shall be provided no more than 60 days
following the conclusion of construction.
         (b)   Wireless providers will advise the Administrator of any
significant discrepancy between construction plans and actual construction.
         (c)   Wireless providers shall advise the Administrator if, during
construction of small wireless facilities, such construction is within six feet
of any water or sewer facilities.
         (d)   Engineering, construction and as-built documents shall be
provided in hard copy (paper) and/or electronic copy as requested by the
Administrator.
         (e)   In addition to design maps and as-built maps, wireless providers
shall provide such other information regarding existing facilities in the
public way, in such detail, as the Administrator may require.
         (f)   The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable federal,
state and local regulations, such as the National Electrical Code, National
Electrical Safety Code, fiber optic cable installation specifications, 1987
telecommunication industry committee standards, traffic safety/lane closure
rules and construction requirements promulgated by the town and the North
Carolina Department of Transportation as amended.
         (g)   The Administrator may inspect the small wireless facilities and
restoration work performed by the wireless provider.
         (h)   The wireless provider shall notify the Administrator when it has
completed each permitted portion of its small wireless facilities; or at such
other time the Administrator requests. Following inspection, the wireless
provider shall make any corrections necessary to bring the permitted
installation into conformance with town requirements.
         (i)   The Administrator may approve the performance of repair or
emergency work without issuance of a permit. When it is impossible for wireless
provider to give the Administrator notice of repair work because of the
unexpected, emergency nature of such work, wireless provider may perform such
work provided notice is given to the Administrator as promptly as possible
after the commencement of such work and a permit request is submitted
retroactively or within two working days.
      (7)   Processing of applications.
         (a)   A small wireless permit application shall be deemed complete
unless the Administrator provides notice otherwise in writing to the applicant
within 30 days of submission or within some other mutually agreed upon time
frame. The notice shall identify the deficiencies in the application which, if
cured, would make the application complete. The application shall be deemed
complete on resubmission if the additional materials cure the deficiencies
identified.
         (b)   The application shall be deemed approved if the Administrator
fails to approve or deny the application within 45 days from the time the
application is deemed complete or within some other mutually agreed upon time
frame between the Administrator and the applicant.
         (c)   1.   The Administrator may deny an application only on the basis
that it does not meet one or more of the following:
               A.   The town's applicable codes;
               B.   Local code provisions or regulations that concern public
safety, objective design standards for decorative utility poles, city utility
poles, or reasonable and nondiscriminatory stealth and concealment
requirements, including screening or landscaping for ground-mounted equipment;
               C.   Public safety and reasonable spacing requirements
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment in a right-of-way; or
               D.   Historic preservation requirements.
            2.   The Administrator must document the basis for a denial and
send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the Administrator
denies an application. The applicant may seek to cure the deficiencies
identified by the Administrator and resubmit the application within 30 days of
the denial without paying an additional application fee. The Administrator
shall approve or deny the revised application within 30 days of the date on
which the application was resubmitted. Any subsequent review shall be limited
to the deficiencies cited in the prior denial.
         (d)   In the event of a consolidated application for multiple facility
collocations, the Administrator may remove and treat separately any facility
collocations:
            1.   For which incomplete information has been provided; or
            2.   That are denied.
      (8)   Collocation of small wireless facilities on town utility poles.
         (a)   Request to collocate on town utility pole. The Administrator
shall grant non-exclusive authorizations for collocations of small wireless
facilities on town utility poles consistent with such terms, fees and
conditions as Town Council may adopt consistent with G.S. § 160A-400.56. A
request to collocate on a town utility pole may be denied if there is
insufficient capacity or for reasons of safety, reliability, and generally
applicable engineering principles, and those limitations cannot be remedied by
rearranging, expanding, or otherwise reengineering the facilities at the
reasonable and actual cost of the town to be reimbursed by the wireless
provider. An applicant permitted to collocate on a town utility pole under this
section must demonstrate compliance with applicable safety requirements,
including the National Electrical Safety Code and the applicable rules and
regulations issued by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
         (b)   Make-ready work. The Administrator shall provide a good-faith
estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable a town utility pole to
support a requested collocation, including pole replacement if necessary,
within 60 days after receipt of a complete application. Make-ready work,
including any pole replacement, shall be completed within 60 days of written
agreement on the cost of the work.
      (9)   Abandonment. Wireless providers shall remove all abandoned small
wireless facilities within 180 days of abandonment. Should the wireless
provider fail to timely remove the abandoned wireless facility, the
Administrator may cause such small wireless facility to be removed and the town
may recover the actual cost of such removal, including legal fees, if any, from
the wireless provider. A small wireless facility shall be deemed abandoned at
the earlier of the date that the wireless provider indicates that it is
abandoning such facility or the date that is 180 days after the date that such
small wireless facility ceases to transmit a signal, unless the wireless
provider gives the Administrator reasonable evidence that it is diligently
working to place such small wireless facility back in service.
      (10)   Exceptions to application and permitting requirements. No
application or written authorization is required for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of small wireless facilities with small wireless
facilities that are the same size or smaller; or
         (c)   Installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement of micro
wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between existing
utility poles or city utility poles in compliance with applicable codes by or
for a communications service provider authorized to occupy the city rights-of-
way and who is remitting taxes under G.S. 105-164.4(a)(4c) or G.S. 105-164.4(a)
(6); provided, however, that written authorization is required for excavations
or other work otherwise required to be permitted under this chapter.
   (B)   All other small wireless facilities shall be subject to all applicable
provisions of this chapter and the Unified Development Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019)
ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS FOR MAINTENANCE BY THE TOWN;
REQUEST FOR CLOSURE OF A PUBLIC WAY
§ 96.045 APPLICATION FOR ACCEPTANCE OF INFRASTRUCTURE; WARRANTY.
   Any person requesting acceptance by Town Council of street infrastructure
shall submit a request to the Administrator on a form prepared for that
purpose, accompanied by a fully executed one-year infrastructure warranty and
repair security on a form acceptable to the town. Any such request shall be
deemed to include a request for acceptance of any water, sanitary sewer,
sidewalk, or storm drainage systems located under or adjoining such street
infrastructure, and such water, sanitary sewer, sidewalk, or storm drainage
systems likewise shall be accompanied by a fully executed one-year
infrastructure warranty and repair security on a form acceptable to the town.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019; Ord. passed - -)
§ 96.046 FINAL ACCEPTANCE; NAMING OF NEW STREETS.
   (A)   When an infrastructure acceptance request form has been submitted and
all other requirements of this subchapter met, the Administrator shall refer
the request to the Town Council for consideration. Only Town Council has the
authority to accept street infrastructure for maintenance by the town.
   (B)   Town Council retains sole authority and discretion to name any town
street. Upon receiving a request to accept street infrastructure, the
Administrator shall consult with the Town Council with respect to the name to
be given to the street. In its discretion, the Town Council may refer the
matter to the Historic Preservation Commission for its recommendation.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019; Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 7-13-2021)
§ 96.047 PREREQUISITES TO ACCEPTANCE.
   Streets and the sidewalks, water, sanitary sewer, or storm drainage systems
located within or adjoining them shall be considered for acceptance for
maintenance by the town when the proper width street is dedicated for public
use and a map is recorded in the office of the register of deeds of the county,
and the infrastructure is improved in accordance with all applicable town
requirements.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019)
§ 96.048 STREET CLOSINGS AND RIGHT-OF-WAY VACATIONS.
   (A)    Any persons petitioning the Town Council for permanent closing of a
public street or alley pursuant to G.S. § 160A-299 must pay a non-refundable
fee of $500 upon the filing of the petition. In addition, the petitioner(s)
must pay all costs incurred with respect to a petition submitted under this
section, including but not limited to costs incurred for: (i) the preparation
of required plats, easements, or other legal documents; (ii) publication of
legal notice, the mailing of notices to adjoining property owners, and posting
as required per division (B) below; and (iii) any and all recording fees
associated with a street or alley closure approved pursuant to this section.
The town may require that such costs be paid directly by the petitioner, or the
town may pay the costs and then seek reimbursement from the petitioner.
   (B)   If Town Council determines to consider the proposed street or alley
closure, it shall first adopt a resolution declaring its intent to close the
street or alley and calling a public hearing on the question. The resolution
shall be published once a week for four successive weeks prior to the hearing,
a copy thereof shall be sent by registered or certified mail to all owners of
property adjoining the street or alley as shown on the county tax records, and
a notice of the closing and public hearing shall be prominently posted in at
least two places along the street or alley. If the street or alley is under the
authority and control of the Department of Transportation, a copy of the
resolution shall be mailed to the Department of Transportation.
   (C)   At the public hearing, any person may be heard on the possible street
or alley closure. If it appears to the satisfaction of Town Council after the
hearing that closing the street or alley is not contrary to the public
interest, and that no person owning property in the vicinity of the street or
alley or in the subdivision in which it is located would thereby be deprived of
reasonable means of ingress and egress to that person's property, the Council
may adopt an order closing the street or alley. A certified copy of the order
shall be filed in the office of the Watauga County Register of Deeds.
   (D)    Upon the closing of a street or alley in accordance with this
section, subject to the provisions of divisions (G) and (H) of this section,
all right, title, and interest in the right-of-way shall be conclusively
presumed to be vested in those persons owning lots or parcels of land adjacent
to the street or alley, and the title of such adjoining landowners, for the
width of the abutting land owned by them, shall extend to the centerline of the
street or alley. However, the provisions of this division may be altered as to
a particular street or alley closing by the assent of all such adjoining
landowners taking title to a closed street or alley by the filing of a plat
which shows the street or alley closing and the portion of the closed street or
alley to be taken by each owner. The plat shall be signed by all adjoining
landowners who, under the first sentence of this division, has an ownership
right in the closed street or alley.
   (E)   This section shall apply to any street or public alley within the town
that has been irrevocably dedicated to the public, without regard to whether it
has actually been opened. This section also applies to unopened streets or
public alleys that are shown on plats but that have not been accepted or
maintained by the town, provided that this section shall not abrogate the
rights of a dedicator, or those claiming under a dedicator, pursuant to G.S.
136-96.
   (F)   No street or alley under the control of the Department of
Transportation may be closed unless the Department of Transportation consents
thereto.
   (G)   The town may reserve a right, title, and interest in any improvements
or easements within a street closed pursuant to this section. An easement under
this division shall include utility, drainage, pedestrian, landscaping,
conservation, or other easements considered by the town to be in the public
interest. The reservation of an easement under this division shall be stated in
the order of closing. The reservation also extends to utility improvements or
easements owned by private utilities which at the time of the street closing
have a utility agreement or franchise with the town.
   (H)   The town may retain utility easements, both public and private, in
cases of streets withdrawn under G.S. 136-96. To retain such easements, the
Town Council shall, after public hearing, approve a “declaration of retention
of utility easements” specifically describing such easements. Notice by
certified or registered mail shall be provided to the party withdrawing the
street from dedication under G.S. 136-96 at least five days prior to the
hearing. The declaration must be passed prior to filing of any plat or map or
declaration of withdrawal with the register of deeds. Any property owner filing
such plats, maps, or declarations shall include the town's declaration with the
declaration of withdrawal and shall show the utilities retained on any map or
plat showing the withdrawal.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019; Ord. passed 8-17-2021)
§ 96.999 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2019)
CHAPTER 97: TREES AND SHRUBS
Section
   
97.01   Definitions
   
97.02   Exemptions
   
97.03   Damage to trees and shrubs on public property without a permit
prohibited
   
97.04   Permit procedure
   
97.05   Appeal
 
   
97.99   Penalty
§ 97.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, corporation, association or entity.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY.
      (1)   Any property which the town owns, leases or has an easement over;
and
      (2)   Any property which the owner or easement holder grants authority to
the town for the purposes of enforcing this chapter (DOT right-of-way).
(Prior Code, § 99.01)
§ 97.02 EXEMPTIONS.
   Exemptions to the provisions of this chapter include the following:
   (A)   Trimming of trees and shrubs as normal maintenance provided the
trimming does not result in the mutilation, death or destruction of the tree or
shrub; and
   (B)   Any tree or shrub which during a period of emergency or act of God
must be removed so that it, in no way, will hinder public work to restore order
in the town; the removal to be by the town or its authorized agents.
(Prior Code, § 99.02)
§ 97.03 DAMAGE TO TREES AND SHRUBS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY WITHOUT A PERMIT
PROHIBITED.
   The following actions shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall
be subject to the penalties prescribed herein:
   (A)   Injuring, removal, relocation, generally. No person shall, without a
written permit from the Town Landscape Planner, willfully mutilate, injure,
remove or relocate any tree or shrub upon any public property within the town
or injure or misuse any structure or device placed to protect any tree or
shrub;
   (B)   Whitewashing, painting. No person shall, without a written permit from
the Town Landscape Planner, whitewash, paint or in any way discolor the stem
base, bole or root of any tree or shrub upon any public property in the town;
   (C)   Attaching ropes, signs and the like; obstructing roots. No person
shall, without a written permit from the Town Landscape Planner, fasten any
rope, wire or electrical attachment or attach any sign or device in any manner
to the trees or shrubs upon public property in the town or to guard about the
tree or shrub or close or obstruct any open space provided about the base or
root of the tree or shrub within three feet in any direction or in any way
prevent the access of air, water or fertilizer to roots of the tree or shrub;
and
   (D)   Piling building material or making mortar cement within six feet. No
person shall, without a written permit from the Town Landscape Planner, pile
any building material or make any mortar cement within six feet of any tree or
shrub upon a public property within the town.
(Prior Code, § 99.03) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.04 PERMIT PROCEDURE.
   Persons seeking permits under the provisions of this chapter will conform to
the following procedures.
   (A)   A request shall be submitted to the Town Landscape Planner or his or
her designee, in writing on a form provided by the Department of Public
Services and accompanied with the following information:
      (1)   For new buildings or developments, an overall site plan, including
the approximate shape and dimensions of the lot or parcel of land together with
existing and proposed driveways, structures and improvements;
      (2)   The approximate location of all trees to be removed, replaced or
relocated from public property and shall be identified as to type and species;
      (3)   A statement as to why the trees are to be removed, replaced or
relocated; and
      (4)   A statement as necessary, explaining how any standing tree or trees
to be relocated as part of a development project are to be protected during
construction of the development.
   (B)   In determining whether a permit should be issued, the Landscape
Planner or his or her designee shall consider the following criteria:
      (1)   The condition of the tree with respect to disease, danger of
falling, proximity to existing or proposed structures and interference with
utility services;
      (2)   Necessity to remove trees in order to construct proposed
improvements to allow economic enjoyment of property adjacent to public
property;
      (3)   Topography of land and the effect of tree removal on erosion, soil
retention and the diversion or increased flow of surface waters and
coordination with the town's drainage patterns;
      (4)   Number of trees existing in the neighborhood on improved property.
The Landscape Planner or his or her designee shall be guided by the standards
established in the neighborhood and the effect of tree removal upon property
values in the area; and
      (5)   In all cases, the Landscape Planner or his or her designee and/or
the Town Manager may require the relocation or replacement of trees as
condition of issuing the permit, on a one for one basis, with replacement trees
having a caliper of two-inch diameter at breast height (that is, four and one-
half feet above average ground level).
(Prior Code, § 99.04)
§ 97.05 APPEAL.
   Any person who feels aggrieved under the strict enforcement of this chapter
by any administrative official may file, within ten days after the
aggrievement, a petition to have his or her case reviewed and acted upon by the
Town Manager, whose decision on all matters shall be final.
(Prior Code, § 99.05)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $100.
   (B)   Any violator of this chapter shall be required to replace removed or
damaged trees and/or shrubs on public property with trees and/or shrubs of the
same size. The violator shall be responsible for the full replacement costs of
the trees and/or shrubs.
   (C)   Each day's continuing violation of any provision of this chapter shall
be a separate and distinct offense.
   (D)   Violators shall be issued written notice of the violation which must
be paid within 72 hours after receipt of the notice. If the violator does not
pay the penalty within 72 hours, the town may recover the penalty and all
subsequently accruing from a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   Notwithstanding division (A) above, this chapter may also be enforced
by appropriate equitable remedies issuing from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (F)   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall not be a misdemeanor.
(Prior Code, § 99.99)
CHAPTER 98: BIRD SANCTUARY
Section
   
98.01   Bird sanctuary established
§ 98.01 BIRD SANCTUARY ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The area embraced within the corporate limits of the town and all land
owned or leased by the town outside the corporate limits is designated as a
bird sanctuary.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to intentionally trap, hunt, shoot, or otherwise
take, within the sanctuary hereby established, any protected bird except
pursuant to a permit issued by the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission
under G.S. 113 274(c) (la) or under any other license or permit of the Wildlife
Resources Commission.
   (C)   PROTECTED BIRD means and includes all wild birds, whether locally
resident or migratory, except the following birds that are not protected:
starlings, English house sparrows, pigeons, and any other bird classified as a
pest under G.S. Ch. 113, Art. 22A and the Structural Pest Control Act of North
Carolina of 1955 or the North Carolina Pesticide Law of 1971.
   (D)   The Town Manager may approve the location, design, and erection of
signs by one or more local birding organizations (such as the local chapter of
the National Audubon Society) giving notice of the sanctuary and/or the
regulations provided in this section
   (E)   Any person who violates this chapter shall be subject to a civil
penalty in the amount of $100 for the first offence. In the event there is more
than one violation within any rolling five-year period, then the civil penalty
shall be increased for each additional violation over one during such period,
as follows.
      (1)   Second offense: $250.
      (2)   Third offense : $500.
      (3)   Fourth and any subsequent offense: $1,000.
   (F)   This chapter may also be enforced by an appropriate equitable action.
(Ord. passed 5-14-25)
CHAPTER 99: RESERVED
CHAPTER 100: PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS
Section
   
100.01   Rules and regulations governing the use of town parks, including the
town greenway
   
100.02   Hazardous recreational activities within the town
   
100.03   Parks in which concealed handguns prohibited
 
   
100.99   Penalty
§ 100.01 RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE USE OF TOWN PARKS, INCLUDING THE
TOWN GREENWAY.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
      TOWN PARK. Includes not only the land itself, but recreational facilities
and equipment, playgrounds, athletic facilities and equipment, spectator areas,
greenways and walking trails, bodies of water used for sporting events,
recreational activities, fitness or athletic training areas, picnic areas,
shelters and parking areas, signage and all other areas, natural features,
facilities, and improvements associated with the park.
   (B)   The following acts are prohibited in all town parks:
      (1)   Marking, defacing, disfiguring, injuring, tampering with,
displacing or removing any structure, equipment or facilities;
      (2)   Damaging, cutting or removing any tree, plant or flower;
      (3)   Depositing any trash or litter, except in receptacles placed for
that purpose;
      (4)   Driving any motorized vehicle, except for motorized wheelchairs,
except in areas paved for that purpose or parking areas designated for that
purpose;
      (5)   Consuming or possessing alcoholic beverages;
      (6)   Possessing a firearm or other dangerous weapon, except by duly
authorized law enforcement officers, a public safety employee of the town so
authorized by the Town Manager, or an individual who has been issued a permit
authorizing the legal carrying of a concealed handgun, who may carry such
handgun except in the parks identified in §
100.03 and in the case of athletic fields, except during the periods
designated; but as to those parks in which possession of a duly authorized
concealed handgun is prohibited, may nevertheless secure the handgun in a
locked vehicle within the trunk, glove box, or other enclosed compartment or
area within or on his or her motor vehicle even if it is parked in a designated
parking area of the park;
      (7)   Entering, using or remaining within a park between 30 minutes after
sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise;
      (8)   Entering, using or remaining within a park when it has been closed
and a sign to that effect is posted at the entrance to the park;
      (9)   Disturbing or unreasonably interfering with another person who is
using the park;
      (10)   Possessing or using fireworks or any other types of explosive
device;
      (11)   Camping except in areas specifically designated for that purpose;
or
      (12)   Allowing any animal to be at large.
   (C)   Unless otherwise prohibited by ordinance and so posted, a person
(hereinafter “rider”) may ride a bicycle, roller skates, in-line skates,
skateboard, coaster, toy vehicle or similar non-motorized vehicle so long as
the rider complies with all of the following requirements:
      (1)   A rider must yield to pedestrians. Pedestrians shall at all times
have the right-of-way upon the sidewalk. In the case of any doubt of safe and
untouched passage by a pedestrian, a rider shall stop or dismount the device
until the pedestrian has passed;
      (2)   A bicycle rider under the age of 21 must wear a helmet meeting the
requirements of §
71.02 of this code;
      (3)   A rider shall not engage in tricks or other maneuvers involving
wheels leaving the ground, except in areas specifically designated for such
activity (i.e., a skateboard park as defined in §
100.02 herein); and
      (4)   A rider shall not ride upon any area other than a sidewalk or
greenway path. By way of example only, there shall be no riding upon stairs,
courtyards, covered pavilions, gazebos tables, and railings.
   (D)   The Director of Public Works or his or her designee shall post these
rules and regulations at each town park.
(Prior Code, § 102.01) (Ord. passed 8-19-2004; Ord. passed 9-17-2013; Ord.
passed 6-19-2018; Ord. passed 1-19-21) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.02  HAZARDOUS RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES WITHIN THE TOWN.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      HAZARDOUS RECREATIONAL ACTIVITY. Skateboarding, inline skating or
freestyle bicycling.
      INHERENT RISK. Those dangers or conditions that are characteristic of,
intrinsic to or an integral part of skateboarding, inline skating and freestyle
bicycling.
      SKATEBOARD PARK. An area or facility, whether or indoor or outdoor,
legally operating within the town, whether owned and/or operated by a private
entity or by a governmental entity, as that term is defined in G.S. § 99E-22
(1), which is designed and maintained for persons to engage in hazardous
recreational activities, as above defined.
   (B)   Duties of non-governmental operators of skateboard parks.
      (1)   No operator of a skateboard park shall permit any person to engage
in a hazardous recreational activity unless that person is wearing a helmet,
elbow pads and kneepads.
      (2)   The operator of a skateboard park operated by a non-governmental
entity must have an employee present and on-duty during all hours of operation
who is trained in first aid and certified to administer cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR). Hours of operation must be prominently displayed and the
operator must secure the park during off-hours so as to prevent its use when an
attendant is not present.
      (3)   The operator of a skateboard park operated by a non-governmental
entity must post signs in plan view at the skateboard park advising any person
wishing to engage in or engaging in a hazardous recreational activity of the
requirement that any person engaging in a hazardous recreational activity must
wear a helmet, elbow pads and kneepads.
   (C)   Duties of governmental entities operating skateboard parks.
      (1)   No governmental entity operating a skateboard park shall permit any
person to engage in a hazardous recreational activity unless that person is
wearing a helmet, elbow pads and kneepads.
      (2)   A governmental entity shall either have an employee present and on-
duty during all hours of operation of a skateboard park or, if the use of the
skateboard park is not supervised on a regular basis, must post signs at the
skateboard park affording reasonable notice that any person engaging in a
hazardous recreational activity in the facility must wear a helmet, elbow pads
and kneepads and that any person failing to do so will be subject to citation
by the town.
   (D)   Duties of persons engaged in hazardous recreational activities.
      (1)   Any person who participates in or assists in hazardous recreational
activities operated by a governmental entity assumes the inherent risks in
these activities, irrespective of age and is legally responsible for all
damages, injury or death to himself or herself or other persons or property
that result from these activities.
      (2)   No person may participate in a hazardous recreational activity or
allow another person who is in his or her custody or control to engage in a
hazardous recreational activity unless the participant wears a helmet, elbow
pads and knee pads.
      (3)   While engaged in a hazardous recreational activity, a person must
act within the limits of his or her ability and the purpose and design of the
equipment used, must maintain control of his or her person and the equipment
used and must refrain from acting in any manner that may cause or contribute to
death or injury to himself or herself or to other persons.
   (E)   Limitation. Nothing herein shall authorize the use of any facility or
area for hazardous recreational activities, nor shall anything herein authorize
a person to engage in a hazardous recreational activity, except in a facility
properly designed, maintained and permitted for that purpose.
(Prior Code, § 102.02) (Ord. passed 5-18-2006; 6-19-2018) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.03 PARKS IN WHICH CONCEALED HANDGUNS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Other than a duly authorized law enforcement officer or a public
safety employee of the town so authorized by the Town Manager, no person shall
possess a concealed handgun in the following playgrounds; athletic fields,
including any appurtenant facilities such as restrooms, during an organized
athletic event if the field has been scheduled for use with the town or Watauga
County Parks and Recreation Department; swimming pools, including any
appurtenant facilities used for dressing, storage of personal items, or other
uses related to the swimming pool; and athletic facilities; although an
individual who has been issued a permit authorizing the legal carrying of a
concealed handgun may secure the handgun in a locked vehicle within the trunk,
glove box, or other enclosed compartment or area within or on his or her motor
vehicle even if it is parked in a designated parking area of the park.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, a playground is designated with a
parenthetic “p” following the park name, an athletic field is designated with a
parenthetical “fi” following the park name, a swimming pool is designated with
a parenthetical “s” following the park name, and an athletic facility is
designated with a parenthetical “fa”:
      (1)   Industrial fields (both Small Industrial Field and Large Industrial
Field) (fi);
      (2)   Jaycee Parks (p);
      (3)   Junaluska Park (portion other than area reserved for use by Watauga
Post 130 of the American Legion and areas needed for access to the “Legion
Hut”) (p); and
      (4)   North Street Park (p).
(Ord. passed 9-17-2013; Ord. passed 6-19-2018)
§ 100.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Violation of the rules and regulations adopted in §
100.01 shall constitute an infraction and unless another penalty is
specifically provided for within the code of ordinances or under state law, in
which case that penalty shall apply, shall subject the responsible person or
owner to a penalty of $10. Violators shall be issued written notice of the
violation, which must be paid within ten days after the receipt of the notice.
If the violator does not pay the penalty within ten days, the town may recover
the penalty and all subsequently accruing penalties, in a civil action. In the
event that it is necessary for the town to institute a civil action to collect
the penalty, the violator shall be responsible for all court costs and
attorney's fees incurred by the town.
      (2)   In addition to the aforesaid penalty, a duly authorized law
enforcement officer or other authorized agent of the town may require that any
person violating these rules immediately leave the town's park and, if the
person has engaged in repeated violations within a 12-month period, may bar the
person from the use of the town park for a period of 60 days.
(Prior Code, § 102.01)
   (B)   Any person who violates §
100.02(B) or (D) of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, pursuant to
G.S. § 14-4(b), punishable by a penalty of up to $50.
(Prior Code, § 102.02)
(Ord. passed 5-18-2006; Ord. 6-19-2018)
CHAPTER 101: STATES OF EMERGENCY
Section
   
101.01   Declaration of state of emergency; Mayor’s powers
   
101.02   Restrictions during state of emergency
   
101.03   Effectiveness of declaration; modification; termination
 
   
101.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Authority, see G.S. Ch. 166A, Art. 1A
§ 101.01 DECLARATION OF STATE OF EMERGENCY; MAYOR’S POWERS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, an EMERGENCY is an occurrence or
imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or
property resulting from any natural or man-made accidental, military,
paramilitary, terrorism, weather-related, public health, explosion-related,
riot-related cause, or technological failure or accident, including, but not
limited to, a cyber incident, an explosion, a transportation accident, a
radiological accident, or a chemical or other hazardous material incident.
   (B)   In the event of an existing or threatened emergency endangering the
lives, safety, health, and welfare of the people within the town or threatening
widespread danger to or destruction of property, the Mayor is hereby authorized
and empowered to declare by public proclamation a state of emergency, and, in
order to more effectively protect the lives and property of people within the
town, to place in effect any or all of the prohibitions or restrictions
hereinafter authorized.
   (C)   The Mayor is further authorized and empowered to limit by the
declaration the application of all or any part of such prohibitions or
restrictions to any area specifically designated or described within the
corporate limits of the town and to specific hours of the day or night; and to
exempt from all or any part of such restrictions law enforcement officers, fire
department officers and other emergency responders; public employees; doctors,
nurses, employees of hospitals and other medical facilities; on-duty military
personnel, whether state or federal; on-duty employees of public utilities,
public transportation companies, and newspaper, magazine, radio broadcasting,
and television broadcasting corporations; and such other classes of persons as
may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately necessary
to serve the safety, health, and welfare needs of the people within the town.
   (D)   In the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem is
authorized to act in the Mayor's stead pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 101.02 RESTRICTIONS DURING STATE OF EMERGENCY.
   A declaration of state of emergency issued by the Mayor may impose any or
all of the following prohibitions or restrictions:
   (A)   Of movements of people in public places, including imposing a curfew;
directing and compelling the voluntary or mandatory evacuation of all or part
of the population from any stricken or threatened area within the governing
body's jurisdiction; prescribing routes, modes of transportation, and
destinations in connection with evacuation; and controlling ingress and egress
of an emergency area, and the movement of persons within the area;
   (B)   Of the operation of offices, business establishments, and other places
to or from which people may travel or at which they may congregate;
   (C)   Upon the possession, transportation, sale, purchase, and consumption
of alcoholic beverages;
   (D)   Upon the possession, transportation, sale, purchase, storage, and use
of gasoline, and dangerous weapons and substances, except that this subdivision
does not authorize prohibitions or restrictions on lawfully possessed firearms
or ammunition. As used in this chapter, the term DANGEROUS WEAPONS AND
SUBSTANCES has the same meaning as it does under G.S. § 14-288.1. As used in
this chapter, the term FIREARM has the same meaning as it does under G.S. § 14-
409.39(2); and
   (E)   Upon other activities or conditions the control of which may be
reasonably necessary to maintain order and protect lives or property during the
state of emergency.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 101.03 EFFECTIVENESS OF DECLARATION; MODIFICATION; TERMINATION.
   (A)   All prohibitions and restrictions imposed by a declaration of state of
emergency shall take effect in the emergency area immediately upon publication
of the declaration unless the declaration sets a later time. Publication may
consist of reports of the substance of the prohibitions and restrictions in the
mass communications media serving the emergency area or other effective methods
of disseminating the necessary information quickly. As soon as practicable,
however, appropriate distribution of the full text of any declaration shall be
made. The requirements of G.S. § 1-597 (regarding newspaper publication) shall
not apply to such declarations.
   (B)   Any declaration of a state of emergency issued under authority of this
chapter may be extended, altered, modified, or repealed as to any particular by
issuance of a subsequent declaration by the Mayor or by a majority vote of Town
Council upon a duly-called and noticed regular, special, or emergency meeting.
   (C)   The Mayor shall declare the end of a state of emergency or all or any
part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when
directed to do so by the Council.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 101.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of a declaration issued under this
chapter shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor in accordance with G.S. § 14-
288.20A.
(Ord. passed - -)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
110.   TAXICABS AND OTHER VEHICLES FOR HIRE
         
111.   STREET VENDORS
CHAPTER 110: TAXICABS AND OTHER VEHICLES FOR HIRE
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Permit required
   
110.03   Application
   
110.04   Investigation
   
110.05   Conditions of permit; issuance and fee
   
110.06   Compliance inspections
   
110.07   Renewal of permit; revocation
   
110.08   Display of permit, schedule of fares, driver's photograph
   
110.09   Signs identifying vehicle as vehicle for hire or taxicab
   
110.10   Non-transferability of permit
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   OPERATOR OF A BUSINESS INVOLVING VEHICLES FOR HIRE. An owner and (if
different from the owner) manager of a business that involves one or more
vehicles for hire operated at any time within the corporate limits of the town,
including a taxicab business, but not including a business that only operates
vehicles regulated under G.S. Ch. 62, a regional transportation authority
created or operating under G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 26 or 27, a transportation
service operated by a governmental entity, or a Transportation Network Company
(“TNC”) service regulated under G.S. Ch. 20, Art. 10A.
   TAXICAB. Any motor vehicle seating nine or fewer passengers operated upon
any street or highway on call or on demand, accepting or soliciting passengers
indiscriminately for hire between points along streets or highways as may be
directed by the passenger so being transported.
   TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANY (TNC). Any person that uses an online-enabled
application or platform to connect passengers with TNC drivers who provide
prearranged transportation services, as provided at G.S. § 20-280.1.
   VEHICLE FOR HIRE. Any motor vehicle, including, but not limited to, a
taxicab, accepting or soliciting one or more passengers for hire between any
two locations, during at least a portion of which it is operated upon a public
street or highway; but not including vehicles regulated under G.S. Ch. 62,
vehicles owned and operated by a regional transportation authority created or
operating under G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 26 or 27, vehicles owned and operated by a
governmental entity, or TNC service vehicles.
(Ord. passed 4-19-2011; Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed --)
§ 110.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Every driver of a vehicle for hire, including a taxicab, operating over any
public street within the corporate limits of the town is required to obtain a
permit from the town prior to engaging in the activity.
(Ord. passed 4-19-2011; Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed --) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.03 APPLICATION.
   The application required of each applicant for a permit to drive a vehicle
for hire, including a taxicab, shall be made upon such forms as are furnished
by the town for that purpose and shall, among other things, require the
applicant’s full name, any other name by which the person has been known,
complete physical and mailing address, physical condition, physical
description, full name and contact information for every former employer within
the last ten years, court record, chauffeur’s license number, if applicable,
any other identifying information as may be needed to conduct a state or
national background check, and the identity of and contact information for the
operator(s) of the vehicle-for-hire business for whom the applicant works if
the applicant is not the operator or his or her own business. The application
shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant and by the owner and operator in
front of a state notary public. Each applicant shall appear at the office of
the Police Department for the purpose of having his or her fingerprints taken
and photograph made, both of which shall constitute a part of the application.
Each applicant shall be required to sign a form consenting to the check of his
or her criminal record and to the use of the fingerprints and other identifying
information required by the NC Department of Public Safety and/or state or
national repositories in order to conduct the check. The applicant must pay the
fee, if any, for any background check upon submission of the application.
(Ord. passed 4-19-2011; Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed --)
§ 110.04 INVESTIGATION.
   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall investigate the facts
stated in each application and, in addition, shall subject an applicant to a
national criminal history background check, including through the use of FBI
records, by making appropriate application to the NC Department of Public
Safety as provided at G.S. § 160A-304(a). All information collected pursuant to
the investigation shall be privileged, in accordance with applicable state law
and federal guidelines, and the information shall be confidential and shall not
be a public record under G.S. Ch. 132. The Chief of Police or designee may also
require an applicant to submit to a controlled substance examination for which
the applicant must pay the actual costs. Following his or her investigation,
the Chief of Police or his or her designee shall report his or her findings and
recommendations to the Town Manager.
(Ord. passed 4-19-2011; Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed --)
§ 110.05 CONDITIONS OF PERMIT; ISSUANCE AND FEE.
   (A)   The Town Manager shall consider the application and the results of the
investigation and shall issue the permit unless he or she concludes that there
is reliable information justifying rejection of the application. The following
factors shall be deemed sufficient grounds for refusing to issue a permit or
for revoking a permit already issued:
      (1)   Conviction of a felony against the state, or conviction of any
offense against another state which would have been a felony if committed in
this state;
      (2)   Violation of any federal or state law relating to the use,
possession or sale of alcoholic beverages or narcotic or barbiturate drugs;
      (3)   Addiction to or a habitual use of alcoholic beverages or narcotic
or barbiturate drugs;
      (4)   Violation of any federal or state law relating to prostitution;
      (5)   Lack of United States citizenship or permanent resident alien
status; or
      (6)   Habitual violation of traffic laws or ordinances.
   (B)   Upon the Town Manager’s approval of the issuance of a permit to the
applicant, a permit may be issued upon completion of all of the following:
      (1)   The applicant has paid a permit fee in the amount of $15;
      (2)   The applicant has paid all fees due in connection with the
investigation of the application;
      (3)   With respect to the vehicle-for-hire business for whom the driver
works (whether as an employee, independent contractor, or principal), the
operator has:
         (a)   Demonstrated that the operator has policies in place by which
the operator will maintain control over each driver working in the business
with respect to the fares to be charged and the driver’s behavior while
transporting passengers;
         (b)   Signed a consent for periodic and random inspections of taxicabs
and/or other vehicles for hire for safety and compliance with this chapter;
         (c)   Filed with the town proof of financial responsibility maintained
on all taxicabs or other vehicles to be used for hire, such proof of financial
responsibility having the meaning set forth at G.S. § 20-280(b) for taxicabs
and/or other applicable state law; and
         (d)   Demonstrated that the operator maintains all vehicles for hire
which are currently available for hire and within his or her control in a safe
and sanitary condition and maintains current state safety inspections on all
vehicles for hire within his or her control.
(Ord. passed 9-17-2009; Ord. passed 4-19-2011; Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord.
passed --)
§ 110.06 COMPLIANCE INSPECTIONS.
   Any person issued a permit under this chapter shall allow random inspections
by the Chief of Police or his or her designee of any vehicle currently
available for hire. The inspections shall be for the following purposes:
   (A)   To ensure that the vehicle is maintained in a safe and sanitary
condition; provided, the inspections shall not be considered a substitute for
required state safety inspections, and shall not constitute a guarantee or
assurance to any person by the town that a vehicle for hire is safe or
sanitary; and
   (B)   To ascertain compliance with this chapter, including, but not limited
to:
      (1)   Determining that the permit, schedule of fares and a photograph of
the driver are displayed as required;
      (2)   Determining that there is a permanent sign at a conspicuous place
on each taxicab or vehicle for hire showing that it is a taxicab or vehicle for
hire;
      (3)   Determining that the vehicle's state safety inspection is current;
and
      (4)   Determining that the driver of the vehicle is in possession of a
valid driver's license, registration and proof of insurance.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed --)
§ 110.07 RENEWAL OF PERMIT; REVOCATION.
   (A)   A permit issued to a driver of a vehicle for hire shall expire after
two years if it is not renewed. A permit may be renewed upon approval of the
Town Manager no more than 90 days before its expiration date. In order to renew
the permit, the driver shall provide such forms, fingerprints, and fees as are
required for the Chief of Police or his or her designee to carry out an updated
background check with state and national repositories per §
110.04, and shall fulfill and/or confirm as applicable all requirements set
forth at §
110.05.
   (B)   At any time after the issuance of a permit to drive a taxicab or other
vehicles for hire, the Town Manager may revoke a permit for the reasons set
forth in §
110.05(A), for the operator’s failure to continually meet the requirements of §
110.05(B)(3), for an operator or driver’s failure to submit to a random
compliance search pursuant to §
110.06, or if, upon inspection, the Chief or his or her designee determines
that a vehicle currently available for hire is not being maintained in a safe
or sanitary condition.
(Ord. passed 4-19-2011; Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed --)
§ 110.08 DISPLAY OF PERMIT, SCHEDULE OF FARES, DRIVER'S PHOTOGRAPH.
   All drivers of vehicles for hire shall prominently display in each vehicle
for hire, so as to be visible to the passengers, the permit, the schedule of
fares and a photograph of the driver.
(Ord. passed 4-19-2011; Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed --) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.09 SIGNS IDENTIFYING VEHICLE AS VEHICLE FOR HIRE OR TAXICAB.
   Every vehicle for hire shall have permanent signs at conspicuous places on
each taxicab or vehicle for hire showing that it is a taxicab or vehicle for
hire.
(Ord. passed 4-19-2011; Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed --) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.10 NON-TRANSFERABILITY OF PERMIT.
   A permit issued under this chapter is not transferable.
(Ord. passed 4-19-2011; Ord. passed 6-21-2011; Ord. passed --)
CHAPTER 111: STREET VENDORS
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Applicability; special events
   
111.03   Street vending allowed in limited locations and only with a permit
   
111.04   Certain merchandise prohibited
   
111.05   Vendor site locations, rules and assignment
   
111.06   Permit process
   
111.07   Permits must be visible
   
111.08   Prohibited conduct
   
111.09   Enforcement
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT. A person, other than a merchant with an established
retail store in the county, who transports an inventory of goods to a building,
vacant lot, or other location in a county and who, at that location, displays
the goods for sale and sells the goods at retail or offers the goods for sale
at retail.
   MERCHANDISE. Goods, including fresh cut flowers, balloons, food, and any
other wares offered for sale or donations.
   PEDDLER. A person who travels from place to place with an inventory of
goods, who sells the goods at retail or offers the goods for sale at retail,
and who delivers the identical goods.
   PERSON. An individual, a firm, an association, a partnership, a limited
liability company, a corporation, a unit of government, or another group acting
as a unit.
   SPECIAL EVENT. A town-sponsored or town-sanctioned market, festival,
activity, or similar event.
   STREET VENDOR. A person who hawks, peddles, sells or offers food or
merchandise, and includes both itinerant merchants and peddlers. Musicians
(buskers)/performers are not STREET VENDORS within the meaning of this chapter
and are not intended to be regulated under this chapter.
   VENDING STAND. A stand, mobile cart, pushcart, wagon, or vehicle used or
intended to be used for displaying, transporting or storing articles offered
for sale by a vendor. For purposes of this chapter, VENDING STANDS do not
include mobile food units (i.e., "food trucks") and this chapter is not
intended to apply to or regulate lawfully operating mobile food units.
(Ord. passed 7-12-2023)
§ 111.02 APPLICABILITY; SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   This chapter applies only within the area of the downtown Municipal
Services District ("MSD"), which is referred to hereinafter as the "downtown
area."
   (B)   This chapter is intended to regulate conduct on town-owned public
property and town-maintained public rights-of-way in the downtown area,
including all streets and sidewalks maintained by the town (and regardless of
whether or not such public rights of way are within the boundaries of private
parcels). This chapter is not intended to regulate private property that is not
subject to public rights-of-ways, such as private parking lots.
   (C)   When special events are held in the downtown area, the Town Manager
(or designee) may, in the town manager's discretion, determine that street
vending shall not be allowed under this chapter but instead will be prohibited
or will be allowed only as permitted by the sponsor(s) of the special event.
SPECIAL EVENTS for purposes of this provision shall include all town-sponsored
parades, Boone Boo, Boonerang, and any other event determined by the Town
Manager to constitute a special event for purposes of this section.
(Ord. passed 7-12-2023)
§ 111.03 STREET VENDING ALLOWED IN LIMITED LOCATIONS AND ONLY WITH A PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or to offer for sale, any food,
beverage or merchandise on foot or from any vending stand on any public right-
of-way, public street, public sidewalk or town-owned property within the
downtown area unless:
   (A)   The person has obtained a valid and unexpired permit; and
   (B)   The person vends from a vending stand located at a site approved by
the Town Manager and otherwise complies with all requirements of this chapter,
including such rules and regulations as may be issued by the Town Manager (or
designee) as provided herein.
(Ord. passed 7-12-2023)
§ 111.04 CERTAIN MERCHANDISE PROHIBITED.
   Street vendors may not sell the following:
   (A)   Vendors may not sell second-hand (used) clothing, personal effects,
home furnishings, or similar used merchandise. The intention of this
prohibition is to avoid sales in the nature of "flea sales" or "yard sales" of
used personal items. It is not the intention of this section to prohibit sales
of true vintage items, but such items must be at least ten years old and the
vendor must keep upon the vendor's person (to display if requested) evidence
demonstrating that the items are vintage.
   (B)   Vendors may not cook food using a heat source (e.g., boil, roast,
broil, bake, or fry), at a vending stand. Re-heating pre-cooked food is allowed
if otherwise allowed under Health Department regulations and any other
applicable law.
(Ord. passed 7-12-2023)
§ 111.05 VENDOR SITE LOCATIONS, RULES AND ASSIGNMENT.
   (A)   Vending shall only be allowed at sites located on the sidewalk in
front of the downtown Post Office.
   (B)   The Town Manager (or designee) shall, in the Town Manager's
discretion, determine the specific vending stand locations and dimensions that
will be allowed and any other appropriate rules or limitations that shall
govern the usage of such vending sites. In exercising this discretion, the Town
Manager shall see to it that the sidewalks are kept clear for pedestrian use as
provided at
Ch. 96 of this code, shall protect the planting areas of the Post Office, shall
require that vendors provide waste receptacles as necessary for wastes
generated by their operations, protect the sightliness of the area, and
otherwise exercise the Town Manager's (or designee's) discretion to protect the
public's use and enjoyment of the area. Such rules may include a system for
assignment of vending sites (e.g., sign-up and/or lottery) if circumstances
(such as excessive competition for sites) warrant. Sites at the Post Office may
be changed or removed from availability in the Town Manager's discretion, and
applicable rules otherwise modified, without advance notice to any permitted
vendor.
(Ord. passed 7-12-2023)
§ 111.06 PERMIT PROCESS.
   (A)   A person wishing to offer merchandise for sale pursuant to this
chapter shall apply to the Town Clerk for a permit on such form(s) as may be
required by the Town Clerk.
   (B)   The permit shall be for a one-year period from the date the permit is
issued.
   (C)   The permit fee shall initially be $100 per year, but may be changed as
provided by the schedule of fees approved by Town Council as part of its annual
budget approval process. The fee shall be used for Downtown Boone
revitalization and programming.
   (D)   (1)   A person may not be issued a permit unless the person has
provided the following, and a permit may be revoked at any time if the person
fails to demonstrate upon request by the Town Manager (or designee) that the
person has provided the following information and approvals and that such are
up-to-date and current:
         (a)   Contact information, including residence address, mailing
address, cell phone number, and email address.
         (b)   If applicable, proof of proper registration with the State of
North Carolina for collection and remission of sales taxes.
         (c)   If applicable, approval from the North Carolina Department of
Agriculture.
         (d)   If applicable, approval from the Watauga County Health
Department.
      (2)   If questioned by the town, it shall be the responsibility of the
applicant to demonstrate if any of the above requirements are not applicable to
that person.
   (E)   Permits issued under this section may be superseded during special
events as provided at §
111.02(C) herein.
   (F)   The Town Manager shall have the authority to deny, suspend or revoke a
vendor's permit for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Fraud or misrepresentation contained in the application for the
permit or, in applying for the permit; failure to provide the information
required by this chapter; or failure to provide any relevant information sought
by the permitting official.
      (2)   Fraud or misrepresentation made in the course of carrying on the
business of vending or failure to remit required sales taxes.
      (3)   Repeated violation of this chapter or the rules promulgated by the
Town Manager (or designee) hereunder.
      (4)   Conviction of the permittee for a felony or misdemeanor related to
the vendor's business authorized by the permit.
   (G)   If a permit is suspended or revoked, the permittee shall have the
right to appeal the suspension or revocation to the Town Manager in writing
within ten days of the suspension or revocation. The decision of the Town
Manager shall be final.
   (H)   If a vendor has a permit revoked, the Town Manager (or designee) may
reject any new application for a permit under this chapter for a 12-month
period from the date of revocation.
(Ord. passed 7-12-2023)
§ 111.07 PERMITS MUST BE VISIBLE.
   Every vendor operating pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter shall
have such permit visible on the vendor's person or vending site at all times.
(Ord. passed 7-12-2023)
§ 111.08 PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
It shall be unlawful for a street vendor to:
   (A)   Violate any federal, state, county or city law or regulation that
pertains to food, beverages, or the selling thereof.
   (B)   Fail to permit any lawfully requested inspection by health officials
or to comply with any lawful request of a police officer.
   (C)   Fail to carry and display at all times of operation the permit issued
under this chapter.
   (D)   Have a vending stand that is not in compliance with this chapter or
any rules established by the Town Manager (or designee) hereunder.
   (E)   Leave the vendor's site without first picking up, removing and
disposing of all trash or refuse remaining from the activities of the vendor or
the vendor's customers.
   (F)   Sound or permit the sounding of any device which produces a loud and
raucous noise or engage in any hawking or harassment for the purpose of
attracting the attention of the public to the vending stand.
   (G)   Have any advertising other than the posting of prices, the names of
goods, and the name and contact information of the vendor.
   (H)   Solicit or conduct business with persons in motor vehicles.
   (I)   Use a tent or canopy. Only properly anchored single-pole umbrellas may
be used, and any such umbrella must not interfere with pedestrian traffic or in
any other way pose any threat to public safety.
(Ord. passed 7-12-2023)
§ 111.09 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The provisions of §
10.99 apply to violations of this chapter except as specifically provided
otherwise in this section.
   (B)   An initial violation of this chapter shall subject the responsible
person to a civil penalty in the amount of $25. In the event there is more than
one violation within any one-year period by the person, then the civil penalty
shall be increased for each additional violation over such period, as follows.
      (1)   Second offense within one year: $50.
      (2)   Third offense within one year: $100.
      (3)   Fourth and any subsequent offense within one year: $200.
      (4)   Once the one-year period has run from the first violation, the next
violation shall be considered to be a first violation for the purposes of
establishing a new one-year period.
   (C)   A person acting in violation of this chapter may be ordered by a town
police officer to cease the person's activities and vacate the vending site.
Such person must obey the order of the police officer or is subject to separate
and distinct citation for violation of this chapter and/or charges for
resisting the lawful orders of a police officer.
(Ord. passed 7-12-2023)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
130.   RESERVED
CHAPTER 130: RESERVED
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE; BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
150.   HOUSE NUMBERING
         
151.   MINIMUM HOUSING CODE
         
152.   RENTAL PROPERTY REQUIREMENTS
         
153.   UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
         
154.   REGULATION OF VACANT BUILDINGS
         
155.   BUILDING PERMITS
CHAPTER 150: HOUSE NUMBERING
Section
   
150.01   Numbers to be posted; standards
   
150.02   Maintenance of numbers
§ 150.01 NUMBERS TO BE POSTED; STANDARDS.
   Within 90 days after written notice by the Town Council, its agent or
authorized contractor, of the assignment of or change of a number for any
house, building, mobile home park or condominium complex, the owner or occupant
of the property shall be required to post the number (including any letters) so
assigned in an approved area on the property in accordance with the
requirements of this section no later than 90 days after adoption.
   (A)   The minimum height of the number(s) placed on a house, building,
mobile home lot/site or unit shall not be less than three inches; however, the
building number of an apartment, townhouse or condominium complex shall not be
less than six inches high and shall be placed either in the approximate center
of the building or on the street end of the building so that it is clearly
visible from either the public or private street by which it is accessed.
   (B)   Numbers shall be displayed in numeric format, not in script.
   (C)   The house or building numbers, except in case of mobile home park lot/
sites, shall be maintained within a three-foot perimeter of an entrance whereby
they are visible from the public street or road on which it fronts or the lot
on which the building is located if the property is landscaped in a manner that
the numbers cannot be seen from the public street or road, the assigned
building number shall also be posted on the property at or near the property
line at a driveway entrance or access to the structure.
   (D)   A sign displaying the property number or street address of a mobile
home park shall be erected and displayed at the driveway entrance of the mobile
home park. Lots or sites within the mobile home park shall be marked in an
uniform manner within the park by placement at or near the individual mobile
home by a pedestal or post, no less than three feet, nor higher than five feet,
above ground level, containing the assigned number of the individual mobile
home. If an individual mailbox is placed at the mobile home lot/site, the
number shall be displayed thereon. If a central cluster postal box site is
provided, the assigned lot/site number also shall be displayed on the
individual boxes of the cluster. In the event the mobile home rests on a
permanent foundation, the structure may be marked in accordance with division
(C) above.
   (E)   The color of the number(s) placed on a structure or pedestal shall be
in contrast to the color scheme of the house, building, mobile home or pedestal
so that the number is clearly visible and shall be maintained in a clearly
visible manner. The Building Inspector shall not issue a certificate of
occupancy or a certificate of compliance until the assigned number is posted in
accordance with this section.
§ 150.02 MAINTENANCE OF NUMBERS.
   Following the posting of the assigned number as required, the owner or
occupant shall maintain the house or building number at all times in compliance
with the standards set forth in §
150.01. Building numbers shall not be obstructed from view by shrubs or
vegetation as viewed from the public road.
CHAPTER 151: MINIMUM HOUSING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Preamble
   
151.02   Scope
   
151.03   Definitions
   
151.04   Conflict with other provisions
   
151.05   Alternate remedies
Requirements and Standards for Structures
   
151.15   Residential buildings unfit for human habitation
   
151.16   Unsafe buildings
   
151.17   General requirements for the exterior and interior of structures
   
151.18   Minimum space and use requirements
   
151.19   Structural and general standards technical guidelines
   
151.20   Cooking equipment
   
151.21   Garbage storage or disposal facilities
   
151.22   Minimum requirements for light and ventilation
   
151.23   Sanitation requirements
   
151.24   Rooming houses
   
151.25   Sanitary facilities
   
151.26   Plumbing standards
   
151.27   Minimum electrical requirements; required outlets
   
151.28   Electrical standards
   
151.29   Electrical services
   
151.30   Heating facilities required
   
151.31   Heating standards
   
151.32   Weatherproofing
Administration and Enforcement
   
151.45   Housing Inspector
   
151.46   Inspections of multi-family dwellings; periodic inspections
   
151.47   Hearing procedures
   
151.48   Service of order, contents
   
151.49   Enforcement procedures in the event of noncompliance
   
151.50   Service of complaints and orders
   
151.51   Right to appeal
   
151.52   Lien on premises
   
151.53   Violations
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 PREAMBLE.
   (A)    Pursuant to G.S. Ch. 160D, Art. 12, it is hereby found and declared
that there exists, in the town’s jurisdiction for purposes of planning and
development, dwellings which are unfit for human habitation and/or are inimical
to the welfare, and dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and morals of
the people of the town’s jurisdictions for purposes of planning and regulation
of development, due to dilapidation, defects increasing the hazards of fire,
accidents or other calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary
facilities, and due to other conditions rending the dwellings unsafe or
unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or morals, or
otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the town’s jurisdiction
for the purposes of planning and development (hereinafter sometimes, “unfit
dwelling”).
   (B)   It is further found and declared that there exists, in the town’s
jurisdiction for purposes of planning and development, abandoned structures
which pose health or safety hazards as a result of the attraction of insects or
rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard, dangerous conditions constituting a
threat to children or frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the
absence of sanitary facilities (hereinafter, “unsafe abandoned structure”).
(Ord. passed 7-21-2016; Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)
§ 151.02 SCOPE.
   (A)    This chapter is hereby declared to be remedial and shall be construed
to secure the beneficial interest and purpose thereof - which are public
safety, health and general welfare - through structural strength, stability,
sanitation, adequate light and ventilation and safety to life and property from
fire and other hazards incident to the construction, alteration, repair,
removal, demolition, use and occupancy of dwellings.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing dwellings
and to all dwellings hereafter constructed within the town or within any area
into which the town has extended its extraterritorial jurisdiction pursuant to
G.S. Ch. 160D, Art. 12, whether or not the action of the town extending its
jurisdiction into the extraterritorial area explicitly refers to the Minimum
Housing Code. This chapter establishes minimum requirements for the initial and
continued occupancy of all dwellings and does not replace or modify
requirements otherwise established for the construction, repair, alteration or
use of buildings, equipment or facilities, except as provided in this chapter.
   (C)   The State Building Code and all current volumes and amendments shall
govern all repairs, alterations and/or additions to any existing structure.
(Ord. passed 7-21-2016; Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)
§ 151.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words
used in the present tense include the future; words in the masculine gender
include the feminine and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and
the plural the singular. Where terms are not defined in this section, they
shall have their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context may imply.
   ACCESSIBLE, READILY. Capable of being reached quickly for operation, renewal
or inspections, without requiring those to whom ready access is requisite to
climb over or remove obstacles or to resort to portable ladders, chairs and the
like.
   ADDITION. An extension or increase in floor or height of a building or
structure.
   AIR CONDITIONING. The treatment of air so as to control simultaneously its
temperature, humidity, cleanness and distribution to meet the requirements of a
conditioned space.
   AIR GAP. An air gap in a water-supply system is the unobstructed vertical
distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe
or faucet supplying water to a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the
flood-level rim of the receptacle.
   ALLEY. Any public space or thoroughfare 20 feet or less in width which has
been dedicated or deeded for public use.
   ALTER or ALTERATION. Any change or modification in construction or
occupancy.
   AMPACITY. The current in amperes a conductor can carry continuously under
the conditions of use without exceeding its temperature rating.
   APARTMENT. A room, or suite of two or more rooms, in a residence building
occupied as the home or residence of an individual, family or household.
   APARTMENT HOUSE. Any building or portion thereof used as a multiple dwelling
for the purpose of providing three or more separate dwelling units which may
share means of egress and other essential facilities.
   APPLIANCE. Utilization equipment, normally built in standardized sizes or
types, which is installed or connected as a unit to perform one or more
functions such as clothes washing or drying, food mixing, cooking and the like.
   APPROVED. Approved by the Housing Inspector or other authority having
jurisdiction.
   AREA BUILDING. The maximum horizontally projected area of the building at or
above grade, exclusive of court and vent shafts.
   AREA (GROSS FLOOR). The area within the inside perimeter of the exterior
walls with no deduction for corridors, stairs, closets, thickness of walls,
columns or other features, exclusive of court and vent shafts.
   AREA (NET FLOOR). The area actually occupied not including accessory
unoccupied area such as corridors, stairs, closets, thickness of walls,
columns, toilet room, mechanical area or other features.
   ATTIC. The space between the ceiling beams of the top habitable story and
the roof rafters.
   ATTIC STORY. Any story situated wholly or partly in the roof, so designated,
arranged or built as to be used for business, storage or habitation.
   AUTOMATIC. Self-acting, operation by its own mechanism when actuated by some
impersonal influence, as for example, a change in current strength, pressure,
temperature or mechanical configuration. (See NON-AUTOMATIC.)
   BACKFLOW. The flow of water or the liquids, mixtures or substances into the
distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from any source or sources
other than its intended source.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTER. A device or means to prevent backflow into the potable
water system.
   BALCONY (EXTERIOR). A platform that projects from the wall of a building or
structure and is enclosed by a parapet or railing no less than 42 inches in
height.
   BASEMENT. A story of a building or structure having one-half or more of its
clear height below grade. Also see STORY. A BASEMENT used as habitable space
shall be considered a story.
   BEAM. A primary structural member supporting secondary structural members,
floor, roof, joists and the like.
   BOILER. A heating appliance intended to supply hot water or steam.
   BONDING. The permanent joining of metallic parts to form an electrically
conductive path which will assure electrical continuity and the capacity to
conduct safely any current likely to be imposed.
   BRANCH CIRCUIT. The circuit conductors between the final overcurrent device
protecting the circuit and the outlet(s).
   BRICK. A solid masonry unit having a shape approximately a rectangular
prism, usually not larger than 12 inches by four inches by four inches. A BRICK
may be made of burned clay or shale, of fire clay or mixtures thereof, of lime
and sand, of cement and suitable aggregates or of other approved materials.
   BUILDING. Any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of
persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind which has enclosing walls
for 50% of its perimeter. The term BUILDING shall be construed as if followed
by the words “or part thereof”. (For the purpose of this chapter, each portion
of a building separated from other portions by a fire wall shall be considered
as a separate BUILDING.) For the purpose of area and height limitations, this
definition shall be applicable to sheds and open sheds.
   BUILDING DRAIN. The part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building connecting with the main soil stack or vent stack which
shall be located at the group or battery of fixtures where the greatest fixture
unit load occurs, and conveys it to the building (house) sewer beginning ten
feet outside the building wall. A cleanout shall be installed at that point and
extended to finish grade.
   BUILDING LINE. The line, established by law, beyond which a building shall
not extend, except as specifically provided by law.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. See HOUSING INSPECTOR.
   BUILDING SEWER. The part of the horizontal piping of a drainage system which
extends from the end of the building drain and which receives the discharge of
the building drain and conveys it to a public sewer, private sewer or
individual sewage-disposal system.
   CELLAR. The portion of a building, the ceiling of which is entirely below
grade or less than four feet six inches above grade. (See STORY.)
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY/COMPLIANCE. A document issued by the Housing
Inspector certifying compliance with all applicable state and local laws,
including all terms of an approved zoning permit, and authorizing occupancy of
a building or structure.
   CHIMNEY. One or more passageways, vertical or nearly so, for conveying flue
gases to the outside atmosphere.
   CHIMNEY CONNECTOR. The pipe which connects a fuel burning appliance to a
chimney.
   CIRCUIT BREAKER. A device designed to open and close a circuit by non-
automatic means and to open the circuit automatically on a predetermined
overcurrent without injury to itself when properly applied within its rating.
   CODE OFFICIAL.  A person qualified under Article 9C of Chapter 9C of the
General Statutes to engage in code enforcement. See G.S. § 143-151.8(a)(5).
   COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL. A material which cannot be classified as non-
combustible or limited- combustible in accordance with that definition.
   COMMON-PROPERTY LINE. A line dividing one lot from another when the lots are
not of one ownership.
   CONCRETE. A mixture of portland cement, fine aggregate, coarse aggregate and
water.
   CONDOMINIUM DWELLING UNIT. For the purpose of this chapter, is an
“apartment”, as defined in this chapter.
   CONDUCTOR, BARE. A conductor having no covering or electrical insulation
whatsoever.
   CONDUCTOR, COVERED. A conductor encased within material of composition or
thickness that is not recognized by the National Electrical Code as electrical
insulation.
   CONDUCTOR, INSULATED. A conductor encased within material of composition and
thickness that is recognized by the National Electrical Code as electrical
insulation.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other water of unknown or questionable safety, whereby water may flow from one
system to the other, the direction of flow depending on the pressure
differential between the two systems.
   DECK. A raised platform extending from an exterior building wall and
supported by piers, columns, pilings or foundation.
   DETERIORATED. A dwelling is unfit for human habitation and can be repaired,
altered or improved to comply with all the minimum standards established by
this chapter, at a cost not in excess of 50% of its value, as determined by
findings of the Housing Inspector.
   DILAPIDATED. A dwelling is unfit for human habitation and cannot be
repaired, altered or improved to comply with all the minimum standards
established by this chapter, at a cost not in excess of 50% of its value, as
determined by findings of the Housing Inspector.
   DISCONNECTING MEANS. A device, or group of devices, or other means by which
the conductors of a circuit can be disconnected from their source of supply.
   DRAIN. Any pipe which carries waste water or water-borne wastes in a
building drainage system.
   DUCT SYSTEM. A continuous passageway for the transmission of air which, in
addition to ducts, may include duct fittings, dampers, plenums, fans and
accessory air handling equipment that may be part of the building construction.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, manufactured home or mobile home, or part
thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used
(whether occupied or vacant), and includes any outhouses and appurtenances
belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith, except that it does not include
any manufactured home or mobile home which is used solely for a seasonal
vacation purpose. Temporary family health care structures, as defined in G.S. §
160D-915, shall be considered dwellings, provided that any minimum square
footage requirements shall not apply to such structures. Temporary housing, as
hereinafter defined, shall not be regarded as a dwelling.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A detached dwelling consisting of a single dwelling
unit only.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A dwelling or combination of dwellings on a single lot
consisting of two dwelling units.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living
facilities for one or more persons; including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   ENGINEER. Within the meaning of this chapter, shall be deemed to be a duly
registered and licensed engineer.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other
pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food, by poisoning, spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by
the Housing Inspector.
   FAMILY. One or more persons living together, whether related to each other
by birth or not, and having common housekeeping facilities.
   FIRE PARTITION. A partition of construction which subdivides a building to
restrict the spread of fire or to provide areas of refuge, but is not
necessarily continuous through all stories nor extended through the roof and
which has a fire-resistance rating as required by the State Building Code.
   FIREPLACE. A hearth, fire chamber or similarly prepared place and a chimney.
      (1)   FACTORY-BUILT FIREPLACES. A fireplace composed of listed factory-
built components assembled in accordance with the terms of their listing and
form the completed fireplace.
      (2)   MASONRY FIREPLACE. A hearth and fire chamber of solid masonry units
such as bricks, stones, listed masonry units or reinforced concrete, provided
with a suitable chimney.
   FIREPLACE STOVE. A chimney-connected, solid fuel-burning stove having part
of its fire chamber open to the room.
   FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING. The time in hours that the material or construction
will withstand the standard fire exposure as determined by a fire test made in
conformity with the Methods of Fire Tests of Building Construction and
Materials, ASTM E119.
   FIRE WALL. A fire resistive wall, having protected openings, which restricts
the spread of fire and extends continuously from the foundation to or through
the roof.
   FIXTURE UNIT. A quantity in terms of which the load-producing effects on a
plumbing system of different kinds of plumbing fixtures are expressed on some
arbitrarily chosen scale.
   FLAME SPREAD. The propagation of flame over a surface.
   FLAME SPREAD RATING. The numerical value assigned to a material tested in
accordance with Method of Test for Surface Burning Characteristics of Building
Materials, ASTM E84.
   FLOOD-LEVEL RIM. The top edge of the receptacle from which water overflows.
   FLOODED. A fixture is flooded when the liquid therein rises to the flood-
level rim.
   FLOOR AREA. The total area of all habitable rooms in a building or
structure.
   FRONT OF LOT. The front boundary line of a lot bordering on the street; and,
in the case of a corner lot, may be either frontage.
   FURNACE, CENTRAL, WARM-AIR. A self-contained appliance designed to supply
heated air through ducts to spaces remote from or adjacent to the appliance
location.
      (1)   FORCED-AIR TYPE. A central furnace equipped with a fan or blower
which provides the primary means for circulation of air.
      (2)   GRAVITY TYPE. A central furnace depending primarily on circulation
of air by gravity.
   FUSE. A safety device for protecting electrical apparatus against the effect
of excess current or to prevent overloading a circuit. It consists of a short
length of conducting metal which melts at a certain heat and thereby breaks
when an excess current flows through it. Most FUSES cannot be reused if burned
out (blown). Some are renewable, however.
   GARAGE. A building or structure or a portion thereof, in which a motor
vehicle containing a flammable fluid in its fuel storage tank is stored,
housed, kept, repaired or serviced.
   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   GRADE. A reference plane representing the average of finished ground level
adjoining the building at all exterior walls. With reference to lumber, means
the division of sawn lumber into quality classes with respect to its physical
and mechanical properties as defined in published lumber manufacturers standard
grading rules.
   GROUND. A conduction connection, whether intentional or accidental, between
an electrical circuit or equipment and the earth, or to some conducting body
that serves in place of the earth.
   GROUND-FAULT CIRCUIT-INTERRUPTER. A device intended for the protection of
personnel that functions to de-energize a circuit or portion thereof within an
established period of time when a current to ground exceeds some predetermined
value that is less than that required to operate the overcurrent protective
device of the supply circuit.
   GROUNDED. Connected to earth or to some conducting body that serves in place
of the earth.
   GROUNDED CONDUCTOR. A system or circuit conductor that is intentionally
grounded.
   GROUNDING CONDUCTOR. A conductor used to connect equipment or the grounded
circuit of a wiring system to a grounding electrode or electrodes.
   HABITABLE ROOM. A room occupied by one or more persons for living, eating or
sleeping; and includes kitchens serving apartments or individual households,
but does not include bathrooms, toilet compartments, laundries, serving and
storage pantries, corridors, basement and other spaces that are not used
frequently or during extended periods.
   HEIGHT. As applied to a building, the vertical distance from average grade
to the highest finished roof surface in the case of flat roofs or to a point at
the average height of pitched roofs; HEIGHT of building in stories.
   HEREAFTER. After the time that this code becomes effective.
   HORIZONTAL SEPARATION. A permanent open space between the building wall
under consideration and the lot line or the center line of a facing street,
alley or public way. Where two or more buildings are on a lot, the HORIZONTAL
SEPARATION of the wall under consideration shall be measured from an imaginary
line drawn at a distance from the facing wall equal to the HORIZONTAL
SEPARATION required for that wall. This definition is for the purpose of this
code only and in no way implies relief from the town’s Zoning Ordinance.
   HOUSING INSPECTOR. The officer or officers charged with the administration
and enforcement of this chapter and the authority granted by G.S. § 160D-1202
(4), referenced as the "public officer" in Article 12 of Chapter 160D, or such
officer's duly authorized representative.
   IDENTIFIED. As applied to equipment, recognizable as suitable for the
specific purpose, function, use environment, application and the like, where
described in a particular code requirement.
   INCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL. Synonymous with NON-COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL.
   INFESTATION. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents or other pests in numbers as to constitute a menace to the health,
safety or welfare of the occupants or to the public.
   LABELED. Equipment or materials to which has been attached a label, symbol,
or other identifying mark of an organization acceptable to the authority having
jurisdiction and concerned with product evaluation, that maintains periodic
inspection of production of LABELED equipment or materials and by whose
labeling the manufacturer indicates compliance with appropriate standards or
performance in a specified manner.
   LINTEL. The beam or girder placed over an opening in a wall which supports
the wall construction above.
   LISTED. Equipment or materials included in a list published by a nationally
recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization
concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of
production of LISTED equipment or materials, and whose listing states either
that the equipment or materials meet nationally recognized standards or have
been tested and found suitable for use in a specified manner. The means for
identifying LISTED equipment may vary for each testing laboratory, inspection
agency or other organization concerned with product evaluation, some of which
do not recognize equipment as LISTED unless it is also labeled. The authority
having jurisdiction should utilize the system employed by the listing
organization to identify a listed product. (Note: Refer to G.S. §§ 66-23
through 66-27, entitled Electrical Materials, Devices, Appliances and
Equipment.)
   LOAD, DEAD. The weight of all permanent construction including walls,
floors, roofs, partitions, stairways and of fixed service equipment.
   LOAD, LIVE. The weight superimposed by the use and occupancy of the
building, not including the wind load, earthquake load or dead load.
   LOT. A parcel of land considered as a unit.
   LOT LINE. A line dividing one lot from another, or from a street or other
public space.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also
includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures
placed on site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved
property.
   MASONRY. The form of construction, composed of stone, brick concrete,
gypsum, hollow clay tile, concrete block or tile or other similar building
units or materials or a combination of these materials laid up unit by unit and
set in mortar. For the purpose of this chapter, plain monolithic concrete shall
be considered as MASONRY.
      (1)   HOLLOW MASONRY UNIT. A masonry unit whose net cross-sectional area
in any plane parallel to the bearing surface is less than 75% of its gross
cross-sectional area measured in the same plane.
      (2)   MASONRY OF HOLLOW UNIT. Masonry consisting wholly or in part of
hollow masonry units laid contiguously in mortar.
      (3)   REINFORCED MASONRY. Unit masonry in which reinforcement is imbedded
in such a manner that the two materials act together in resisting forces.
      (4)   SOLID MASONRY. Masonry consisting of solid masonry units laid
contiguously in mortar, or consisting of plain concrete.
      (5)   SOLID MASONRY UNIT. A masonry unit whose net cross-sectional area
in every plane parallel to the bearing surface is 75% or more of its gross
cross-sectional area measured in the same plane.
   MOBILE HOME. A single portable manufactured housing unit, or a combination
of two or more units connected on-site, that is designed to be used for living,
sleeping, sanitation, cooking and eating purposes by one family only and
containing independent kitchen and sleeping facilities; designed so that each
housing unit can be transported on its own chassis; placed on a temporary or
semi-permanent foundation; and is over 32 feet in length and over eight feet in
width.
   MODULAR UNIT. A factory-fabricated transportable building designed to be
used by itself or to be incorporated with similar units at a building site into
a modular structure. The term is intended to apply to major assemblies and does
not include prefabricated panels, trusses, plumbing trees and other
prefabricated sub-elements.
   MULTI-FAMILY HOUSE. A building or portion thereof containing three or more
dwelling units, including tenement house, apartment house or flat.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING. The same meaning as APARTMENT HOUSE.
   MUNICIPALITY. The governmental unit which has adopted this chapter under due
legislative authority.
   NON-AUTOMATIC. Action requiring personal intervention for its control. (See
AUTOMATIC.)
   NON-COMBUSTIBLE. As applied to a building construction material means a
material which, in the form in which it is used, falls in one of the following
groups in divisions (1) through (4) below. No material shall be classed as NON-
COMBUSTIBLE which is subject to increase in combustibility or flame spread
rating beyond the limits herein established, through the effects of age,
moisture or other atmospheric conditions, as for example, various types of
treated wood. Flame spread rating, as used herein, refers to rating obtained
according to the method for fire hazard classification of Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc. For data on the ratings, see Underwriters Laboratories Fire
Protection Equipment List under the heading Building Materials Hazard
Classification (Fire) (40 U8).
      (1)   Materials no part of which will ignite and burn when subjected to
fire. Examples: asbestos fiber, brick, clay tile, concrete, glass, gypsum,
iron, portland cement, slate, steel, stone.
      (2)   Materials having a structural base of non-combustible material, as
defined in division (1) above, with a surface not over one-eighths-inch thick
which has a flame spread rating not higher than 50. Examples: certain types of
protected steel sheets, gypsum wall board.
      (3)   Materials made up of non-combustible materials as defined in
division (1) above, together with combustible components in a form that cross-
sections of the material in any plane present a similar composition, and having
a surface flame spread rating not higher than 25 without evidence of continued
progressive combustion. Examples: certain insulation materials as, blocks of
cellular glass, boards of glass fiber, slabs of wood excelsior impregnated with
portland cement.
      (4)   Materials, other than as described in division (2) above, made up
of layers with no layer having a surface flame spread rating higher than 25
without evidence of continued progressive combustion. Examples: certain
sandwich-type materials.
   OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used or
intended to be used.
   OCCUPANT. Any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
   OCCUPIED. As applied to a building, shall be construed as though followed by
the words “or intended, arranged or designed to be occupied”.
   OPENABLE AREA. The part of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or part
thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
   OUTLET. A point on the wiring system at which current is taken to supply
utilization equipment.
   OVERCURRENT. Any current in excess of the rated current of equipment or the
ampacity of a conductor.
   OVERLOAD. Operation of equipment in excess of normal, full-load rating, or
of a conductor in excess of rated ampacity which, when it persists for a
sufficient length of time, would cause damage or dangerous overheating. A
fault, such as a short circuit or ground fault, is not an OVERLOAD. (See
OVERCURRENT.)
   OWNER. The holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record.
   PARTIES IN INTEREST. All individuals, associations and corporations who have
interests of record in a dwelling and any who are in possession thereof.
   PARTITION. An interior wall, other than folding or portable, that subdivides
spaces within any story, attic or basement of a building.
   PERMIT. An official document or certificate issued by the authority having
jurisdiction authorizing performance of a specified activity.
   PERSON. A natural person, his or her heirs, executors, administrators or
assigns, and also includes a firm, partnership or corporation, its or their
successors or assigns, or the agent of any of the aforesaid.
   PIPING. Refers to either pipe or tubing, or both.
      (1)   PIPE. Refers to a rigid conduit of iron, steel, copper, brass,
aluminum or semi-rigid polybutylene.
      (2)   TUBING. Refers to semi-rigid conduit of copper, steel, aluminum or
polybutylene.
   PLENUM. An air compartment.
   PLUMBING. The practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation,
maintenance, extension, and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and
appurtenances in connection with any of the following: sanitary drainage or
storm drainage facilities, the venting system and the public or private water-
supply systems, within or adjacent to any building, structure or conveyance;
also the practice and materials used in the installation, maintenance,
extension or alteration of storm water, liquid waste or sewage, and water-
supply systems of any premises to their connection with any point of public
disposal or other acceptable terminal.
   PLUMBING FIXTURES. Installed receptacles, devices or appliances which are
supplied with water or which receive or discharge liquids or liquid-borne
wastes, with or without discharge into the drainage system with which they may
be directly or indirectly connected.
   PLUMBING SYSTEM. Includes the water-supply and distribution pipes; plumbing
fixtures and traps; soil, wastes and vent pipes; building drains and building
sewers, including their respective connections, devices and appurtenances
within the property lines of the premises; and water-treating or water-using
equipment.
   POTABLE WATER. Water which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary and
domestic purposes, and meets the requirements of the Health Authority having
jurisdiction.
   PREMISES.
      (1)   A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or structures
thereon; and
      (2)   A structure or part of a structure used as a unit for residential
or commercial purposes.
   PRIVATE SEWER. A sewer directly controlled by public authority.
   PUBLIC AREAS. An unoccupied open space adjoining a building and on the same
property that is permanently maintained accessible to the Fire Department and
free of all encumbrances that might interfere with its use by the Fire
Department.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A common sewer directly controlled by public authority.
   RAIL (GUARD). A bar extending from one post or support to another and
serving as a guard or barrier.
   RAIL (HAND). A narrow rail for grasping with the hand as a support.
   READILY ACCESSIBLE. See ACCESSIBLE, READILY.
   RECEPTACLE. A contact device installed at the outlet for the connection of a
single attachment plug.
   RECEPTACLE OUTLET. An outlet where one or more receptacles are installed.
   REPAIR. The reconstruction or renewal of any part of an existing building
for the purpose of its maintenance.
   REQUIRED. Required by some provision of this chapter.
   RESIDENTIAL OCCUPANCY. Buildings in which families or households live or in
which sleeping accommodations are provided. The buildings include, among
others, the following: dwellings, multiple dwellings and lodging houses, and
all dormitories.
   ROOF. The roof slab deck with its supporting members.
   ROOF STRUCTURE. An enclosed structure on or above the roof of any part of a
building.
   ROOFING. The covering applied to the roof for weather resistance, fire
resistance or appearance.
   ROOMING HOUSE. Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or
more rooming units, in which space is let by the family of the owner or
operator.
   ROOMING UNIT. A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used
or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating
purposes.
   RUBBISH. Combustible and non-combustible waste materials except garbage, and
the term shall include ashes, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery and dust.
   SANITARY SEWER. A pipe which carries sewage and excludes storm, surface and
ground water.
   SELF-CLOSING. As applied to a fire door or other opening, means normally
closed and equipped with an approved device which will ensure closing after
having been opened for use.
   SEPTIC TANK. A watertight receptacle which receives the discharge of a
drainage system or part thereof, and is designed and constructed so as to
separate solids from the liquid, digest organic matter through a period of
detention, and allow the liquids to discharge into the soil outside of the tank
through a system of one-joint or perforated piping, or disposal pit. For
additional information see State Division of Health Services Bulletin 519 for
tanks of 3,000 gallons capacity or less. Above 3,000 gallons capacity refer to
State Department of Water and Air Resources guidelines.
   SERVICE. The conductors and equipment for delivering energy from the
electricity supply system to the wiring system of the premises served.
   SERVICE CABLE. Service conductors made up in the form of a cable.
   SERVICE CONDUCTORS. The supply conductors that extend from the street main
or from transformers to the service equipment of the premises supplied.
   SERVICE DROP. The overhead service conductors from the last pole or other
aerial support to and including the splices, if any, connect to the service-
entrance conductors at the building or other structure.
   SERVICE EQUIPMENT. The necessary equipment, usually consisting of a circuit
breaker or switch and fuses, and their accessories, located near the point of
entrance of supply conductors to a building or other structure, or an otherwise
defined area, and intended to constitute the main control and means of cutoff
of the supply.
   SEWAGE. Any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension
or solution, and may include liquids containing chemicals in solution.
   SHAFT. A vertical opening extending through one or more stories of a
building, of elevators, dumbwaiter, light, ventilation or similar purpose.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SMOKE DETECTOR. An approved listed detector sensing either visible or
invisible particles or combustion.
   SPRINKLERED. Equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system properly
maintained.
   STAIRWAY. One or more flights of stairs and the necessary landings and
platforms connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from
one story to another in a building or structure.
   STORY. The portion of a building included between the upper surface of a
floor and upper surface of the floor or roof next above. The basement of a
building shall be considered a STORY if it is used for purposes other than
storage or heating.
   STREET. Any public thoroughfare (street, avenue, boulevard, park) or space,
more than 20 feet in which has been dedicated or deeded to the public for
public use.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed.
   SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished or provided by, or under control of the owner
or operator.
   SUPPORTS. Supports, hangers and anchors are devices for supporting and
securing pipe and fixtures to walls, ceilings, floors or structural members.
   TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any tent, trailer or other structure used for human
shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the
ground, to another structure or to any utilities system on the same premises
for more than 30 consecutive days.
   THERMOSTAT. An automatic control actuated by temperature change to maintain
temperatures between predetermined limits.
   TOWNHOUSE. A single-family dwelling unit constructed in a series or group of
attached units with property lines separating the units.
   UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. As defined at §
151.15 herein and G.S. § 160D-1201(a).
   UNSAFE ABANDONED STRUCTURE. An abandoned structure that the Town Council has
found, pursuant to the authority granted at G.S. § 160D-1201(b), to be a health
or safety hazard as a result of the attraction of insects or rodents,
conditions creating a fire hazard, dangerous conditions constituting a threat
to children, or frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the absence of
sanitary facilities.
   UTILIZATION EQUIPMENT. Equipment which utilizes electric energy for
mechanical, chemical, heating, lighting or similar purposes.
   VALUATION OR VALUE. As applied to a building, means the estimated cost to
replace the building in kind.
   VENEER. A facing attached to a wall for the purpose of providing
ornamentation, protection or insulation, but not counted as adding strength to
the wall.
   VENT PIPE. Vent system.
   VENT SYSTEM. A pipe or pipes installed to provide a flow of air to or from a
drainage system or to provide a circulation of air within the system to protect
trap seals from siphonage and back pressure.
   VENTILATED. Provided with a means to permit circulation of air sufficient to
remove an excess of heat, fumes or vapors.
   VENTILATION. The process of supplying and removing air by natural or
mechanical means to or from any space.
   VERTICAL OPENING. An opening through a floor or roof.
   VOLTAGE, NOMINAL. A nominal value assigned to a circuit or system for the
purpose of conveniently designating its voltage class (as 120/240, 480y/277,
600 and the like).
   VOLTAGE TO GROUND. For grounded circuits, the voltage between the given
conductor and that point or conductor of the circuit that is grounded; for
ungrounded circuits, the greatest voltage between the given conductor and any
other conductor of the circuit.
   WALL, BEARING. A wall supporting any vertical load in addition to its own
weight.
   WALL, CAVITY. A wall built of masonry units or of plain concrete, or a
combination of these materials, so arranged as to provide an air space within
the wall, and in which the inner and outer parts of the wall are tied together
with metal ties.
   WALL, CURTAIN. A non-bearing wall between columns or piers and which is not
supported by girders or beams, but is supported on the ground.
   WALL, FACED. A wall in which the masonry facing and backing are so bonded as
to exert common action under load.
   WALL, EXTERIOR. A wall, bearing or non-bearing, which is used as an
enclosing wall for a building, but which is not necessarily suitable for use as
a party wall or fire wall.
   WALL, FOUNDATION. A wall below the first floor extending below in the
adjacent ground level and serving as support for a wall, pier, column or other
structural part of a building.
   WALL OF MASONRY, HOLLOW. A wall built of masonry units so arranged as to
provide an air space within the wall, and in which the inner and outer parts of
the walls are bonded together with masonry units or steel.
   WALL, NON-BEARING. A wall which supports no load other than its own weight.
   WALL, PANEL. A non-bearing wall in skeleton or framed construction, built
between columns or piers and wholly supported at each story.
   WALL, PARAPET. The part of any wall entirely above the roof line.
   WALL, PARTY. A wall on an interior lot line, used or adapted for joint
service between two buildings.
   WALL, RETAINING. A wall designed to prevent the lateral displacement of soil
or other material.
   WALL, VENEERED. A wall having a facing which is not attached and bonded to
the backing so as to form an integral part of the wall for purposes of load
bearing and stability.
   WASTE PIPE. A pipe which conveys only liquid waste, free of fecal matter.
   WATER-DISTRIBUTING PIPE. In a building or premises, a pipe which conveys
water from the water-service pipe to the plumbing fixtures and other water
outlets.
   WATER HEATER. An appliance for supplying hot water for domestic or
commercial purposes. It may be used for space heating if the water temperature
does not exceed 150°F.
   WATER MAIN. The water (street) main is a water-supply pipe for public or
community use.
   WEATHERPROOF. So constructed or protected that exposure to the weather will
not interfere with successful operation.
   WOOD FRAME CONSTRUCTION. Construction in which the exterior bearing and non-
bearing walls and partitions, floors and roofs and their supports are wholly or
partly of wood or other approved materials. WOOD FRAME CONSTRUCTION may be
either protected or unprotected.
   WRITING. Includes printing and typewriting.
   WRITTEN NOTICE. A notification in writing delivered in person to the
individual or parties intended, or delivered at or sent by certified or
registered mail to the last residential or business address of legal record.
   YARD. An unoccupied open space other than a court.
   ZONING ORDINANCE. A term applied to a town ordinance that divides the town
into districts which may have different types of regulations that pertain to
the use of land and type occupancies allowed in a particular area.
(Ord. passed 7-21-2016; Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)
§ 151.04 CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.
    In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict
with a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety or health provisions of
this code of ordinances or ordinances or codes of the town, the provision which
establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection of the health
and safety of the people shall prevail.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)
§ 151.05 ALTERNATE REMEDIES.
    Nothing herein contained shall be construed to impair or limit, in any way,
the town's power to define and declare nuisances and to cause their abatement
by summary action or otherwise, nor shall enforcement of any remedy provided
herein prevent the enforcement of the other remedies provided herein.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)
REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS FOR STRUCTURES
§ 151.15 DWELLINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION.
   (A)    The Housing Inspector shall determine that a dwelling is unfit for
human habitation if he or she finds any of the following conditions:
      (1)   Interior load-bearing members or non-load-bearing members which
seriously list, lean or buckle and/or in the opinion of the Housing Inspector
show damage or deterioration to an extent as to render the building unsafe;
      (2)   External load-bearing members or non-load bearing members which
seriously list, lean or buckle and/or in the opinion of the Housing Inspector
show damage or deterioration to an extent as to render the building unsafe;
      (3)   Floors or roofs which have improperly distributed loads, which are
overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the
purpose used;
      (4)   Damage by fire, wind or other causes as to render the building
unsafe;
      (5)   Dilapidation, decay, unsanitary conditions or disrepair which is
dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of the occupants or other people in
the town;
      (6)   Inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic;
      (7)   Defects significantly increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or
other calamities;
      (8)   Lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating or sanitary facilities
to an extent as to endanger the health, safety or general welfare of the
occupants or other residents of the town; and/or
      (9)   Lack of proper electrical, heating or plumbing facilities required
by this code which constitutes a health or a definite safety hazard.
   (B)   Irrespective of the above, a dwelling unit shall be construed by the
Housing Inspector to be unfit for human habitation, and he or she shall so find
if the dwelling unit contains more than seven separate types of violations of
any of the minimum standards set forth in this code.
(Ord. passed 7-21-2016; Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)  Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.16 UNFIT DWELLINGS AND UNSAFE ABANDONED STRUCTURES.
    Unfit buildings, as defined in §
151.15 of this chapter and G.S. § 160D-1201(a), and unsafe abandoned buildings
as defined in §
151.01 of this chapter and G.S. § 160D-1201(b), shall be repaired, removed,
renovated or demolished as provided therein.
(Ord. passed 7-21-2016; Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)  Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.17 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE EXTERIOR AND INTERIOR OF STRUCTURES.
   No person shall occupy, as owner-occupant, or let or sublet or offer to let
or sublet to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit designed or
intended to be used for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or eating
therein, which does not comply with the following requirements.
   (A)   Foundation. The building foundation walls, piers or other elements
shall be maintained in a safe manner and capable of supporting the load which
normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
   (B)   Exterior walls. The exterior walls shall be substantially weather-
tight and shall be made impervious to the adverse effects of weather and be
maintained in sound condition and good repair.
   (C)   Roofs. Roofs shall be maintained in a safe manner and have no defects
which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of
the building.
   (D)   Means of egress. Every dwelling unit shall have two safe, unobstructed
means of egress with minimum ceiling height of seven feet (84 inches) leading
to a safe and open space at ground level. Exceptions: only one exit may be
required if an exception is specifically addressed in the State Building Code
and all the requirements and terms of that section are met. (This exception is
not applicable if in the opinion of the Housing Inspector unusually hazardous
conditions exist and additional means of egress facilities are required when
necessary to assure the safety of the occupants.)
   (E)   Stairs. Every inside and outside stair shall be safe to use and
capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon;
and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
   (F)   Porches and appurtenances. Every outside porch and any appurtenance
thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use
may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition and good
repair.
   (G)   Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door and basement or cellar
door and hatchway shall be substantially weather-tight, water-tight and rodent-
proof and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.
   (H)   Windows to be glazed. Window panes or an approved substitute shall be
maintained without cracks or holes which allow passage of air.
   (I)   Window sash. Window sash shall be properly fitted and weather-tight
within the window frame.
   (J)   Hardware. Every exterior door shall be provided with proper hardware
and maintained in good condition.
   (K)   Door frames. Every exterior door shall fit reasonably well within its
frame so as to substantially exclude rain and wind from entering the dwelling
building.
   (L)   Screens. Every window or other device with opening to outdoor space,
used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall have screens, tight fitting,
free of holes and not nailed to window or sash, except as follows: Exception:
dwellings containing central heating furnaces and adequate cooling equipment
for mechanically ventilating the building year round are not required to have
screens on window openings.
   (M)   Accessory structures. Garages, storage buildings and other accessory
structures shall be maintained and kept in good repair and sound structural
condition.
   (N)   Interior floors, walls and partitions. Every floor, wall or partition
shall be substantially rodent- proof; shall be kept in sound condition and good
repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which
normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
   (O)   Ceilings. Every interior ceiling shall be substantially rodent-proof;
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and
capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
   (P)   Structural supports. Every structural element of the dwelling shall be
structurally sound and show no evidence of deterioration which would render it
incapable of carrying loads which normal use may cause to be placed thereon.
   (Q)   Protective railings. Protective railings shall be required on any
unenclosed structure over 36 inches above adjacent finish grade or on any steps
containing four risers or more. Interior stairs and stairwells more than four
risers high shall have handrails located in accordance with requirements of the
Building Code. Handrails or protective railings shall be capable of bearing
normally imposed loads and be maintained in good condition.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021) Penalty,  see §
151.99
§ 151.18 MINIMUM SPACE AND USE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Required space in dwelling unit. Every dwelling unit shall contain at
least 150 square feet of floor space for the first occupant thereof and at
least 100 additional square feet of floor area per each additional occupant.
   (B)   Required space in sleeping rooms. In every dwelling unit of two or
more rooms, every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall
contain at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square
feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
   (C)   Minimum ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every
habitable room, foyer, hall or corridor shall have a ceiling height of at least
seven feet; and the floor area of that part of any room where the ceiling
height is less than seven feet shall not be considered as part of the floor
area in computing the total floor area of the room for the purpose of
determining the maximum permissible occupancy thereof.
   (D)   Occupancy of dwelling unit below grade. No basement or cellar space
shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit unless meeting all
specifications for habitable rooms.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021) Penalty,  see §
151.99
§ 151.19 STRUCTURAL AND GENERAL STANDARDS TECHNICAL GUIDELINES.
The following standards shall constitute the minimum standards for structural
condition of a dwelling or dwelling unit:
   (A)   Foundation.
      (1)   Beneath the building firm ground, reasonably dry, no soggy ground,
no water standing, no water running under building;
      (2)   Sound footing, adequate bearing;
      (3)   Sound piers, no loose mortar or building materials;
      (4)   There shall be no piers in which plumb line from top center falls
outside middle one-third of pier base;
      (5)   There shall be no isolated solid masonry piers exceeding in height
ten times least dimension of pier; and
      (6)   No wood stiff-knees or other improper piers.
   (B)   Exterior walls.
      (1)   There shall be no wall in which plumb line from top center of studs
falls outside base plate at any point along wall;
      (2)   Studs shall be framed, anchored, tied, spaced and braced as per the
current State Building Code and all current volumes and amendments, except that
the following may be acceptable in the sound discretion of the code official:
         (a)   Studs installed in a manner that complied with the adopted
Building Codes and related laws at the time of installation and are in
compliance with other sections of this code and that appear to be structurally
sound.
         (b)   Studs that are installed as per a design by a registered,
licensed architect or engineer and that are in compliance with other sections
of this code and any other applicable laws.
         (c)   Studs that are deemed structurally sufficient by the code
official acting within the discretion granted to the code official under the
applicable code and that are in compliance with other sections of this code and
applicable laws.
      (3)   No studs shall be rotted, fire-damaged or termite-damaged;
      (4)   No broken or cracked structural members;
      (5)   All siding weather-tight with no holes, excessive cracks or rotted
boards which permit air to penetrate rooms; and
      (6)   No loose siding.
   (C)   Roofs.
      (1)   No rafters rotted, broken, sagging or improperly supported ends.
All eaves in proper structural condition;
      (2)   No rafters seriously fire damaged;
      (3)   Rafters shall be properly braced and tied four feet O.C. maximum
when required;
      (4)   Attic properly ventilated;
      (5)   No rotted, loose, fire-damaged or sagging sheathing;
      (6)   No loose roof covering, no holes, no leaks causing damage to
structure or rooms;
      (7)   There shall be a minimum of class C roof covering; and
      (8)   Proper flashing at walls or chimneys.
   (D)   Means of egress.
      (1)   The exits required by this division (D) must be at least 30 inches
wide and six feet eight inches high, be easily accessible to the occupants of
each dwelling unit. All doors in the egress way and discharge points shall be
easily operable and remotely located;
      (2)   Platforms, steps and/or handrails provided to serve exits and
maintained in safe condition; and
      (3)   Safe, continuous and unobstructed exit from interior of building to
the exterior at street or grade level.
   (E)   Stairs.
      (1)   Free of holes, grooves and cracks large enough to constitute
accident hazards;
      (2)   Stairwells and flights of stairs more than four risers high shall
have rails not less than 30 inches mounted vertically from the nose of the
treads to the top of the rail;
      (3)   Every rail firmly fastened and maintained in good condition;
      (4)   No flight of stairs shall be steeled more than one inch out of its
intended position or pulled away from supporting or adjacent structures;
      (5)   Every stair tread shall be of uniform width and risers of uniform
height in any single flight of stairs; and
      (6)   Stairs shall be sound, securely fastened in their intended position
and capable of supporting the live and dead loads for which they are intended.
   (F)   Porches and appurtenances.
      (1)   Foundation, floor, ceiling and roof equal to standards as set forth
except: sills and joists need not be level if providing drainage of floor;
floors need not be level if providing for drainage; floors need not be weather-
tight; ceiling height may be 70 and attic need not be vented; and
      (2)   Adequate posts and railings, not rotted, broken or termite-damaged.
   (G)   Interior floor.
      (1)   No rotted or termite-damaged sills;
      (2)   No broken, overloaded or sagging sill;
      (3)   Sills reasonably level;
      (4)   Sills properly and sufficiently supported;
      (5)   No rotted, fire-damaged or termite-damaged joists;
      (6)   No broken or sagging joists;
      (7)   Floor joist, shall be framed, anchored, tied, spaced and at the
maximum span as per the current State Building Code and all current volumes and
amendments, except that the following may be acceptable in the sound discretion
of the code official:
         (a) Floor joists that were installed in a manner that complied with
the adopted Building Codes and related laws at the time of installation and
that comply with other sections of this code and appear to be structurally
sound. In no case shall the maximum spans for floor joist exceed those given in
the table below; providing, they show no signs of being weak or overloaded.
         (b)   Floor joists that are installed as per a design by a registered,
licensed architect or engineer and that comply with other sections of this
chapter and any other applicable laws.
         (c)   Floor joists that are deemed structurally sufficient by the code
official acting within the discretion granted to the code official under the
applicable code and that are in compliance with other sections of this code and
applicable laws.
            158 for 2 x 10 at 16 O.C.
            131 for 2 x 10 at 24 O.C.
            123 for 2 x 8 at 16 O.C.
            103 for 2 x 8 at 24 O.C.
            94 for 2 x 6 at 16 O.C.
            79 for 2 x 6 at 24 O.C.
      (8)   No two-inch by four-inch floor joists shall be allowed;
      (9)   There shall be no joists or sills seriously damaged by fire;
      (10)   Flooring weather-tight without holes or excessive cracks which
permit air to penetrate rooms;
      (11)   Flooring reasonably smooth, not rotten, fire-damaged or worn
through;
      (12)   No loose flooring; and
      (13)   Floor reasonably level.
   (H)   Interior walls.
      (1)   Interior finish free of holes and excessive cracks which permit air
to penetrate rooms;
      (2)   There shall be no walls in plumb lines from top center or studs
fall outside base plate at any point along wall;
      (3)   No loose plaster, loose boards or other loose wall materials;
      (4)   No cardboard, newspaper or other highly combustible or unsafe wall
finish;
      (5)   Studs shall be framed, anchored, tied, spaced and braced as per the
current State Building Code and all current volumes and amendments, except that
the following may be acceptable in the sound discretion of the code official:
         (a)   Studs installed in a manner that complied with the adopted
Building Codes and related laws at the time of installation and are in
compliance with other sections of this code and that appear to be structurally
sound.
         (b)   Studs that are installed as per a design by a registered,
licensed architect or engineer and that are in compliance with other sections
of this code and any other applicable laws.
         (c)   Studs that are deemed structurally sufficient by the code
official acting within the discretion granted to the code official under the
applicable code and that are in compliance with other sections of this code and
applicable laws.
      (6)   No studs shall be rotted or termite-damaged; and
      (7)   No broken or cracked studs or other structural members.
   (I)   Ceilings.
      (1)   No joists rotted, broken, sagging or improperly supported ends;
      (2)   Ceiling joists shall be framed, anchored, tied, spaced, braced and
at the maximum span as per the current State Building Code and all current
volumes and amendments, except that the following may be acceptable in the
sound discretion of the code official:
         (a)   Ceiling joists installed in a manner that complied with the
adopted Building Codes and related laws at the time of installation and are in
compliance with other sections of this code and that appear to be structurally
sound.
         (b)   Ceiling joists that are installed as per a design by a
registered, licensed architect or engineer and that are in compliance with
other sections of this code and any other applicable laws.
         (c)   Ceiling joists that are deemed structurally sufficient by the
code official acting within the discretion granted to the code official under
the applicable code and that are in compliance with other sections of this code
and applicable laws.
      (3)   There shall be no holes or excessive cracks which permit air to
penetrate room;
      (4)   No loose plaster, boards, sheetrock or other ceiling finish;
      (5)   There shall be no ceiling joists seriously damaged by fire; and
      (6)   No cardboard or other highly combustible finishes.
   (J)   Occupancy of dwelling unit below grade.
      (1)   The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are protected against dampness;
      (2)   The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window size as required by §
151.24 of this chapter;
      (3)   The required minimum window area is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining the window area; and
      (4)   The total of openable window area in each room is equal to at least
the minimum required under §
151.24 of this chapter, except where there is supplied some other device
affording adequate ventilation.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.20 COOKING EQUIPMENT.
    All cooking equipment and facilities shall be installed in accordance with
the appropriate State Building, Gas or Electrical Code and shall be maintained
in a safe and good working condition.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.21 GARBAGE STORAGE OR DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
    Every dwelling unit or multi-family dwelling shall be supplied with an
approved garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink grinder) in each dwelling unit;
or an incinerator unit, to be approved by the Housing Inspector, in the
structure for the use of the occupants of each dwelling unit, or an approved
outside garbage can as required by
Ch. 91 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021) Penalty,  see §
151.99
§ 151.22 MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR LIGHT AND VENTILATION.
   (A)   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet or offer to
let or sublet to another for occupancy any dwelling unit designed or intended
to be used for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking and eating therein,
which does not comply with the following requirements. Every habitable room
shall have a window or windows with a total glassed area of not less than eight
square feet or 8% of the floor area, whichever is greater. Windows shall be so
arranged that at least one-half of the glassed area is openable, unless the
room is otherwise properly ventilated by mechanical means.
   (B)    Exception: in existing buildings that complied with the applicable
codes and laws at the time of installation. The minimum size window allowed
will be 16 inches by 32 inches. If, in the opinion of the Housing Inspector,
the location of the window and other means of egress constitute a hazard this
exception shall not apply.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021) Penalty,  see §
151.99
§ 151.23 SANITATION REQUIREMENTS.
   No persons shall occupy as owner-occupant or let or sublet or offer to let
or sublet to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit nor shall any
vacant dwelling be designed or intended to be used for the purpose of living,
sleeping, cooking or eating therein, which does not comply with the following
requirements.
   (A)   Sanitation. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling
units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition
the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
   (B)   Cleanliness. Every owner or occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep in
a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and
premises thereof which he or she occupies or controls or that is provided for
his or her particular use.
   (C)   Garbage disposal. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
dispose of all his or her garbage and any other organic waste which might
provide food for rodents and all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by
placing it in the garbage disposal facilities or garbage or rubbish storage
containers, as required by
Ch. 91 of this code of ordinances.
   (D)   Extermination. Every occupant of a single dwelling and every owner of
a building containing two or more dwelling units shall be responsible for the
extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests within the building or
premises.
   (E)   Use and operation of supplied plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of a
dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the
proper use and operation thereof.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.24 ROOMING HOUSES.
    No person shall operate a rooming house, or occupy or let or sublet or
offer to let or sublet to another for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming
house, except in compliance with the provisions of every section of this
chapter.
   (A)   License required. No person shall operate a rooming house unless he or
she holds a valid rooming house license and a certificate of occupancy.
   (B)   Water closet, lavatory and bath facilities.
      (1)   At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower, properly connected to a water and sewer system and in good working
condition, shall be supplied for each four rooms within a rooming house
wherever the facilities are to be shared.
      (2)   All facilities shall be located on the floor they serve within the
dwelling so as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to
all persons sharing the facilities.
   (C)   Water heater required. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower
shall be supplied with hot water at all times.
   (D)   Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one person shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor
space and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one person
shall contain at least 50 additional square feet for each occupant thereof.
   (E)   Exit requirement. Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed
means of egress leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by
all applicable building codes.
   (F)   Sanitary conditions. The operator of every rooming house shall be
responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and
for maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming
house; and he or she shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance
of the entire premises where the entire structure of building is leased or
occupied by the operator.
   (G)   Other minimum requirements for safety. Rooming houses are to comply
with the other minimum structural, plumbing, electrical, sanitation and heating
standards in this code.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021) Penalty,  see §
151.99
§ 151.25 SANITARY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Sanitary facilities required. Every dwelling unit shall contain not
less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, and a water closet, all in
good working condition and properly connected to an approved water and sewer
system. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from defects,
leaks and obstruction.
   (B)   Location of sanitary facilities. All required sanitary facilities
shall be located within the dwelling unit and be accessible to the occupants of
same. The water closet, tub or shower, and lavatory in at least one bathroom
shall be located in a room affording privacy to the user and the rooms shall
have minimum floor space of 30 square feet.
   (C)   Hot and cold water supply. Every dwelling unit shall have connected to
the kitchen sink, lavatory and tub or shower an adequate supply of both cold
and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe
distribution system connected to a potable water supply.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021) Penalty,  see §
151.99
§ 151.26 PLUMBING STANDARDS.
   (A)   Connection to the town sanitary sewer system where available;
otherwise, an approved septic tank;
   (B)   All fixtures operable;
   (C)   No broken water closet bowls;
   (D)   Water closet not loose or leaking;
   (E)   No leaks in shower stall floor;
   (F)   No hopper or vogel bowl toilets;
   (G)   Adequate facilities for furnishing hot water to each tub or shower,
lavatory and kitchen sink;
   (H)   Installed water supply inside building for each dwelling unit;
   (I)   Installed water closet, tub or shower, lavatory and sink for each
dwelling unit. Kitchen sink at least 12 inches by 16 inches by six inches deep;
   (J)   Separate toilet facilities for each dwelling unit;
   (K)   Toilet and bathing facilities protected from the weather;
   (L)   All water piping protected from freezing by proper installation in
protected space;
   (M) At least three inches minimum size main vent properly installed for each
building. Exception: when a less restrictive main vent size is approved by the
State Plumbing Code, it shall also be approved by this chapter;
   (N)   Soil and water lines properly supported with no broken or leaking
lines; and
   (O)   Every water closet compartment, floor surface and bathroom floor
surface so constructed or finished as not to permit the entrance or passage of
water.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021) Penalty,  see §
151.99
§ 151.27 MINIMUM ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS; REQUIRED OUTLETS.
   (A)    All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be maintained
in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used and installed and
connected to the source of electric power in accordance with the State
Electrical Code.
   (B)   Every dwelling shall be adequately and safely wired for electric
lights and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room and hallway shall have
provision for adequate lighting and other necessary electrical service.
   (C)   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing
five or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every
public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling occupancy and
containing not more than four dwelling units may be supplied with conveniently
located light switches, controlling an adequate lighting system which may be
turned on when needed, instead of full-time lighting.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021) Penalty,  see §
151.99
§ 151.28 ELECTRICAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   No receptacles, ceiling fixtures or other fixtures hanging loose;
   (B)   All switches and fixtures safely operable;
   (C)   No unsafe wiring;
   (D)   No extension cords shall be spliced;
   (E)   No circuit shall be overloaded;
   (F)   Fuses sized correctly and not bridged out;
   (G)   All wiring to be installed shall be in accordance with the National
Electrical Code;
   (H)   All wiring shall be maintained in a safe condition;
   (I)   Smoke detectors as required by town ordinance; and
   (J)   Sufficient outlets for existing usage shall be provided as follows.
There shall be a minimum of one duplex receptacle and one light with an
approved switching device in each room of each dwelling or dwelling unit.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021) Penalty,  see §
151.99
§ 151.29 ELECTRICAL SERVICES.
   (A)   Where the determination is made, upon examination of the existing
electrical service supply, that the electrical service supply is obsolete or is
a hazard to the occupants or would otherwise constitute a hazard to life and
property, the following shall be used for determining the adequacy of the
service supply and main disconnect switch:
 
Total Number of Lighting Electrical Capacity of Main Service Supply and Main
Outlets Only                        Disconnect Switch
0-24                                60 amp service at 240 volts
25-50                               100 amp service at 240 volts
 
   (B)   The minimum capacity of the service supply and the main disconnect
switch shall be sufficient to adequately carry the total load required in
accordance with the Electrical Code of the town.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021) Penalty,  see §
151.99
§ 151.30 HEATING FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   (A)    Every dwelling unit shall have heating facilities that are properly
installed, maintained in safe and good working conditions and capable of
heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water closet compartments. The
heating systems shall be capable of heating these areas to a temperature of
65°F at a distance of three feet above the floor at an outside temperature of
0°F or a windchill factor equal thereto. If the heating systems are found by
the Housing Inspector to be inadequate according to these standards, the owner
shall make provisions to comply with this standard. The requirements to comply
with this standard may include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   The repair, replacement and/or alteration of the heating systems;
      (2)   The installation of insulation with an R value as required by the
State Building Code in all accessible floors, walls and ceilings; and (Note:
ACCESSIBLE shall be defined, in reference to this section, to mean capable of
being reached without removal of the building finish.)
      (3)   The installation of storm doors and windows.
   (B)   Where an approved heating system is not provided, each dwelling unit
shall be provided with sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues or gas vents, in
good working order, whereby heating units may be connected so as to furnish a
minimum temperature of 65°F measured at a point three feet above the floor at
an outside temperature of 0°F or a windchill factor equal thereto, and in a
safe and proper working order.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021) Penalty,  see §
151.99
§ 151.31 HEATING STANDARDS.
   (A)   In multi-family housing, liquid fuel to be stored in outside tanks and
piped to heating units;
   (B)   No loose bricks in chimney;
   (C)   No hanging masonry chimneys;
   (D)   No holes in flue;
   (E)   Thimbles grouted in tight;
   (F)   Thimbles high enough for stovepipe to rise one-fourth inch per foot
minimum;
   (G)   Combustible materials shall not be placed within six inches of the
edges of a fireplace opening. Combustible material above and projecting more
than one and one half inches from the face of the fireplace opening shall have
a minimum clearance of 12 inches above the opening;
   (H)   Fireplace used only for supplemental heat and not for basic heating;
   (I)   Masonry closure, if fireplace opening is closed;
   (J)   Stove within six feet of thimble serving it;
   (K)   Clearances for appliances are to be as per the manufacturer’s
installation instructions or in the case of unlisted approved units, use the
tables in Vol. III of the State Building Code; and
   (L)   No stovepipe through combustible walls.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021) Penalty,  see §
151.99
§ 151.32 WEATHERPROOFING.
   Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be maintained as provided at §§
151.17,
151.19 and
151.26 of this chapter, so as to be weather-tight and free of plumbing leaks or
other sources of water or moisture giving rise to mold and mildew or other
conditions that are unsafe or unsanitary for the occupants of the dwelling.
Means of draining water from a dwelling, including but not limited to sump
pumps, gutters, gutter drains, condensate drains, culverts and the like, shall
be maintained so as to function as intended and prevent dampness in the walls,
ceiling or crawl space or basement.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.45 HOUSING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   The Office of Housing Inspector is hereby created. Until otherwise
provided by the Town Council, the Chief Building Code Officer or his or her
designee shall be the Housing Inspector.
   (B)    The Housing Inspector shall have the powers provided by G.S. § 160D-
1210 and as otherwise may be necessary or convenient to carry out and
effectuate the purposes and provisions of this chapter, including, without
limiting the generality of the foregoing and in addition to others herein
expressly or impliedly granted, the following powers:
      (1)   Investigations. To investigate dwellings in the town’s jurisdiction
in order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation
and/or unsafe, being guided by the requirements set forth in this chapter;
      (2)   Oaths, witnesses and the like. To administer oaths and affirmations
and to examine witnesses and receive evidence;
      (3)   Right of entry. To enter upon and within premises and dwellings for
the purpose of making examinations and investigations; provided that, the
entries shall be made in a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience
to the persons in possession during reasonable hours and upon presentation of
proper credentials;
      (4)   Delegation. To appoint and fix the duties of officers, agents, and
employees necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter; and to delegate
any of his or her functions and powers under this chapter to other officers or
agents; and
      (5)   Inspections. To make inspections to determine the condition of
dwellings in order that he or she may perform his or her duty of safeguarding
the health and safety of occupants and the public. For the purpose of making
the inspections after proper notification and presentation of proper
credentials, the Housing Inspector is hereby authorized to enter, examine and
survey, at all reasonable times, all dwellings and premises. The owner and/or
occupant of every dwelling, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the
Housing Inspector free access to the dwelling and its premises at all
reasonable times for the purpose of the inspections, examination and survey.
Every occupant of a dwelling shall give the owner thereof, or his or her agent
or employee, access to any part of the dwelling or its premises at all
reasonable times for the purpose of making the repairs or alterations as are
necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any
lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 7-21-2016; Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)
§ 151.46 INSPECTIONS OF MULTI-FAMILY DWELLINGS; PERIODIC INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the Housing
Inspector may make periodic inspections only when there is reasonable cause to
believe that unsafe, unsanitary, or otherwise hazardous or unlawful conditions
may exist in a residential building or structure. However, when the Housing
Inspector determines that a safety hazard exists in one of the dwelling units
within a multi-family building, which in the opinion of the Housing Inspector
poses an immediate threat to the occupant, the Housing Inspector may inspect,
in the absence of a specific complaint and actual knowledge of the unsafe
condition, additional dwelling units in the multi-family building to determine
if that same safety hazard exists. In conducting inspections authorized under
this section, the Housing Inspector shall not discriminate between single-
family and multi-family buildings or between owner-occupied and tenant-occupied
buildings. In exercising this power, the Housing Inspector shall have a right
to enter on any premises within its jurisdiction at all reasonable hours for
the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action, upon presentation of
proper credentials. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit
periodic inspections in accordance with state fire prevention code or as
otherwise required by state law.
   (B)   By means of a separate ordinance adopted pursuant to the authority
granted at G.S. § 160D-1207, the Town Council may require periodic inspections
as part of a targeted effort to respond to blighted or potentially blighted
conditions within a geographic area that has been designated by the Town
Council.
(Ord. passed 7-21-2016; Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)
§ 151.47 HEARING PROCEDURES.
    Whenever a petition is filed with the Housing Inspector by at least five
residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling is unfit for human
habitation or is an unsafe abandoned structure, or whenever either of the
foregoing appears to the Housing Inspector (on his or her own motion), the
Housing Inspector shall, if his or her preliminary investigation discloses a
basis for the charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and
parties having an interest in the dwelling or abandoned structure, a complaint
stating the charges in that respect and containing a notice that an
administrative hearing will be held before the Housing Inspector (or his or her
designated agent) at a place within the jurisdiction in which the property is
located therein fixed not less than ten days, nor more than 30 days, after the
serving of the complaint. The owner and parties in interest shall be given a
right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise,
and give testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. The rules of
evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in
administrative hearings before the Housing Inspector.
(Ord. passed 7-21-2016; Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)
§ 151.48 SERVICE OF ORDER, CONTENTS.
    If, after the notice and an administrative hearing, the Housing Inspector
determines that the structure under consideration is unfit for human habitation
and/or an unsafe abandoned structure in accordance with the standards herein
set forth, the Housing Inspector shall state in writing his or her findings of
fact in support of the determination, and shall issue and cause to be served
upon the owner thereof one of the following orders, as appropriate:
   (A)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling or unsafe
abandoned structure (sometimes referenced herein collectively as "structure"),
bringing it up to the standards described herein, can be made at a cost less
than 50% of the present value of the building, the order shall require the
owner, within a specified period of time, to repair, alter or improve the
structure so as to render it fit for human habitation, or it shall require the
owner within the specified time therein, to repair, alter or improve the
structure so as to render it safe. The order may require that the structure be
vacated and closed only if continued occupancy during the time allowed for
repair will present a significant threat of bodily harm, taking into account
the nature of the necessary repairs, alterations, or improvements; the current
state of the structure; and any additional risks due to the presence and
capacity of minors under the age of 18 or occupants with physical or mental
disabilities. The order shall state that the failure to make timely repairs as
directed in the order shall make the structure subject to the issuance of an
order under §
151.49 below.
   (B)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the structure, bringing it
up to the standards described herein cannot be made at a cost of less than 50%
of the present value of the structure, the order shall require the owner,
within a specified period of time, to either repair, alter or improve the
structure so as to bring it into compliance with the standard described herein,
or to demolish and remove the structure. The order may require that the
structure be vacated and closed only if continued occupancy during the time
allowed for repair will present a significant threat of bodily harm, taking
into account the nature of the necessary repairs, alterations, or improvements;
the current state of the structure; and any additional risks due to the
presence and capacity of minors under the age of 18 or occupants with physical
or mental disabilities. The order shall state that the failure to make timely
repairs as directed in the order shall make the structure subject to the
issuance of an order under §
151.49 below. If the structure is a designated local landmark or located in a
historic district of the town, the Housing Inspector shall notify the Historic
District Commission, and the Historic District Commission shall, after
providing proper notice, hold an administrative hearing to determine if the
structure is of particular significance or value toward maintaining the
character of the district and if the structure is determined to be of
particular significance or value, the order may require that the structure be
vacated and closed consistent with G.S. § 160D-949.
   (C)   The Housing Inspector shall ensure that any order issued under this
section that concerns a designated landmark or a structure within a designated
historic district is consistent with and follows the procedures and standards
applicable to such designated landmark and/or within the designated historic
district under the town's unified development ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-21-2016; Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)
§ 151.49 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES IN THE EVENT OF NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Repair, closing, and posting. If the owner fails to comply with an
order to repair, alter or improve, or to vacate and close a dwelling or unsafe
abandoned structure, the Housing Inspector may cause the structure to be
repaired, altered or improved, or to be vacated and closed, and the Housing
Inspector may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed
a placard with the following words: "This building [or structure] is unfit for
human habitation [and/or unsafe]; the use or occupation of this building [or
structure] for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful." Occupation of a
structure so posted shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor. The duties of the
Housing Inspector set forth in this division shall not be exercised until the
Town Council shall have by ordinance ordered the Housing Inspector to proceed
to effectuate the purpose of this chapter with respect to the particular
property or properties that the Housing Inspector shall have found to be unfit
for human habitation or an unsafe abandoned structure, and which property or
properties shall be described in the ordinance. This ordinance shall be
recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds in the county where the
property or properties are located and shall be indexed in the name of the
property owner in the grantor index.
   (B)   Demolition. If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or
demolish a dwelling or an unsafe abandoned structure, the Housing Inspector may
cause such structure to be removed or demolished. The duties of the Housing
Inspector set forth in this division shall not be exercised until the Town
Council shall have by ordinance ordered the Housing Inspector to proceed to
effectuate the purpose of this chapter with respect to the particular property
or properties that the Housing Inspector shall have found to be unfit for human
habitation or an unsafe abandoned structure, and which property or properties
shall be described in the ordinance. No such ordinance shall be adopted to
require demolition of a structure until the owner has first been given a
reasonable opportunity to bring it into conformity with this chapter and any
other applicable codes. This ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the
Register of Deeds in the county where the property or properties are located
and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor index.
   (C)   Abandonment of intent to repair.
      (1)   If a structure has been vacated and closed for a period of one year
pursuant to an ordinance adopted pursuant to division (A) of this section, or
after the Housing Inspector issues an order or proceedings have commenced
regarding a structure to be repaired or vacated and closed as provided in this
section, then the Town Council may find that the owner has abandoned the intent
and purpose to repair, alter, or improve the structure in order to render it
fit for human habitation and/or safe and that the continuation of the structure
in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health, safety, and
welfare of the local government in that the structure would continue to
deteriorate, would create a fire and safety hazard, would be a threat to
children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal activities,
would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in
the area, and would render unavailable property and a structure that might
otherwise have been made available to ease the persistent shortage of decent
and affordable housing in this state, then in such circumstances, the Town
Council may, after the expiration of such one-year period, enact an ordinance
and serve such ordinance on the owner, setting forth the following:
         (a)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it
fit for human habitation can be made at a cost not exceeding 50% of the then
current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the owner
either repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days.
         (b)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it
fit for human habitation cannot be made at a cost not exceeding 50% of the then
current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the owner to
demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days.
      (2)   This ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the register of
deeds and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor
index. If the owner fails to comply with this ordinance, the housing inspector
shall effectuate the purpose of the ordinance.
   (D)   If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a dwelling,
the Housing Inspector may file a civil action in the name of the town to remove
the occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the nature of
summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as
parties- defendant any person occupying the dwelling. The Clerk of Superior
Court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a
magistrate at a certain time, date and place not to exceed ten days from the
issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint
shall be served as provided in G.S. § 42-29. The summons shall be returned
according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly
served and if, at the hearing, the Housing Inspector produces a certified copy
of an ordinance adopted by the governing body pursuant to division (C) above,
authorizing the officer to proceed to vacate the occupied dwelling, the
magistrate shall enter judgment ordering that the premises be vacated and that
all persons be removed. The judgement ordering that the dwelling be vacated
shall be enforced in the same manner as the judgement for summary ejectment
entered under G.S. § 42-30. An appeal from any judgement entered hereunder by
the magistrate may be taken as provided in G.S. § 7A-228, and the execution of
the judgement may be stayed as provided in G.S. § 7A-227. An action to remove
an occupant of a dwelling who is a tenant of the owner may not be in the nature
of a summary ejectment proceeding pursuant to this division (D), unless the
occupant was served with notice at least 30 days before the filing of the
summary ejectment proceeding that the governing body has ordered the Housing
Inspector to proceed to exercise his or her duties under division (C) of this
section to vacate and close or remove and demolish the dwelling.
   (E)   Whenever a determination is made pursuant to §
151.48 that a dwelling must be vacated and closed, or removed or demolished,
under the provisions of this section, notice of the order shall be given by
first-class mail to any organization involved in providing or restoring
dwellings for affordable housing that has filed a written request for the
notices. A minimum period of 45 days from the mailing of the notice shall be
given before removal or demolition by action of the Housing Inspector, to allow
the opportunity of any organization to negotiate with the owner to make
repairs, lease or purchase the property for the purpose of providing affordable
housing. The Housing Inspector or clerk shall certify the mailing of the
notices, and the certification shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud.
Only an organization that has filed a written request for the notices may raise
the issue of failure to mail the notices, and the sole remedy shall be an order
requiring the Housing Inspector to wait 45 days before causing removal or
demolition. Authority: G.S. § 160D-1203.
   (F)   The Town Council shall ensure that any ordinance issued under this
section that concerns a designated landmark or a structure located within a
designated historic district is consistent with, and follows the procedures and
standards applicable to such designated landmark and/or within the designated
historic district under the town's unified development ordinance.
(Ord. passed 7-21-2016; Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)
§ 151.50 SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.
   (A)    Complaints or orders issued by the Housing Inspector shall be served
upon persons either personally or bycertified mail. When service is made by
certified mail, a copy of the complaint or order may also be sent by regular
mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the certified mail is unclaimed or
refused, but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within ten
days after the mailing. If regular mail is used, a notice of the pending
proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected.
   (B)   If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are
unknown and cannot be ascertained by the Housing Inspector in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, or, if the owners are known but have refused to accept
service by registered or certified mail, and the Housing Inspector makes an
affidavit to that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the
owners or other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having
general circulation in the town at least once no later than the time at which
personal service would be required under the provisions of this chapter. When
service is made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be
posted in a conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected.
(Ord. passed 7-21-2016; Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)
§ 151.51 RIGHT TO APPEAL.
   (A)    Any owner or person who is aggrieved with a decision or order issued
by the Housing Inspector pursuant to §
151.48 may appeal from that decision or order to the Town’s Zoning Board of
Adjustment (hereinafter, "Board").
   (B)   An appeal from any decision or order of the Housing Inspector may be
taken by any person aggrieved thereby or by any officer, board or commission of
the town. Any appeal from the Housing Inspector shall be taken within ten days
from the rendering of the decision or service of the order, whichever is later,
and shall be taken by filing with the Housing Inspector and with the Board a
written notice of appeal on forms supplied by the Housing Inspector, which
shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of
any notice of appeal, the Housing Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the
Board all the papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed
from was made. When an appeal is from a decision of the Housing Inspector
refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, his or her
decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is
from a decision of the Housing Inspector requiring the person aggrieved to do
any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until
the hearing by the Board, unless the Housing Inspector certifies to the Board,
after the notice of appeal is filed with him or her, that by reason of the
facts stated in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished the
appellant), a suspension of his or her requirement would cause imminent peril
to life or property, in which case the requirement shall not be suspended
except by a restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon
not less than one days written notice to the Housing Inspector, by the Board,
or by a court of record upon petition made pursuant to division (E) of this
section.
   (C)   The Board shall fix reasonable time for the hearing of all appeals,
shall give due notice to all the parties and shall render its decision within a
reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or attorney. The
Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the decision or
order appealed from, and may make the decision and order as in its opinion
ought to be made in the matter. The concurring vote of four members of the
majority of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or
order of the Housing Inspector. In any case where there are practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardships in carrying out the strict letter of the
ordinance, the Board shall have the power to adapt the application of the
ordinance to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of the
ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial
justice done.
   (D)   Every decision of the Board shall be subject to review by proceedings
in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the decision of the
Board, but not otherwise.
   (E)   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Housing Inspector or a
decision rendered by the Board may petition the Superior Court for an
injunction restraining the Housing Inspector from carrying out the order or
decision, and the Court may, upon the petition, issue a temporary injunction
restraining the Housing Inspector pending a final disposition of the order;
provided, however, that the petition shall be filed within 30 days after
issuance of the order or rendering of the decision. Hearings shall be held by
the Court on any petition within 20 days, and shall be given preference over
other matters on the Court’s calendar. The court shall hear and determine the
issues raised and shall enter the final order or decree as law and justice may
require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any
amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this division (E).
   (F)   In case any dwelling is erected, constructed, altered, repaired
converted, maintained or used in violation of this chapter or any valid order
or decision of the Housing Inspector or Board may institute any appropriate
action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration or use, to restrain, correct or abate the violation,
to prevent the occupancy of the dwelling or to prevent any illegal act, conduct
or use in or about the premises of the dwelling.
(Ord. passed 7-21-2016 ; Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)
§ 151.52 LIEN ON PREMISES.
   (A)    The amount of the cost of the repairs, alterations or improvements,
or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the Housing Inspector
shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred,
which lien shall be filed, have the same priority and be collected as a lien
for special assessment provided in Article 10 of Chapter 160A of the General
Statutes. The amount of such cost is also a lien on any other real property of
the owner located within the town limits except for the owner's primary
residence. The additional lien provided in this division is inferior to all
prior liens and shall be collected as a money judgment.
   (B)   If the structure is removed or demolished by the Housing Inspector, he
or she shall sell the materials of the structure and any personal property,
fixtures, or appurtenances found in or attached to the structure and shall
credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or demolition
and any balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court by the
Housing Inspector, shall be secured in a manner as may be directed by the
court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled
thereto by final order of decree of the court. Repairs, alterations,
improvements or demolitions may be made under the supervision of the Housing
Inspector, or he or she may let the same to contract on competitive bids or by
private contract if no bids are received.
   (C)   Vacating and closing structures shall be done under the supervision of
the Housing Inspector.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)
§ 151.53 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)    Unless otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for the owner
of any structure to fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter or improve the
same, or to vacate and close and demolish and remove the same, upon order of
the Housing Inspector duly made and served as herein provided, within the time
specified in the order, and each day that any failure, neglect, or refusal to
comply with the order continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   When the Housing Inspector finds that a building is unfit for human
habitation or unsafe within the meaning of this chapter and has notified the
owner to this effect and the time limit set by the Housing Inspector for the
correction of defects or vacating same has expired, no person shall receive
rentals, offer for rent or occupy the structure, and each day the offense
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 7-21-2016; Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter is subject to the general penalty and
enforcement provisions of §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. PL05268-110121, passed 12-8-2021)
CHAPTER 152: RENTAL PROPERTY REQUIREMENTS
Section
Smoke Detectors
   
152.01   Definitions
   
152.02   Automatic smoke detector outlets required in rental residential
dwelling units
   
152.03   Responsibilities of building owner
   
152.04   Permits
   
152.05   Enforcement and inspectors
   
152.06   Appeals
Tenant Notification of Flood Zone
   
152.20   Definitions
   
152.21   Purpose
   
152.22   Notification
 
   
152.99   Penalty
SMOKE DETECTORS
§ 152.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. For the
purposes of this subchapter, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases, words and
their derivatives shall be construed as set forth in the definitions sections
of the State Building Codes and the town's Zoning Ordinance. For purpose of
this subchapter, all other wording shall be defined as per a dictionary.
   AUTOMATIC SMOKE DETECTOR DEVICE (120-VOLT PLUG-IN). A self-acting approved
device powered by 120 volts, cord and plug connected, operating by its own
mechanism when actuated by smoke. Note: may be used in residential dwelling
units constructed prior to 1-1-1975.
   AUTOMATIC SMOKE DETECTOR DEVICE (BATTERY POWERED). A self-acting approved
battery powered device, operating by its own mechanism when actuated by smoke.
Note: may be used in residential dwelling units constructed prior to 1-1-1975.
   AUTOMATIC SMOKE DETECTOR OUTLET (120-VOLT). A self-acting approved outlet
(non- plug-in) powered by 120 volts operating by its own mechanism when
actuated by smoke. Note: required in all residential dwelling units constructed
after 1-1-1975. As per NEC 210-71, a state amendment to the State Electrical
Code.
   RENTAL RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT. A structure with one or two dwelling units
that is not owner occupied; or a structure with three or more dwelling units
whose units are not required to have smoke detectors under the State Building
Code.
   RESIDENTIAL DWELLING UNIT. Single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings,
apartment houses, condominiums and/or town houses.
§ 152.02 AUTOMATIC SMOKE DETECTOR OUTLETS REQUIRED IN RENTAL RESIDENTIAL
DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   A minimum of one 120-volt outlet shall be installed outside each
sleeping area in each dwelling unit within single-family dwellings, two-family
dwellings, apartment houses, condominiums and/or town houses for the connection
of approved fixed automatic smoke detectors (non-plug-in) as required in the
State Building Code.
   (B)   Automatic smoke detector outlets are required in residential dwelling
units. The outlets shall be located on or near the ceiling in accordance with
the listing and the instructions of the manufacturer of the approved automatic
smoke detector.
   (C)   Exception: the 120-volt outlets specified in this section shall not be
required when an approved automatic smoke detecting system is installed which
provides equivalent protection and whose primary source of power is 120-volts.
(Note: the wording in this section is identical to the wording contained in §
210-71, state amendment number one to the 1984 and 1987 State Electrical Code.
This wording is also identical to the wording contained in § 210-27 of both the
1978 and the 1981 editions of the State Electrical Code.)
   (D)   Local exception No. 1: a battery powered, approved automatic smoke
detector may be used in rental residential dwelling units constructed prior to
1-1-1975 in lieu of the 120-volt automatic smoke detector outlet required in
this section.
   (E)   Local exception No. 2: a 120-volt (plug-in-type) automatic smoke
detector may be used in residential dwelling units constructed prior to 1-1-
1975 in lieu of the 120-volt automatic smoke detector outlet required in this
section.
Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.03 RESPONSIBILITIES OF BUILDING OWNER.
   (A)   The owner(s) of a building having a rental residential dwelling unit
or dwelling units shall be responsible for installing or having qualified
persons install outlets as required by this subchapter. Installation of 120-
volt automatic smoke detector outlets shall be done by a licensed electrical
contractor.
   (B)   The owner of a rental residential dwelling unit shall be responsible
for maintaining his or her automatic smoke detector and its power source.
Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.04 PERMITS.
   Permits will only be required if the type installation is as outlined in
G.S. § 160A-417. This statute explains, in detail, when permits are required.
§ 152.05 ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTORS.
   The Planning and Inspections Department and/or the Fire Marshal shall be
responsible for enforcing this subchapter. Inspectors shall be qualified by the
Code Officials Qualification Board when inspecting the 120-volt permanent type
units.
§ 152.06 APPEALS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, appeals from an inspector's decision
may be taken to the Town Minimum Housing Board by filing an appeal with the
staff within five days of an inspector's written decision.
TENANT NOTIFICATION OF FLOOD ZONE
§ 152.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DWELLING. Any building or structure that is or is intended to be used for
living or sleeping by one or more human occupants.
   DWELLING UNIT. A room or group of rooms within a dwelling forming a single
independent habitable unit containing independent kitchen, sanitary, and
sleeping facilities.
   FLOOD ZONE. A geographical area defined by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency ("FEMA") according to varying levels of flood risk and shown on the most
current Flood Insurance Rate Map subject to periodic and/or severe flooding.
FLOOD ZONES present in the Town of Boone are the AE Floodway (formerly,
Floodway), the AE Zone (formerly the 100-year Floodplain), and Zone X (formerly
the 500-Year Floodplain).
   LANDLORD. Both the owner of the property that is offered for residential
lease and any agent or representative of the property owner who acts on the
owner's behalf with respect to such residential rental property, including but
not limited to a property manager.
(Ord. passed 7-16-2020)
§ 152.21 PURPOSE.
   The town seeks to protect the health, safety and welfare of citizens
residing within the town who may be subject to unexpected flooding. Individuals
and families who rent may be unaware that their dwelling unit is located within
an area subject to flooding. It is the purpose of this subchapter to require
landlords to notify prospective tenants when a rental dwelling unit is located
within a flood zone.
(Ord. passed 7-16-2020)
§ 152.22 NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   All landlords who lease dwelling units located within a flood zone
shall disclose to all prospective tenants, by means of a written notice in at
least 16-point type that is separate from other lease or application materials
and provided before the lease is signed, a notice that contains all of the
following:
      (1)   The specific flood zone in which the dwelling unit is located;
      (2)   That the specific flood zone may not accurately reflect the
frequency of flooding;
      (3)   That the landlord will not accept responsibility for damage to or
destruction of the tenant's property by flooding (unless the landlord accepts
responsibility);
      (4)   That renter's flood insurance is available through the National
Flood Insurance Program, and that the tenant may visit www.floodsmart.gov for
more information on the National Flood Insurance Program;
      (5)   To the extent the landlord has actual knowledge, the years in which
flooding of the dwelling unit has occurred; and
      (6)   This notice shall be signed and dated by the tenant.
   (B)   Sample notice.
 
   Notice of Possible Flooding
   The dwelling unit at (insert address) is located within the (insert flood zone) flood zone. Consequently, there is the possibility in any given
year that this dwelling unit may be flooded.
   Previously, flood zones were known as (1) the floodway, (2) the 100-year flood plain or (3) the 500-year flood plain. FEMA now uses the following
terminology:
      (1)   Floodway = AE Floodway
      (2)   100-Year Floodplain = AE Zone
      (3)   500-Year Floodplain = Zone X
   It is important for tenants to note that the category of flood zone may not accurately reflect actual frequency of flooding.
   Landlord is aware that the dwelling unit at (insert address) has been flooded (insert number of times) in the past (number of years).
   The landlord (choose one) does or does not accept responsibility for damage to or destruction of the tenant's property resulting from flooding.
   The tenant is hereby notified that renter's flood insurance policies are available through your insurance agent.
   The renter is encouraged to visit www.floodsmart.gov for more information on the National Flood Insurance Program.
                                                                          
         Tenant Signature         Date
 
(Ord. passed 7-16-2020) Penalty, see §
152.99
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Smoke detectors.
      (1)   Any person who shall be adjudged to have violated §§
152.01 through
152.06 shall be subject to a civil penalty of $25 for each offense. Each 30
days that the violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense.
      (2)   The Inspector shall make written demand for payment of the penalty
assessed upon the person in violation and shall set forth in a description of
the violation for which the penalty has been imposed. If payment is not
received within 30 days after demand for payment is made, the town may recover
the penalty, and all subsequently accruing penalties, in a civil action.
      (3)   Any person who shall be adjudged to have violated §§
152.01 through
152.06 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be liable
to a fine not to exceed $50 for each offense. Each 30 days that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
      (4)   Notwithstanding divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) and (A)(3) above, §§
152.01 through
152.06 may also be enforced by appropriate equitable remedies issuing from a
court of competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   Tenant notification. Violation of §§
152.20 through
152.22 by any person shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the
amount of $100 per dwelling unit to be recovered by the town. Violators shall
be issued written notice of the violation which must be paid within ten days
after receipt of the notice. If the violator does not pay the penalty within
ten days, the town may recover the penalty and all subsequent accruing
penalties in a civil action. In the event it is necessary for the town to
institute a civil action to collect the penalty, the violator shall be
responsible for all court costs and attorney’s fees incurred by the town.
(Ord. passed 7-16-2020)
CHAPTER 153: UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Section
   
153.01   Adoption by reference
§ 153.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The town’s Unified Development Ordinance is hereby adopted by reference and
made a part of this code, the same as if set forth in full herein. Copies of
the ordinance shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk as a
separate Volume II to the Town of Boone Code of Ordinances, and shall be
available for public inspection during regular business hours.
CHAPTER 154: REGULATION OF VACANT BUILDINGS
Section
   
154.01   Declaration of policy
   
154.02   Definitions
   
154.03   Prohibition against creating or maintaining blighted properties
   
154.04   Prohibited lease provisions
   
154.05   Enforcement
 
   
154.99   Penalty
§ 154.01 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   (A)   The Town Council finds that there exists within the town a large
number of real properties containing vacant buildings that are poorly
maintained.
   (B)   It is further found that these poorly maintained vacant buildings are
a major cause and source of blight in residential and non-residential areas.
   (C)   It is further found that the existence of vacant and blighted
buildings adversely affects the economic well-being of the town, and is
inimical to the health, safety and welfare of town citizens, thereby
constituting a nuisance dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or public
safety.
   (D)   It is further found that many of the vacant and blighted buildings can
be rehabilitated and used to provide decent, safe facilities for the use(s) in
which the buildings were originally constructed, and the rehabilitation, and
reuse would eliminate, remedy and prevent the adverse conditions described.
   (E)   It is further found that the abatement of vacant and blighted
buildings is a benefit to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the
town.
(Ord. passed 8-17-2006)
§ 154.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLIGHTED PROPERTIES. Any vacant building, or any vacant portion of a
building that is a separate unit, where it has been determined by the town the
building is neglected or otherwise poorly maintained. The following factors may
be considered in determining whether a building is poorly maintained: missing
or boarded windows or doors; collapsing or missing walls, roof or floors;
siding that is seriously damaged or missing; faulty or damaged foundation or
other structural components; or the exterior of the building fails to meet the
standards set forth below.
      (1)   The exterior and all areas exposed to public view shall be kept
free from deterioration and shall be in good state of repair. The surrounding
property shall be maintained so that the building and property reflect a
reasonable level of maintenance in keeping with the standards of the community
and not constitute a blighting factor for town citizens.
      (2)   The maintenance of the building exterior and property shall
include, without limitation, the following.
         (a)   All building surfaces shall be maintained free of broken glass,
crumbling stone or brick, peeling paint or other finish material utilized to
prevent deterioration of materials susceptible to decay, graffiti or other
condition reflective to overall deterioration or inadequate maintenance.
         (b)   The maintenance and appearance of the grounds and yards of
premises shall be such that they reflect the level of upkeep of surrounding
properties. This shall include, but not be limited to, dead or severely
overgrown trees and shrubs, dilapidated or abandoned materials or equipment,
deteriorating sidewalks, parking areas and other site improvements.
   VACANT BUILDING. Any building or a portion thereof which is without a
resident or occupant or which is not being put to a lawful use for a period of
60 days or longer.
(Ord. passed 8-17-2006)
§ 154.03 PROHIBITION AGAINST CREATING OR MAINTAINING BLIGHTED PROPERTIES.
   Any owner of real property in the town shall not cause or allow blighted
properties to be created, nor shall any owner allow the continued existence of
blighted properties.
(Ord. passed 8-17-2006) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.04 PROHIBITED LEASE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Any lease provision contained in any lease or other instrument entered
after the effective date of this chapter, which prevents or seeks to prevent a
landlord from immediately terminating the lease when the tenant has vacated the
leased premises, is hereby declared to be against public policy and null and
void, irrespective of the tenant's willingness to continue to pay monthly rent
following vacation of the premises.
   (B)   Any lease provision contained in any lease or other instrument entered
after the effective date of this chapter, which prevents, seeks to prevent or
limits a landlord from leasing the premises to any other person or entity after
termination of the tenant's tenancy, is hereby declared to be against public
policy and null and void.
(Ord. passed 8-17-2006) Penalty, see §
154.99
§ 154.05 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   (1)   The Chief Building Code Official, or his or her designee, shall
perform periodic inspections, subject to Town Council's directions, for vacant
buildings within the town's planning jurisdiction which may constitute a
violation of this chapter.
      (2)   In exercising this power, Building Code Officials shall have a
right to enter on any premises at all reasonable hours for the purposes of
inspection, upon presentation of proper credentials.
   (B)   When a Building Code Official finds a blighted property in violation
of this chapter, it shall be his or her duty to issue and cause to be served
upon the property owner a complaint, stating the conditions present which have
resulted in this action, and containing a notice that a hearing will be held
before the Code Official in the Development Services Office, not less then ten
days nor more than 30 days after serving of a complaint.
      (1)   The complaints shall be served upon owners either personally or by
certified mail, return receipt requested.
      (2)   The failure of the property owner to accept or claim a complaint
sent by certified mail shall not prevent further action under this section, but
will be presumed to have been received three days after the complaint is
deposited in the United States mail.
      (3)   The hearing shall provide the owner a right to file an answer to
the complaint, and to appear in person to give testimony, at the place and time
fixed in the complaint.
   (C)   If, after the notice and hearing, the Inspector determines that a
vacant building constitutes a blighted property in violation of this chapter,
he or she shall state his or her findings in a written notice of violation.
      (1)   The notice shall be served upon owners either personally or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, and contain a written order to cause
the property to be repaired, improved or demolished as necessary to abate the
violation within a specified time period, not to exceed 60 days.
      (2)   The failure of the property owner to accept or claim a notice of
violation sent by certified mail shall not prevent further action under this
section, but will be presumed to have been received three days after the notice
is deposited in the United States mail.
   (D)   Any owner who is aggrieved with the Code Official's decision may file
an appeal to the Town Council, by giving notice of appeal in writing to the
Code Official and to the Town Clerk within ten days following issuance of the
notice of violation.
      (1)   The Town Council shall hear and render a decision in an appeal
within a reasonable time period.
      (2)   The Town Council may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the
order.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building to fail, neglect,
or refuse to repair, improve or demolish blighted properties upon order of the
Code Official duly made and served, as herein provided, within the time period
specified in the notice of violation.
(Ord. passed 8-17-2006)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any act constituting a violation of this chapter shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $100.
   (B)   Each day that the violation continues shall constitute separate
violation of this chapter.
   (C)   If the offender fails to pay the penalty, the penalty, along with
court costs and attorney's fees incurred by the town, may be recovered by the
town in a civil action in the nature of a debt.
   (D)   (1)   This chapter may also be enforced by any civil action instituted
by the town to prevent, restrain, correct or abate a violation of this chapter.
      (2)   If the action is taken by the town, the town shall be entitled to
recover all expenses, including court costs and attorney's fees incurred.
(Ord. passed 8-17-2006)
CHAPTER 155: BUILDING PERMITS
Section
   
155.01   Building permits required
   
155.02   Application
   
155.03   Time limits on applications
   
155.04   Permit fees
   
155.05   Time limitations on validity
§ 155.01 BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED.
   Consistent with the requirements of G.S. § 160A-417, and subject to the
exceptions set forth therein, no person shall commence or proceed with the
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of any
building or other structure, or any part thereof, unless they have obtained a
written permit therefor from the building inspector. The issuance, enforcement,
and revocation of such permits shall be as provided at G.S. § 160A-418 through
160A-423.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2018)
§ 155.02 APPLICATION.
   Written application shall be made for all permits required by this chapter
and shall be made on forms provided by the Inspection Department. Such
application shall be made by the owner of the building or structure affected,
or by his authorized agent or representative, and, in addition to such other
information as may be required by the appropriate inspector to enable the
inspector to determine whether the permit applied for should be issued, shall
include the following:
   (A)   Name, residence, and business address of the property owner(s);
   (B)   Name, residence, and business address of the authorized representative
or agent, if any; and
   (C)   Name and business address of the contractor, if any, together with
evidence that the contractor has obtained a certificate from the appropriate
state licensing board for such contractors, if such be required for the work
involved in the permit for which application is made.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2018)
§ 155.03 TIME LIMITS ON APPLICATIONS.
   An application for a building permit shall be considered abandoned and void,
and the plan review fee will not be refunded, if:
   (A)   One hundred-eighty days has passed since the date that the applicant
was notified that the permit was ready for pickup and the permit has not been
picked up; or
   (B)   One hundred-eighty days has passed since the permit application was
submitted and the applicant has not responded to the building inspector's
request(s) for modifications or additional information so as to allow final
processing and issuance of the permit.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2018)
§ 155.04 PERMIT FEES.
   All building permit application reviews require payment of review and
permitting fees at the time of application submittal. Fees shall be as
established by the current town ordinance establishing fees and permit
requirements.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2018)
§ 155.05 TIME LIMITATIONS ON VALIDITY.
   All permits issued under this chapter shall expire by limitation six months
after the date of issuance if the work authorized by the permit has not been
commenced. If after commencement the work is discontinued for a period of 12
months, the permit shall immediately expire. No work authorized by any permit
which has expired shall thereafter be performed until a new permit has been
secured.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2018)
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
G.S. Section Code Section
G.S. Section                           Code Section
1-597                                  101.03, UDO 1.13
1-598                                  UDO 1.14
7A-227                                 151.49
7A-228                                 151.49
Ch. 9C, Art. 9C                        151.03
                                       10.99,
                                       50.999,
14-4                                   72.99,
                                       80.14,
                                       90.04
14-4(a)                                84.99, UDO 12.06
                                       71.99,
14-4(b)                                73.99,
                                       85.99,
                                       100.99
14-288.1                               101.02
14-288.20A                             101.99
14-409.39(2)                           101.02
14-409.40(f)                           89.21
14-415.13                              89.21
14, Art. 37                            UDO 34.01
18B-101(9)                             89.35
18B-101(15)                            89.35
18B-300(c)                             89.35
18B-1001                               83.02
19-1.1                                 80.05, UDO 26.04
Ch. 20                                 74.01
Ch. 20, Art. 10A                       110.01
20-4.01                                70.01
20-4.01(7)(a)                          70.01
20-4.01(23)                            73.01
20-4.01(27)d1                          70.01
20-141                                 Ch. 74, Sch. IX
20-141.1                               Ch. 74, Sch. IX
20-153                                 Ch. 74, Sch. VII
                                       Ch. 74, Sch.
                                       I,
20-158                                 II,
                                       III,
                                       IV
20-158.1                               Ch. 74, Sch. VI
20-160(a)                              71.04
20-160.1                               Ch. 74, Sch. VI
20-162                                 70.04
                                       Ch. 74, Sch.
                                       I,
20-172                                 II,
                                       III,
                                       IV
20-219.9 through 20-219.14             70.08
20-219.11                              81.09
20-219.12                              81.10
20-280(b)                              110.05
20-281.1                               110.01
Ch. 26A                                UDO 15.51, UDO 34.01
40A-3                                  UDO 7.02
42-29                                  151.49
42-30                                  151.49
44A-4                                  81.11
44A-5                                  81.11
44A-6                                  81.11
47-30                                  UDO App. A, A4.02
Ch. 55A                                83.02
Ch. 62                                 110.01
66-23 through 66-27                    151.02
74-46 through 74-68                    UDO 20.02
87-10(b)                               UDO 31.11
Ch. 87, Art. 1                         UDO 31.11
Ch. 89B                                UDO 15.38
89D-13                                 UDO 31.11
99E-22(1)                              100.02
105-130.2(1)                           83.02
105-164.3                              UDO 34.01
105-164.4(a)(4c)                       96.037
105-164.4(a)(6)                        96.037
105-349(a)                             31.07
105-349(c)                             31.07
Ch. 105, Art. 12                       UDO 15.38
110-86(3)                              83.02
113.274(c)(1a)                         98.01
Ch. 113, Art. 22A                      98.01
113A-52(8)                             UDO 20.02
116-35                                 50.291
116-35                                 50.291
121-12(a)                              UDO 8.03
122C-3(11)b                            UDO 34.01
Ch. 130A                               83.03
130A, Art. 8, Part 6                   83.02
130A, Art. 9                           UDO 34.01
130A-247 through 130A-250              50.445
130A-290(a)(6)                         UDO 34.01
130A-491 et seq.                       83.01
131E-114.3(a)(1)                       95.02
Ch. 132                                110.04
132-1 et seq.                          30.52
136-32.2                               UDO 26.01
136-96                                 96.048
136-102.6                              UDO 23.01, UDO App. A, A4.02
136-141 et seq.                        81.14
136-143                                81.14
Ch. 143, Art. 21                       50.999, UDO 29.01
143-140                                92.39
143-141                                92.39
143-143.15                             30.03
143-151.8(a)(5)                        151.03
143-213(2)                             UDO 15.45
143-213(18)                            50.327
143-215.1                              50.327,
                                       50.339
143-215.1(b)                           50.339
143-215.1(f3)                          50.113
143-215.1(g)                           50.339
143-215.3(a)                           50.999
143-215.6A                             50.999
143-215.6B                             50.999
143-215.6B(f)                          50.999
143-215.6B(g)                          50.999
143-215.6B(h)                          50.999
143-215.6B(i)                          50.999
143-318.9                              30.52, UDO 2.01, UDO 2.02, UDO 2.03
143-318.9 et seq.                      35.04
143-318.10                             30.52
158-7.1                                50.291
Ch. 159                                30.13
159, Art. III                          31.06
159-17                                 30.13
Ch. 160A                               50.001
Ch. 160A, Art. 15                      74.01
160A-31                                UDO 4.14
160A-58.1                              UDO 4.14
160A-71                                30.03
160A-174                               73.02,
                                       80.01
160A-174(a)                            83.01
                                       10.99,
160A-175                               80.01,
                                       80.14,
                                       96.033
160A-175(d) and (e)                    38.08
160A-175(f)                            73.99
160A-189                               89.21
160A-193                               80.01,
                                       80.14
160A-194(a)                            73.02
160A-200.1                             80.01
160A-205                               50.113
160A-216 through 160A-239              50.289
160A-281 through 160A-289              32.01
160A-282(a) and (b)                    32.01
160A-299                               96.048
160A-301                               70.04
160A-303                               Ch. 81
160A-303.2                             Ch. 81
160A-304(a)                            110.04
160A-312                               50.327
160A-319                               96.026
160A-320                               50.113
160A-344.1                             UDO 4.14
160A-360 (repealed)                    UDO 1.26
160A-360 through 160A-458.4 (repealed) 33.01
160A-385.1 (repealed)                  UDO 4.14, UDO 4.16
160A-393 (repealed)                    50.339, UDO 6.01
160A-400.51 et seq. (repealed)         96.001
160A-400.55(b) (repealed)              96.037
160A-400.56 (repealed)                 96.037
160A-413 (repealed)                    33.01
160A-417 (repealed)                    152.04, UDO 5.01, UDO 12.06,
                                       155.01
160A-418 through 160A-423 (repealed)   155.01
160A-452 (repealed)                    UDO 2.03
160A-492                               39.02
160A-499                               50.113
160A, Art. 4A                          UDO 1.26
160A, Art. 8, § 174                   UDO 29.01
160A, Art. 10                          151.52
160A, Art. 19, Part 3D (repealed)      50.113
160A, Art. 26                          110.01
160A, Art. 27                          110.01
Ch. 160D, Art. 12                      151.01—
                                       151.03
160D-915                               151.03
160D-949                               151.48
160D-1201(a)                           151.03,
                                       151.16
160D-1201(b)                           151.03,
                                       151.16
160D-1202(4)                           151.03
160D-1203                              151.49
160D-1207                              151.46
160D-1210                              151.45
162-207(c)                             50.113
162A-211                               50.113
162A, Art. 8                           50.113
Ch. 163, Art. 22A                      30.52
                                       101.01—
166A, Art. 1A                       101.03,
                                       101.99
                                       
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2012 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2012 Code Section
36.03              36.99
37.06              37.01
Ch. 73, Schd. I    Ch. 74, Schd. I 
Ch. 73, Schd. II   Ch. 74, Schd. II
Ch. 73, Schd. III  Ch. 74, Schd. III
Ch. 73, Schd. IV   Ch. 74, Schd. IV
Ch. 73, Schd. V    Ch. 74, Schd. V
Ch. 73, Schd. VI   Ch. 74, Schd. VI
Ch. 73, Schd. VII  Ch. 74, Schd. VII
Ch. 73, Schd. IX   Ch. 74, Schd. IX
97.01              83.01
97.02              83.02
97.03              83.03
97.04              83.04
97.05              83.05
97.99              83.99
99.01              97.01
99.02              97.02
99.03              97.03
99.04              97.04
99.05              97.05
99.99              97.99
100.01             84.01
100.02             84.02,
                   84.99
101.01             85.01
101.02             85.02
101.03             85.03
101.04             85.04
101.99             85.99
102.01             100.01,
                   100.99
102.02             100.02,
                   100.99
                   
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date   Code Section
         Passed
                71.05,
         3-18-  94.06,
—      2004   85.01—
                85.04,
                85.99
—      5-2-   84.02,
         2004   84.99
—      5-20-  71.05
         2004
—      7-20-  Ch. 74, Schd. IX
         2004
—      8-19-  100.01
         2004
—      4-21-  71.05
         2005
—      11-17- Ch. 74, Schd. V
         2005
—      1-19-  85.04
         2006
—      4-20-  30.07
         2006
—      5-18-  100.02,
         2006   100.99
—      6-15-  30.51
         2006
         8-17-  154.01—
—      2006   154.05,
                154.99
—      4-17-  30.51
         2008
—      6-19-  30.07,
         2008   30.51
—      10-29- 30.51,
         2008   112.01
—      1-15-  30.07
         2009
         6-18-  30.51,
—      2009   35.01—
                35.06
—      9-17-  110.04
         2009
—      11-19- Ch. 74, Schd. III and
         2009   VI
         12-17- 83.01—
—      2009   83.05,
                83.99
         2-16-  83.02,
—      2010   83.04,
                83.99
—      4-15-  30.51
         2010
—      8-17-  30.51
         2010
—      9-21-  30.04,
         2010   35.04
—      11-16- 30.52
         2010
                36.01,
—      12-14- 36.02,
         2010   36.99,
                37.01
—      4-19-  110.01—
         2011   110.08
                30.03,
         6-21-  35.02,
—      2011   35.04,
                110.01—
                110.08
                50.001—
                50.010,
                50.025,
                50.026,
                50.040—
                50.071,
                50.085—
                50.091,
                50.105—
                50.112,
                50.114—
                50.121,
                50.135—
                50.162,
                50.175—
                50.182,
                50.195—
                50.208,
                50.220—
                50.225,
                50.240—
                50.243,
                50.255—
                50.259,
—      6-21-  50.270—
         2011   50.274,
                50.285,
                50.287—
                50.290,
                50.292—
                50.296,
                50.305—
                50.313,
                50.327—
                50.335,
                50.338—
                50.340,
                50.355—
                50.367,
                50.380—
                50.382,
                50.395—
                50.402,
                50.415—
                50.426,
                50.440—
                50.448,
                50.460,
                50.462,
                50.999
—      7-1-   50.460
         2011
—      7-1-   50.460
         2011
                50.003,
         7-17-  50.105—
—      2012   50.112,
                50.114—
                50.119
                50.009,
                50.010,
                50.327—
                50.335,
                50.338—
                50.341,
                50.355—
—      12-13- 50.368,
         2012   50.380—
                50.382,
                50.395—
                50.402,
                50.440—
                50.448,
                50.999,
                Ch. 50, App. A
13-01    1-15-  10.99
         2013
—      9-17-  100.01,
         2013   100.03
                UDO 1.01—1.26, 2.01—2.08, 4.01—4.19, 5.01—5.09, 6.01—6.05, 7.01—7.05, 8.01ï—8.06,
         12-16- 9.01—9.09, 9.11, 12.01—12.10, 14.01—14.12, 15.01—15.69, 16.01—16.12, 17.01—17.09,
—      2013   19.01—19.03, 20.01—20.03, 22.01—22.13, 23.01—23.10, 24.01—24.10, 25.01—25.07,
                26.01—26.20, 27.01, 29.01—29.12, 30.01—30.03, 31.01—31.13, 34.01, Appendix A, Appendix
                B
                30.02,
         3-20-  30.03,
—      2014   30.05 -
                30.07,
                30.15
—      4-24-  30.06
         2014
—      9-18-  50.003,
         2014   50.004
Res.     11-20- 30.52
         2014
Res.     12-18- 84.03,
         2014   84.99
                30.01,
         2-19-  30.02,
—      2015   30.06,
                30.07,
                30.51
—      4-16-  90.01—
         2015   90.05
—      7-23-  10.99
         2015
—      4-21-  35.04
         2016
—      6-16-  30.06
         2016
—      6-16-  35.02—
         2016   35.04
                151.01—
                151.03,
—      7-21-  151.15,
         2016   151.16,
                151.45—
                151.53
—      9-15-  UDO 26.13
         2016
—      9-15-  50.125
         2016
—      10-20- 30.07
         2016
                70.01,
—      10-20- 70.06,
         2016   70.09,
                70.99
         10-20- 72.01—
—      2016   72.07,
                72.09
—      11-17- UDO 24.01.03, 24.01.05, 24.01.07
         2016
—      12-15- UDO 14.09.02
         2016
—      12-15- 10.99
         2016
—      --     36.01
—      --     Ch. 74, Sched. II
—      --     UDO 15.07
—      --     UDO 2.03.06, 6.05, 15.10.03, 15.10.05, 15.54.08, 25.02.01, 25.02.04, 25.07
—      --     UDO 16.01, 16.08, 16.11.01,
                Ch. 34
—      --     UDO 15.07, 24.01.03
—      --     UDO 15.09.02, 15.10.03, 15.11.01, 15.11.04
—      --     UDO 24.01—24.06, 24.08, 24.09
                50.004,
—      --     50.290,
                50.292
—      --     UDO 14.04.01, Art. 34
—      --     UDO 15.07, 15.39—15.41
—      --     UDO 14.03, 15.01—15.07, 15.15, 15.16, 16.01—16.04, 16.06—16.12, 17.02, Art. 34
—      --     UDO 15.15, 15.16, 16.01—16.04, 16.06—16.12, 17.02, Art. 34
—      --     UDO 14.03, 15.01—15.07
                50.004,
—      --     50.290,
                50.292
—      --     110.01—
                110.10
—      2-16-  Ch. 74, Sch. IX, UDO 1.05, 2.02, 6.01—6.05, 15.07, 30.01,
         2017   Ch. 34
         3-16-  UDO 2.01, 2.03, 6.05, 15.07, 15.09—15.11, 15.54, 16.01—16.04, 16.06—16.12, Art. 24,
—      2017   25.01—25.07,
                Ch. 34
—      11-16- 50.290,
         2017   50.292
—      3-22-  UDO 4.06, 4.14, 7.03, 9.02, 9.03, 14.03, 14.05, 15.01, 15.10, 15.64,
         2018   Ch. 34
         6-19-  100.01—
—      2018   100.03,
                100.99
                50.003,
         6-19-  50.105,
—      2018   50.113,
                50.460,
                50.999
—      --     70.06
                101.01—
—      --     101.03,
                101.99
—      7-17-  50.113
         2018
—      8-14-  36.99
         2018
—      9-18-  155.01—
         2018   155.05
—      1-15-  10.98
         2019
—      1-15-  35.03,
         2019   35.04
—      1-15-  50.285—
         2019   50.296
—      2-21-  50.001—
         2019   50.010
—      2-21-  72.01—
         2019   72.09
—      --     10.16
—      7-18-  50.461
         2019
—      8-13-  30.52
         2019
—      9-17-  50.066,
         2019   50.067
                96.001—
                96.010;
         9-17-  96.025—
—      2019   96.037;
                96.045—
                96.048;
                96.999
                92.01—
                92.08,
         9-19-  92.15—
—      2019   92.21,
                92.35—
                92.39,
                92.99
—      11-21- 10.99
         2019
                70.01—
                70.06,
                70.08,
                70.09,
                71.01,
                71.02,
                71.99,
                72.01—
                72.09,
—      12-16- 72.99,
         2019   74.01, Ch. 74, Sch.
                I,
                II,
                III,
                IV,
                V,
                VI,
                VII,
                VIII,
                IX
         12-16- 80.01—
—      2019   80.14,
                80.99
                81.01—
                81.15,
                82.01—
                82.07,
                82.99,
                83.01—
                83.05,
         12-16- 83.99,
—      2019   84.01—
                84.03,
                84.99,
                85.01—
                85.04,
                85.99,
                91.01—
                91.09,
                91.99
                89.01—
                89.05,
         12-16- 89.20,
—      2019   89.21,
                89.35—
                89.39,
                89.99
—      --     30.52
—      --     30.52
—      --     50.460
—      7-16-  Ch. 74, Sch. IX
         2020
         7-16-  152.20—
—      2020   152.22,
                152.99
         12-15- 83.01—
—      2020   83.05,
                83.99
-        --     96.045,
                96.046
                71.01,
-        1-19-  71.02,
         2021   71.99,
                100.01
-        --     50.113
-        --     50.290
-        3-16-  38.03
         2021
-        3-18-  30.51
         2021
-        4-13-  96.010
         2021
                72.01—
-        4-15-  72.09,
         2021   72.99,
                89.99
-        6-15-  96.002
         2021
-        7-13-  96.046
         2021
-        8-17-  96.048
         2021
-        9-14-  50.296
         2021
-        11-16- 39.01—
         2021   39.05
-        11-16- 73.99
         2021
-        11-16- 82.99
         2021
                151.01 —
                151.05,
PL05268- 12-8-  151.15 —
110121   2021   151.32,
                151.45 —
                151.53,
                151.99
-        6-8-   32.01
         2022
         1-25-  38.01—
-        2023   38.09,
                39.03
-        6-28-  50.460
         2023
-        6-28-  50.066
         2023
         6-28-  73.01—
-        2023   73.10,
                73.99
-        7-12-  111.01—
         2023   111.09
-        8-9-   50.291
         2023
-        11-8-  50.113
         2023
-        3-15-  35.04
         2024
-        4-10-  80.05
         2024
-        6-26-  50.460
         2024
-        2-12-  35.01—
         2025   35.06
         5-14-  70.99,
-        2025   72.01,
                72.99
-        5-14-  98.01
         2025
-        5-28-  50.109
         2025
-        6-25-  50.460
         2025
-        12-10- 94.01—
         2025   94.09
                96.001,
         12-10- 96.002,
-        2025   96.010,
                96.025—
                96.036
               
 
