TOWN OF BRYSON CITY,
NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Local legislation current through Ord. 9-2-2025-2, passed 10-20-2025
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street, Ste. 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION;
GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time; computing time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was adopted on December 6, 2021
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the Town of Bryson City shall be
designated as the “Code of Bryson City, North Carolina”, and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code, unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BOARD OF ALDERMEN or TOWN BOARD. The governing body of the Town of Bryson
City, North Carolina.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COUNTY. Swain County, North Carolina.
      GOVERNING BODY. The Town Board or Board of Aldermen of Bryson City, North
Carolina.
      GOVERNOR. The Governor of North Carolina.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving that authority to a majority
of those persons or officers.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath and, in those cases, the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of the municipality, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      OWNER. Applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or a part of that property.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to
any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property, except real property.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
      REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of North Carolina.
      STREET. Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, dedicated alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto
within the town, and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between
abutting property lines.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of that building or land, whether alone
or with others.
      TOWN or MUNICIPALITY. The Town of Bryson City, North Carolina.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the town shall be by the following
rules, unless that construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in a section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered, unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of the town exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the
word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published.
   (B)   No alteration shall be made or permitted if any question exists
regarding the nature or extent of the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within the town for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTING TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, REASONABLE TIME OR
NOTICE shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced.
   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
   (B)   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force,
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   (1)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend,
repeal or in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system hereof and printed for inclusion herein.
      (2)   When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, subchapter, section
or division, or any portion thereof, the repealed portions may be excluded from
this code by omission from reprinted pages.
      (3)   The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in
the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence that the subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the town.
   (B)   (1)   Amendments to any of the provisions of the code shall be made by
amending the provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in language substantially similar to the following: “Section
               of the Code of Ordinances, Town of Bryson City, North Carolina,
is hereby amended as follows: ...”
      (2)   The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (C)   (1)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be
added, language substantially similar to the following shall be used: “The Code
of Ordinances, Town of Bryson City, North Carolina, is hereby amended by adding
a section, to be numbered                , which section shall read as follows:
...”
      (2)   The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (D)   All sections, subchapters, chapters or provisions desired to be
repealed must be specifically repealed by section, subchapter or chapter
number, as the case may be.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. passed 5-13-1960; Ord.
passed 1-1-1970; Ord. passed 1-1-1980; Ord. passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (G.S. §
160A-11) (Ord. passed 1-17-1980; Ord. passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
Statutory reference:
   Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 132-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the town published in 2004 and subsequently amended, the 2004
Code section number shall be indicated in the history by “(2004 Code, §       
)”.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   In addition to any other remedies cited in this code of
ordinances for the enforcement of the provisions of this code of ordinances,
the regulations and standards contained in this code of ordinances may be
enforced through the issuance of citations by the appropriate town official.
These citations shall be in the form of a civil penalty. The town may recover
this penalty in a civil action in the nature of a debt if the offender does not
pay the penalty within 72 hours after being cited for a violation. In addition,
failure to pay the civil penalty within 72 hours may subject the violator to
criminal charges of not more than $50 or imprisonment for not more than 30
days, as set forth in G.S. § 14-4(a). The following civil penalties are
established for violations under this section:
         (a)   Warning citation (to be issued in the discretion of the issuing
officer): Correct violation within ten days.
         (b)   First citation: $25;
         (c)   Second citation for same offense: $100; and
         (d)   Third and subsequent citation for same offense: $200.
      (2)   These civil penalties are in addition to any other penalties which
may be imposed by a court for violation of the provisions of this code of
ordinances.
   (B)   In addition to the foregoing enforcement provisions, this chapter may
be enforced by any remedy provided in G.S. § 160A-175, including, but not
limited to, all appropriate equitable remedies issued from a court of complete
jurisdiction as provided in G.S. § 160A-175(e). This section specifically
provides that each day’s continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct
offense.
(Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN
      
31.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
      
34.   FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 30: MAYOR AND BOARD OF ALDERMEN
Section
   
30.01   Governing body
   
30.02   Mayor
   
30.03   Mayor Pro Tem
   
30.04   Meetings
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was adopted on December 6, 2021
§ 30.01 GOVERNING BODY.
   (A)   The governing body of the town shall consist of a Mayor and Board of
Aldermen of four members. The governing body shall be charged with the general
government and administration of the affairs of the town.
   (B)   The powers and duties of the governing body shall be as set out in the
general statutes of the state, the town charter and the ordinances of the town.
(2004 Code, § 30.01)
Statutory reference:
   Board to organize town government, see G.S. § 160A-146
§ 30.02 MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the town and, as such,
shall perform the following duties:
   (A)   Keep himself or herself informed as to the town’s business;
   (B)   Preside over the meetings of the Board of Aldermen;
   (C)   Sign all contracts, ordinances, resolutions, franchises and all other
documents as authorized by the Board;
   (D)   Appoint all committees and outline their duties, under the general
direction of the Board;
   (E)   Make recommendations to the Board concerning the affairs of the town,
as he or she deems necessary;
   (F)   Represent the town at ceremonies and other official occasions; and
   (G)   Perform other duties as authorized by the general statutes, the town
charter and this code.
(2004 Code, § 30.02)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of the Mayor, see G.S. § 160A-69
§ 30.03 MAYOR PRO TEM.
   At the first meeting after its election, the Board of Alderman shall select
one of its number to act as Mayor Pro Tem. The Mayor Pro Tem shall have no
fixed term of office, but, as such, shall perform all the duties of the Mayor
in the Mayor’s absence or disability.
(2004 Code, § 30.03)
Statutory reference:
   Mayor Pro Tem, see G.S. § 160A-70
§ 30.04 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings; time and place. At the first meeting in December,
the Board of Alderman shall set the date and time of its regular meetings for
the following calendar year. The regular meetings of the Board will be held on
the first and third Mondays of each month at such time as may be designated
from time to time by the Board at the Town Hall unless otherwise designated by
the Board.
   (B)   Special meetings. Special meetings of the Board may be held according
to the procedures set out in the applicable general statutes.
   (C)   Adjourned meetings. Any meeting of the Board may be continued or
adjourned to a time and date certain from day to day, or for more than one day.
(2004 Code, § 30.04) (Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
Statutory reference:
   Regular and special meetings; notice required, see G.S. § 160A-71
   Quorum, see G.S. § 160A-74
   Voting, see G.S. § 160A-75
CHAPTER 31: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
   
31.01   Town Manager
   
31.02   Clerk
   
31.03   Town Attorney
   
31.04   Tax Collector
   
31.05   Other officers and employees
   
31.06   Criminal history checks
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was adopted on December 6, 2021
§ 31.01 TOWN MANAGER.
   (A)   The Board shall appoint a Town Manager, as set forth in G.S. § 160A-
147.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Manager to:
      (1)   Appoint and suspend all town officers and employees not elected by
the people, and whose appointment or removal is not otherwise provided for by
law, except the Town Attorney, in accordance with such general personnel rules,
regulations, policies or ordinances as the Board may adopt;
      (2)   Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices
and agencies of the town, subject to the general direction and control of the
Board of Aldermen, except as otherwise provided by law;
      (3)   Attend all meetings of the Board of Aldermen and recommend any
measures that he or she deems expedient;
      (4)   See that all laws of the state, the town charter and the
ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the Board of Aldermen are faithfully
executed within the town;
      (5)   Prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to the
Board of Aldermen;
      (6)   Submit to the Board of Aldermen and make available to the public a
complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the town as of
the end of the fiscal year;
      (7)   Make any other reports that the Board of Aldermen may require
concerning the operations of the town departments, offices and agencies subject
to his or her direction and control;
      (8)   Perform the duties of the Finance Officer; and
      (9)   Perform any other duties that may be required or authorized by the
Board of Aldermen.
(Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
Editor’s note:
   Amended December 6, 2021
Statutory reference:
   Powers and duties of Manager, see G.S. § 160A-148
§ 31.02 CLERK.
   (A)   The Board shall appoint a Clerk.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Clerk to:
      (1)   Act as Secretary to the Board;
      (2)   Keep a true record of all the proceedings of the Board;
      (3)   Keep the original of all ordinances in a book especially provided
for that purpose;
      (4)   Act as custodian for all the books, papers, records and journals of
the Board;
      (5)   Perform other duties as may be required by law or by the Board; and
      (6)   Perform the duties of the Finance Officer, in the absence of the
Town Manager.
(2004 Code, § 31.01) (Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
Editor’s note:
   Amended December 6, 2021
Statutory reference:
   Duties of the Clerk specified, see G.S. § 160A-171
   Minutes to be kept, see G.S. § 160A-72
§ 31.03 TOWN ATTORNEY.
   The Board shall appoint a Town Attorney, whose duties shall be to:
   (A)   Prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to
which the town may be a party, or in which it may be interested, or which may
be brought against, or by, any officer of the town, or in the capacity of the
person as an officer of the town;
   (B)   See to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or
entered in favor of the town;
   (C)   See to the completion of all special assessment proceedings and
condemnation proceedings;
   (D)   Draft or review any contract, lease or other document or instrument to
which the town may be a party, and approve all ordinances and resolutions of
the Board as to form;
   (E)   At the request of the Board, draft ordinances covering any subjects
within the power of the town;
   (F)   Attend meetings of the Board on request; and
   (G)   Perform any other duties required of the attorney by G.S. § 160A-173
and other laws and ordinances.
(2004 Code, § 31.02)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of the Town Attorney, see G.S. § 160A-173
§ 31.04 TAX COLLECTOR.
   The Board shall provide for the appointment of a Tax Collector, whose duties
shall be to:
   (A)   Collect all taxes and assessments due to the town;
   (B)   Make an accounting to the Finance Officer at the end of each month;
   (C)   Pay over to the Finance Officer such money as is collected for the
account of each separate fund according to the tax levy;
   (D)   Deliver a list of all unpaid taxes with the reason therefor as
ascertainable to the Board of Aldermen;
   (E)   Supply the Mayor and Board with any information as they may require
relative to the performance of his or her duties;
   (F)   Make periodic reports to the Board listing therein all funds
collected; and
   (G)   Perform other duties required by law, or as the Board may direct.
(2004 Code, § 31.03)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of Tax Collector, see G.S. §§ 105-349 and 105-350
§ 31.05 OTHER OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Such other officers and employees as are deemed necessary shall be appointed
by the Board at the first meeting after each election. All officers and
employees shall serve at the pleasure of the Board and receive such
compensation as from time to time may be prescribed by the Board.
(2004 Code, § 31.04)
§ 31.06 CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECKS.
   (A)   This section adopted by the Board of Aldermen is to provide a policy
and procedures for conducting criminal history checks through the State Bureau
of Investigations (SBI)/Division of Criminal Information (DCI) Network on final
applicants for employment with the town. This section is adopted pursuant to
the authority vested in the town by the G.S. §§ 160A-11 and 160A-12.
   (B)   Upon its adoption, this section was also added to the City Personnel
Manual, Article V, Recruitment and Employment.
   (C)   In order to protect the citizens of the town and their properties, the
procedures herein are established to provide for criminal history checks on all
final applicants for regular full-time and part-time positions in the town
government. Subject to division (C)(3) below, employment with the town may be
denied for those persons convicted of any crime against a person, or crimes
against property where intent is an element, or any drug or gambling related
offense.
      (1)   The Town Manager, or designee, may conduct an investigation of any
final candidate for a permanent full-time or part-time position with the town
government and it shall be a precondition of employment that an applicant for
such a position shall, upon request, provide all necessary personal
identification including a birth certificate, social security number and
driver’s license, if available, so the Town Manager, or his or her designee,
may cause a thorough search to be made of local and state criminal records to
determine if the applicant has a history of criminal convictions or the crimes
enumerated above by us of the Division of Criminal Information (DCI) Network.
      (2)   The Police Chief, or his or her designee, shall provide the
findings from the use of the DCI to the Town Manager, or his or her designee,
provided that all necessary agreements with the State Bureau of Investigations
(SBI) Division of Criminal Information have been executed. These findings would
include and be in compliance of Taxi Service Employment (G.S. § 160A-304), City
Government Employment (G.S. § 143B-945) and Fire Department Employment (G.S. §
143B-943) to ensure safe and responsible personnel are hired or admitted to the
positions being requested.
      (3)   An evaluation of any crime for purposes of employment will take
into account the nature and the circumstances of the offense and the time frame
of the offense as it relates to the essential job functions or the position
applied.
      (4)   Prior to denial or termination of employment based upon criminal
history record information (CHRI) received from the Police Chief, or his or her
designee, shall verify the existence of a record by cither obtaining a
certified public record of the individual to the criminal information and
identification section for verification that the CHRI record belongs to the
individual.
CHAPTER 32: ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Establishment of Departments
   
32.01   Administration Department
   
32.02   Public Works Department
   
32.03   Taxation Department
   
32.04   Wastewater Treatment Department
   
32.05   Bryson City Fire Department
   
32.06   Water Plant Department
   
32.07   Streets, Lands and Buildings Department
Planning Board
   
32.20   Creation
   
32.21   Composition and vacancies
   
32.22   Organization, rules, meetings and records
   
32.23   Expenditures
   
32.24   Powers and duties
Police Department
   
32.35   Composition; Chief
   
32.36   Duties; supervision
   
32.37   Work schedule; accident reports; training
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was adopted on December 6, 2021
ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENTS
§ 32.01 ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The Administration Department, under the direction and authority of
the Town Manager, is hereby established.
   (B)   This Department is responsible for the daily operation of all phases
of town government, as directed by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen under state
guidelines.
(2004 Code, § 32.01)
§ 32.02 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
   The Public Works Department, under the direction and authority of the
Director of Public Works, is hereby established. This Department shall work
with and supervise the collection, distribution and sanitation services for the
town.
(2004 Code, § 32.02)
§ 32.03 TAXATION DEPARTMENT.
   The Taxation Department, under the direction and authority of the Tax
Collector, is hereby established. This Department is responsible for town tax
billing and collection pursuant to state guidelines and shall assist the Town
Clerk/Finance Officer.
(2004 Code, § 32.03)
§ 32.04 WASTEWATER TREATMENT DEPARTMENT.
   The Wastewater Treatment Department, under the direction and authority of
the Wastewater Treatment Director, is hereby established. This Department shall
maintain and operate the wastewater treatment plant.
(2004 Code, § 32.04)
§ 32.05 BRYSON CITY FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The town’s Volunteer Fire Department is hereby established and will be
known as the Bryson City Fire Department. This Department, under the direction
and authority of the Fire Chief, shall be responsible for fire protection of
the town as set forth in G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 14, and shall perform all other
duties established by the Mayor and the Board of Aldermen.
   (B)   This Department shall be governed by bylaws adopted by the volunteer
firefighters and approved by the Board of Aldermen. A Fire Chief shall be hired
by Board of Aldermen.
(2004 Code, § 32.05) (Ord. passed 10-4-2010; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-
2025)
§ 32.06 WATER PLANT DEPARTMENT.
   The Water Plant Department, under the direction of the water plant, ORC
(operator responsible charge) is established. This Department shall maintain
and operate the water treatment plant.
§ 32.07 STREETS, LANDS AND BUILDINGS DEPARTMENT.
   The Street, Lands and Buildings Department, under the authority of the
Streets, Lands, Buildings Supervisor, is hereby established. This Department
shall maintain the streets, lands and buildings of the town.
PLANNING BOARD
§ 32.20 CREATION.
   The Board of Aldermen hereby establishes the Planning Board under the
authority granted by G.S. § 160A-361. The Board shall constitute, function and
may be referred to as the “Bryson City Planning Board”.
(2004 Code, § 32.20) (Ord. passed 4-3-2000)
§ 32.21 COMPOSITION AND VACANCIES.
   (A)   The Planning Board, hereinafter referred to as the “Board”, shall
consist of five members. The initial appointments to the Planning Board shall
be made in the following manner: two members shall be appointed for a term of
three years; two members shall be appointed for a term of two years; and one
member shall be appointed for a term of one year. As the terms of all members
expire, members may be reappointed or new members appointed by the Board of
Aldermen to terms of three years.
   (B)   In the event of a vacancy on the Planning Board, the Board of Aldermen
shall appoint a new member to fill the unexpired term of the vacated position.
   (C)   (1)   All members of the Board shall have equal rights, privileges and
duties. Members shall serve without pay, but may be reimbursed for any expenses
incurred while representing the Board. Regular attendance of the meetings of
the Board is considered a prerequisite for maintenance and membership on the
Board.
      (2)   If a member is absent from more than three consecutive meetings,
the member may be replaced at the discretion of the Board of Aldermen.
   (D)   Eligibility requirements. Board members must be:
      (1)   Resident within corporate limits;
      (2)   Owner of commercial building within Corporate Limits;
      (3)   Own or operate a business within Corporate Limits; and/or
      (4)   One resident of Swain County may be appointed as an at-large
member.
(2004 Code, § 32.21) (Ord. passed 4-3-2000; Ord. passed 12-6-2021; Ord. passed
3-1-2025)
§ 32.22 ORGANIZATION, RULES, MEETINGS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   (1)   The Board shall meet and elect a Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson from among its regular members, both of whom shall serve for terms
of one year or until reelected or until their successors are elected.
      (2)   The Board shall appoint a Secretary who shall hold office during
the term of the Chairperson and/or until a successor Secretary shall have been
appointed. The Board may create and fill other offices as it may determine.
   (B)   (1)   The Board shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business
which are consistent with this subchapter as well as state statutes and shall
keep a record of its members’ attendance, and of its resolutions, discussions,
findings and recommendations, which record shall be a public record.
      (2)   The Board shall schedule at least four meetings per year and all of
its meetings shall be open to the public. There shall be a quorum of three
Board members for the purpose of taking any official action required by this
subchapter.
(2004 Code, § 32.22) (Ord. passed 4-3-2000)
§ 32.23 EXPENDITURES.
   The expenditures of the Planning Board exclusive of gifts or grants, shall
be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the Board of Aldermen,
and no indebtedness for which the town shall be liable shall be contracted or
incurred by the Planning Board unless an appropriation is made by the Board of
Aldermen for such purpose, as authorized by law, and then only to the extent of
such appropriation. The Planning Board shall have the right to accept gifts and
donations for the exercise of its functions, and may expend the money received
from such gifts and donations in a manner which, in the judgment of the Board,
is consistent with the best interest of the planning program.
(2004 Code, § 32.23) (Ord. passed 4-3-2000)
§ 32.24 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning Board shall have the power to perform the following duties:
   (A)   Make studies of the area within its jurisdiction and surrounding
areas;
   (B)   Determine objectives to be sought in the development of the study
area;
   (C)   Prepare and adopt plans for achieving these objectives;
   (D)   Develop and recommend policies, ordinances, administrative procedures
and other means for carrying out plans in a coordinated and efficient manner;
   (E)   Advise the Board of Aldermen concerning the use and amendment of the
means for carrying out plans;
   (F)   Exercise any functions in the administration and enforcement of
various means for carrying out plans that the Board of Aldermen may direct;
   (G)   Work and coordinate with other boards and advisory groups as directed
by the Board of Aldermen;
   (H)   May accept, receive and disburse in furtherance of its functions any
funds, grants and services made available by the Federal Government and its
agencies, the state’s government and its agencies, any local government and its
agencies and any private and civic sources as set forth in G.S. § 160A-363; and
   (I)   Perform any other related duties that the Board of Aldermen may
direct.
(2004 Code, § 32.24) (Ord. passed 4-3-2000)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 32.35 COMPOSITION; CHIEF.
   (A)   The Police Department shall consist of such numbers of police officers
as the Board of Aldermen shall from time to time determine to be necessary.
   (B)   The Board of Aldermen shall, at such time as it deems proper, select a
Chief of Police for the town to serve for such time as the Board may decide
upon, and to receive such salary as the Board may prescribe.
(2004 Code, § 32.40) (Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
§ 32.36 DUTIES; SUPERVISION.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and other police officers
or assistants to be diligent in the enforcement of good order in the town, to
enforce all rules, regulations and ordinances prescribed or enacted by the
Board of Aldermen of the town and to do all acts required of public officers in
the enforcement of law and good order.
   (B)   The Police Department shall be directly under the supervision of the
Mayor.
(2004 Code, § 32.42)
Statutory reference:
   Extraterritorial jurisdiction, G.S. § 160A-286
   Powers and duties, G.S. § 160A-285
§ 32.37 WORK SCHEDULE; ACCIDENT REPORTS; TRAINING.
   (A)   Work schedule. Members of the Police Department shall work as
scheduled and approved by the Chief of Police.
   (B)   Accident reports. All accident reports made by the Police Department
shall be kept on file at the Police Department.
   (C)   Police school and training. Members of the Police Department shall
attend basic law enforcement training held at an accredited training facility.
The officer must have all certification and paperwork prior to employment.
(2004 Code, § 32.43)
Statutory reference:
   Training and development, see G.S. § 160A-289
CHAPTER 33: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
   
33.01   State of emergency authorized
   
33.02   Proclamation imposing prohibitions and restrictions
   
33.03   Evacuation
   
33.04   Curfew
   
33.05   Restrictions on alcoholic beverages
   
33.06   Restrictions on dangerous weapons and substances
   
33.07   Restrictions on access to areas
   
33.08   Termination of emergency; amendment or termination of proclamation
   
33.09   Absence or disability of Mayor
   
33.10   Territorial applicability
 
   
33.99   Penalty
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was adopted on December 6, 2021
§ 33.01 STATE OF EMERGENCY AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever during times of
public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe or similar circumstances public
authorities are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection
for lives, safety or property, or whenever the occurrence of any such condition
is imminent.
   (B)   In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency
endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the town
or any part thereof, or threatening damages to or destruction of property, the
Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered under G.S. §§ 14-288.18 and 166A,
Article 1A, State Emergency Management Act, to issue a public proclamation
declaring to all persons the existence of such a state of emergency and, in
order to more effectively protect the lives and property of people within the
town, to place in effect any or all of the restrictions hereinafter authorized.
   (C)   The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit by the
proclamation the application of all or any part of such restrictions to any
area specifically designated or described within the town and to specific hours
of the day or night; and to exempt from all or any part of such restrictions,
while acting in the line of and within the scope of their respective duties,
law enforcement officers, firefighters and other public employees, rescue squad
members, doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals and other medical facilities;
on-duty military personnel, whether state or federal; on-duty employees of
public utilities, public transportation companies and newspaper, magazine,
radio broadcasting and television broadcasting corporations operated for
profit; and such other classes of persons as may be essential to the
preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the safety,
health and welfare needs of people within the town.
(2004 Code, § 33.01) (Ord. passed 12-6-1994; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-
2025)
§ 33.02 PROCLAMATION IMPOSING PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The Mayor, by proclamation, may impose the prohibitions and
restrictions specified in division (C) below and §§
33.03 through
33.07 of this chapter in the manner described in those sections. The Mayor may
impose as many of those specified prohibitions and restrictions as he or she
finds are necessary, because of an emergency, to maintain an acceptable level
of public order and services and to protect lives, safety and property. The
Mayor shall recite his or her findings in the proclamation.
   (B)   The proclamation shall be in writing. The Mayor shall take reasonable
steps to give notice of the terms of the proclamation to those affected by it
and shall post a copy of it in the Town Hall. The Mayor shall send reports of
the substance of the proclamation to the mass communications media which serves
the affected area. The Mayor shall retain a text of the proclamation and
furnish upon request certified copies of it.
   (C)   The proclamation may prohibit or restrict:
      (1)   Movements of people in public places;
      (2)   The operation of offices, business establishments and other places
to or from which people may travel or at which they may congregate; and
      (3)   Other activities or conditions the control of which may be
reasonably to maintain order and protect lives or property during the state of
emergency, within the area designated in the proclamation.
(2004 Code, § 33.02) (Ord. passed 12-6-1994; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-
2025)
§ 33.03 EVACUATION.
   (A)   The Mayor may direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the
population of the town, to prescribe routes, modes of transportation and
destination in connection with evacuation; and to control ingress and egress of
a disaster area, the movement of persons within the area and the occupancy of
premises therein.
   (B)   Details of the evacuation may be set forth or amended in a subsequent
proclamation which shall be well publicized.
(2004 Code, § 33.03) (Ord. passed 12-6-1994)
§ 33.04 CURFEW.
   (A)   (1)   The proclamation may impose a curfew prohibiting in certain
areas and during certain periods the appearance in public of anyone who is not
a member of an exempted class. The proclamation shall specify the geographical
area or areas and the period during each 24-hour day to which the curfew
applies.
      (2)   The Mayor may exempt from some or all of the curfew restrictions
classes of people whose exemption the Mayor finds necessary to the public. The
proclamation shall state the exempted classes and the restrictions from which
each is exempted.
   (B)   Unless otherwise specified in the proclamation, the curfew shall apply
during the specified period each day until the Mayor by proclamation removes
the curfew.
(2004 Code, § 33.04) (Ord. passed 12-6-1994)
§ 33.05 RESTRICTIONS ON ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   The proclamation may prohibit the possession or consumption of any
alcoholic beverage, including beer, wine and spirituous liquor other than on
one’s own premises, and may prohibit the transfer, transportation, sale or
purchases of any alcoholic beverage within the area of the town described in
the proclamation.
   (B)   The prohibition, if imposed, may apply to transfers of alcoholic
beverages by employees of alcoholic beverage control stores as well as by
anyone else within the geographical areas described.
(2004 Code, § 33.05) (Ord. passed 12-6-1994)
§ 33.06 RESTRICTIONS ON DANGEROUS WEAPONS AND SUBSTANCES.
   Prohibitions and restrictions may be imposed upon the possession,
transportation, sale, purchase, storage and use of gasoline, and dangerous
weapons and substances, except such prohibitions and restrictions shall not
include lawfully possessed firearms or ammunition. As used herein, the term
DANGEROUS WEAPONS AND SUBSTANCES has the same meaning as it does under G.S. §
14-288.1, and the term FIREARM has the same meaning as it does under G.S. § 14-
409.39(2).
(2004 Code, § 33.06) (Ord. passed 12-6-1994; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-
2025)
§ 33.07 RESTRICTIONS ON ACCESS TO AREAS.
   (A)   The proclamation may prohibit obtaining access or attempting to obtain
access to any area, designated in the manner described in this section, in
violation of any order, clearly posted notice or barricade indicating that
access is denied or restricted.
   (B)   (1)   Areas to which access is denied or restricted shall be
designated by the Chief of Police and his or her subordinates or other law
enforcement officers when directed in the proclamation to do so by the Mayor.
      (2)   When acting under this authority, the Chief of Police and his or
her subordinates may restrict or deny access to any area, street, highway or
location within the town limits if that restriction or denial of access or use
is reasonably necessary to promote efforts being made to overcome the emergency
or to prevent further aggravation of the emergency.
(2004 Code, § 33.07) (Ord. passed 12-6-1994)
§ 33.08 TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY; AMENDMENT OR TERMINATION OF PROCLAMATION.
   (A)   Removal of prohibitions and restrictions. The Mayor shall, by
proclamation, terminate the entire declaration of emergency or remove any of
the prohibitions and restrictions when the emergency no longer requires them,
or when directed to do so by the Board of Aldermen.
   (B)   Superseding and amendatory proclamations. The Mayor, in his or her
discretion, may invoke the restrictions authorized by this chapter in separate
proclamations, and may amend any proclamation by means of a superseding
proclamation in accordance with the procedures set forth in §
33.02 of this chapter.
   (C)   Termination of proclamation. A state of emergency declared pursuant to
this section shall expire when it is terminated by the official or governing
body that declared it. In any event, the prohibitions and restrictions imposed
pursuant to this section shall expire upon the earliest occurrence of any of
the following:
      (1)   The prohibition or restriction is terminated by the official or
entity that imposed the prohibition or restriction; or
      (2)   The state of emergency terminates.
(2004 Code, § 33.08) (Ord. passed 12-6-1994; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-
2025)
§ 33.09 ABSENCE OR DISABILITY OF MAYOR.
   In case of the absence or disability of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro Tem for the
town or such other person as may be designated by the Board of Aldermen shall
have and exercise all of the powers herein given the Mayor.
(2004 Code, § 33.09) (Ord. passed 12-6-1994)
§ 33.10 TERRITORIAL APPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall apply within the corporate limits of the town wherein the
Mayor and Board of Aldermen have the authority to enact police power
ordinances.
(2004 Code, § 33.10) (Ord. passed 12-6-1994)
§ 33.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of an ordinance or a declaration
enacted or declared pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a Class 2
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 and imprisonment not
exceeding 60 days. (See G.S. § 14-288.20A and G.S. § 15A-1340.23.)
(2004 Code, § 33.99) (Ord. passed 12-6-1994; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-
2025)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
34.01   Procedure for disbursement
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was adopted on December 6, 2021
§ 34.01 PROCEDURE FOR DISBURSEMENT.
   In accordance with the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act, found
in G.S. Ch. 159, Art. 3, Part 1, no bill or claim against the town may be paid
unless it has been approved by the officer or employee responsible for the
function or agency to which the expense is charged. No check or draft of the
town nor any contract, agreement or purchase order shall be valid unless it
bears the certificate of the Finance Officer as follows: “This instrument has
been pre-audited in the manner required by the Local Government Budget and
Fiscal Control Act”.
(2004 Code, § 34.01) (Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
Statutory reference:
   Pre-audit of disbursements required, see G.S. § 159-28
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
51.   SOLID WASTE
      
52.   SEWERS
      
53.   WATER
      
54.   CROSS-CONNECTIONS
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Payment
   
50.01   Crediting of partial payment for services
Extensions
   
50.15   Application for and approval of extensions required
   
50.16   General extension requirements
   
50.17   Financing extensions within corporate limits
   
50.18   Financing extensions outside corporate limits
   
50.19   Specifications, ownership
   
50.20   Additional subdivision improvement requirement
PAYMENT
§ 50.01 CREDITING OF PARTIAL PAYMENT FOR SERVICES.
   In the event the town receives a payment for various enterprise services
covered by a bill for the services which said payment does not pay the bill in
full, then the partial payment shall be applied among the various enterprise
services covered by a bill as follows:
   (A)   To any past due bill for enterprise services, first for past due
garbage collection fees, second for past due sewer charges and third for past
due water charges; and
   (B)   To current charges for enterprise services, first to current charges
for garbage collection fees, second for current charges for sewer service fees
and third for current charges for water service fees.
(2004 Code, § 50.01) (Ord. passed 7-7-1997)
EXTENSIONS
§ 50.15 APPLICATION FOR AND APPROVAL OF EXTENSIONS REQUIRED.
   (A)   From and after the effective date of this chapter, any property owner,
or owners, desiring water or sanitary sewer service shall apply in writing to
the town requesting the extension of water or sanitary sewer service or both.
No request for the extension of services shall be considered unless submitted
in writing in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   The town may require the applicant to submit as part of the written
application such information, plans or other data as may be required to
adequately determine if the requirements of this subchapter are to be met.
   (C)   When application is made for water and sewer extensions to serve an
area or development project that is planned as part of a larger project or
subdivision, all of which is not to be developed at the time application is
made, the owner or owners shall submit plans in sufficient detail in order to
determine the size and type of facilities which will be necessary to serve the
entire development or subdivision when completed.
   (D)   No extension to the water or sanitary sewer system of the town shall
be made and no application shall be approved, except in accordance with the
requirements of this subchapter.
(2004 Code, § 50.15) (Ord. passed 8-29-1969) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.16 GENERAL EXTENSION REQUIREMENTS.
   All extensions of either water or sanitary sewer service shall be governed
by the following.
   (A)   (1)   The minimum distance for any extension of a water main or
sanitary sewer main shall be determined by the town.
      (2)   In general, the minimum distance for extensions shall be one
platted block, or in the case of water mains from main line valve to valve and
in the case of sanitary sewer extension from manhole to manhole.
   (B)   The size of water mains and sanitary sewer mains to be installed and
the other required system facilities shall be determined by the town in
accordance with the recognized standards and accepted engineering practices and
design.
(2004 Code, § 50.16) (Ord. passed 8-29-1969)
§ 50.17 FINANCING EXTENSIONS WITHIN CORPORATE LIMITS.
   (A)   Extensions to approved subdivisions or developed property.
      (1)   When application is received requesting the extension of water or
sanitary sewer service or both to serve property within the corporate limits
which is developed or has been previously approved as a subdivision, or where
streets have previously been dedicated and accepted by the town, and where such
area is not part of a new subdivision which has not been approved by the town,
the Town Clerk or other person designated by the Board of Aldermen shall
estimate the cost of the project and present the application for such
extension, the estimated cost and other required information to the Board of
Aldermen for its consideration. If the application is approved by the Board of
Aldermen and subject to the availability of funds, the town will install or
have installed by contract under its supervision the extensions which have been
approved, and such extension shall be financed in accordance with this division
(A)(1).
      (2)   When an approved water or sanitary sewer extension project has been
completed and the total cost thereof has been determined, 75% of the total cost
of such water or sanitary sewer extension or both shall be assessed against the
property owners whose property abuts upon such extension at an equal rate per
front foot in accordance with and under the authority granted to the town by
state law. The remaining 25% of the total cost of such extensions shall be
borne by the town from funds appropriated for this purpose.
      (3)   Any property owner or owners shall have the opportunity to pay his,
her or their proportionate share of the cost of such extensions after the
assessment roll is confirmed rather than paying his, her or their share in
equal annual installments with interest as required by the statute.
   (B)   Extensions to proposed developments or subdivisions.
      (1)   When an application is received requesting the extension of water
or sanitary sewer service or both to proposed developments or subdivisions
within the corporate limits which have not been approved by the Board of
Aldermen, the Town Clerk or other person designated by the Board of Aldermen
shall estimate the cost of the project and present the application for such
extension, the estimated cost and other required information to the Board of
Aldermen for its consideration. If the application is approved and subject to
the approval of the development or subdivision by the town, and subject to the
availability of funds, the town will install or have installed by contract
under its supervision such extensions which shall be financed in accordance
with this section.
      (2)   Prior to the beginning of any construction, the property owner or
owners shall advance to the town funds in an amount equal to 75% of the total
estimated cost of the proposed extensions. Upon receipt of such funds, a
written contract shall be entered into by and between the town and the property
owner or owners, under which the town will use such funds upon the following
terms and conditions.
         (a)   The funds shall be deposited in a special account of the town
for which a separate accounting will be made.
         (b)   At the time construction of the extension is completed and the
total cost thereof is determined, if the amount deposited exceeds 75% of the
total cost, that portion in excess of the amount deposited will be refunded to
the owner or owners without interest. If the amount deposited is less than 75%
of the total cost, the owner or owners shall pay such additional amount to the
town and this condition shall be a part of the written contract.
         (c)   In lieu of depositing funds, the owner or owners may provide a
surety bond or some other form of security that will insure payment to the town
of the owner or owners proportionate share of the cost of extension in
accordance with this chapter.
         (d)   No refund or reimbursement of funds shall be made to the owner
or owners who pay 75% of the total cost of extension under the requirements of
this division (B), except as provided for in division (B)(2)(b) above.
      (3)   The town will finance from funds appropriated for this purpose the
remaining 25% of the total cost of extension to and within such proposed
developments or subdivisions.
   (C)   Facilities excluded in determining owner’s share of cost. When the
town determines that it is advisable to install larger size facilities than are
necessary to serve the property requesting such extension, the difference in
the cost of the larger size facilities over and above the cost of the
facilities required to serve the property requesting such extension shall be
paid for by the town and excluded from the total cost to be shared by the
property owner and the town as provided for herein. Fire hydrants, pumping
stations, outfall lines and other facilities installed for general public use
shall be paid for by the town and excluded from the total cost to be shared by
the property owner and the town, as provided for herein.
   (D)   Exceptions authorized. Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent the
Board of Aldermen from extending water or sanitary sewer mains or both within
the corporate limits on their own motion without receipt of an application from
property owners, and to assess the cost of such extensions in accordance with
division (A) above when, in the opinion of the Board of Aldermen, the general
public interest demands such extension of service.
(2004 Code, § 50.17) (Ord. passed 8-29-1969)
§ 50.18 FINANCING EXTENSIONS OUTSIDE CORPORATE LIMITS.
   (A)   All applications for water and sewer extensions outside the corporate
limits shall be made in the same manner and under the same requirements as
provided for in §§
50.15 and
50.16 of this chapter.
   (B)   If an application is approved by the Board of Aldermen, the owner or
owners shall be required to pay for the entire cost of all extensions;
provided, the town may participate to the extent agreed upon by the Board of
Aldermen in the cost of larger size mains which are in excess of the size mains
required to serve the project. No reimbursement shall be made upon annexation
and all water and sewer lines connected to the town system and located outside
the corporate limits shall become the property of the town at the time such
facilities are connected.
   (C)   (1)   Prior to the beginning of any construction, the owner or owners
shall deposit with the town funds in an amount equal to the total estimated
cost of such extensions.
      (2)   Upon receipt of such funds a written contract shall be entered into
by and between the town and the property owner or owners in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
      (3)   Such contract shall provide that in the event the amount of the
total funds deposited exceeds the amount of the total extension cost when
completed, that portion in excess of the total cost will be refunded to the
owner or owners without interest. Such contract shall also provide that if the
amount deposited is less than the total cost, the owner or owners shall pay
such additional amount to the town.
   (D)   In lieu of depositing funds the owner or owners may execute a surety
bond guaranteeing payment for such extension or the owner or owners may have
such extension performed under private contract with the approval of the Board
of Aldermen; provided, the work is to be performed in accordance with all
construction requirements of the town and subject to inspection and approval of
the town.
   (E)   In the event the property for which application has been made for
water or sewer service is contiguous to the corporate limits and the owner or
owners of such property agree to annexation and in the event such property is
annexed to the town, extensions may be made to such property and the cost
thereof financed in accordance with the requirements of §
50.17(A) or (B) of this chapter, whichever is applicable.
(2004 Code, § 50.18) (Ord. passed 8-29-1969)
§ 50.19 SPECIFICATIONS, OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   Any water mains or sanitary sewer mains extended under the provisions
of this subchapter shall be installed and constructed in accordance with the
approved plans, specifications and other requirements of the town.
   (B)   All facilities installed under the provisions of this chapter, whether
within or outside the corporate limits, shall become the sole property of the
town and under its jurisdiction and control for any and all purposes whatsoever
at the time such facilities are connected to the town system.
   (C)   When required, the property owner or owners shall grant to the town
such utility easements as the town may require.
   (D)   In addition, a deed to the town for water and/or sewer facilities
installed which are located outside the corporate limits, the cost of which is
borne by individual property owners, shall be executed prior to the time any
extensions provided for in this chapter are connected to the town systems.
(2004 Code, § 50.19) (Ord. passed 8-29-1969)
§ 50.20 ADDITIONAL SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENT.
   The Board of Aldermen may, in its discretion, as a condition under which
water or sewer service or both will be extended, require the owner or owners of
a proposed subdivision to enter into an agreement to improve the proposed
streets therein at his, her or their own expense and in accordance with the
ordinances then in force governing the acceptance of public streets for the
town. If required, this section shall apply to subdivisions which are located
either within or outside the corporate limits of the town.
(2004 Code, § 50.20) (Ord. passed 8-29-1969)
CHAPTER 51: SOLID WASTE
Section
Garbage and Refuse
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Approved containers
   
51.03   Burning or burying garbage
   
51.04   Accumulation of garbage and refuse prohibited
   
51.05   Containers required
   
51.06   Precollection practices
   
51.07   Collection schedule
   
51.08   Unlawful to displace containers
   
51.09   Special or bulk collections regulated
   
51.10   Garbage collection fees; suspension of service
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING MATERIAL SCRAPS. Scrap building material from the construction,
reconstruction, remodeling or repair of a building, walkway, driveway, sign and
other structure, including, but not limited to, excavated earth, tree stumps,
rocks, gravel, bricks, plaster, concrete, lumber or any other similar material
used in construction or the containers or wrappings therefor.
   GARBAGE. All putrescible wastes, including animal and vegetable matter,
animal offal and carcasses and recognizable industrial byproducts, but
excluding sewage and human wastes.
   REFUSE. All non-putrescible wastes.
   SOLID WASTE. Garbage, refuse, rubbish, trash and other discarded solid
materials, including SOLID WASTE materials resulting from homes, businesses,
industrial, commercial and agricultural operations and from community
activities, but does not include solids or dissolved materials in domestic
sewage or other significant pollutants in water resources, such as silt,
dissolved or suspended solids in industrial waste water effluents, dissolved
materials in irrigation return flows or other common water pollutants.
   TREE TRIMMINGS. Tree limbs, leaves, shrubbery, trimmings and cuttings and
all other trimmings from the natural growth of trees, shrubbery, weeds, plants
or grass.
(2004 Code, § 51.01) (Ord. passed 6-4-1987)
§ 51.02 APPROVED CONTAINERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any garbage
or refuse of any kind on any public or private property, except in approved
containers or as otherwise provided in this subchapter.
(2004 Code, § 51.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.03 BURNING OR BURYING GARBAGE.
   It shall be unlawful to burn or set fire to any garbage for the purpose of
disposal. In addition, it shall be unlawful to bury any refuse for the purpose
of disposal.
(2004 Code, § 51.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
Editor’s Note:
   Extensive state regulations are in effect with respect to the open burning
of trash and refuse, see Department of Environmental Management’s Regulations
Governing the Control of Air Pollution.
§ 51.04 ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE PROHIBITED.
   All garbage and refuse shall be collected and placed in containers as
required by this subchapter, and it shall be unlawful for any person to permit
garbage or refuse to accumulate or remain on any premises longer than is
reasonably necessary to remove and deposit same in approved containers, as
required herein.
(2004 Code, § 51.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.05 CONTAINERS REQUIRED.
   The occupant of every building or premises where garbage and refuse does or
may exist shall provide containers made of substantial galvanized iron,
plastic, rubber or other non-rusting material in which shall be deposited all
garbage and refuse existing at such building or premises. Each container shall
be provided with handles or bails and with a tight fitting cover made of the
same material as the container. All containers shall be water-tight and they
shall be of a size that can be conveniently handled by the collectors, and no
container shall be more than 30 gallons in capacity, nor measure over 22 inches
in diameter or 30 inches in height. All containers shall be kept in a
reasonably clean condition.
(2004 Code, § 51.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.06 PRECOLLECTION PRACTICES.
   All garbage and refuse shall have the liquid drained therefrom and shall be
wrapped in paper or other like material before it is placed in the container
for collection. Ashes and cinders shall be placed in a separate container
provided for that purpose and no ashes shall be deposited in any container
until they are cold. Containers which fail to have a cover as required in §
51.05 of this chapter or which have become rusted or broken and, therefore, are
unable to contain garbage and refuse in a satisfactory manner shall not be
used.
(2004 Code, § 51.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.07 COLLECTION SCHEDULE.
   Garbage and refuse will be collected by the town according to a collection
schedule maintained in the Clerk’s office. Such schedule may be periodically
revised and amended by action of the Board.
(2004 Code, § 51.07)
§ 51.08 UNLAWFUL TO DISPLACE CONTAINERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, displace or to otherwise
interfere with garbage containers or their contents, except the owner or on
permission or at the request of the owner.
(2004 Code, § 51.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.09 SPECIAL OR BULK COLLECTIONS REGULATED.
   (A) No bulk trash or other refuse will be collected.
   (B)   Tree trimmings shall not be collected by the town.
   (C) No collection shall be made from vacant lots, nor shall any large rocks,
tree trunks, tree stumps, tree limbs of more than six feet in length or other
heavy objects be collected by the town. No waste building materials or lot
clearings shall be collected from houses or other structures under construction
or recently completed.
   (D) Material to be collected by special collections shall be placed in neat
piles and so located that such refuse can be easily loaded on trucks for
disposal.
(2004 Code, § 51.09) (Ord. passed 6-4-1987) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.10 GARBAGE COLLECTION FEES; SUSPENSION OF SERVICE.
   The charges, if any, for garbage collection shall be as established by the
Board of Aldermen and, if so established, shall be due from each water consumer
of the town. Any such charges for garbage collection shall be billed monthly
with water and/or sewer charges.
(2004 Code, § 51.10) (Ord. passed 7-7-1997; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
Editor’s note:
   Adopted by town on December 6, 2021; Revised by American Legal Publishing
CHAPTER 52: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Protection from damage
   
52.03   Surcharges
   
52.04   Late fee on water and sewer bills
Sewer Use; Discharges
   
52.15   Unpolluted discharges
   
52.16   Prohibited discharges
   
52.17   Special agreements
   
52.18   Conditionally admitted wastes
   
52.19   Application to discharge industrial waste
   
52.20   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
52.21   Holding or storage tanks
   
52.22   Control of volume of discharge
   
52.23   Maintenance of preliminary treatment facilities by owner
   
52.24   Control manholes
   
52.25   Inspection
   
52.26   Measurement and flow
   
52.27   Determination of character and concentration of wastes
   
52.28   Campsites
Industrial Use Regulations
   
52.40   Purpose and policy
   
52.41   Definitions
   
52.42   General discharge prohibitions
   
52.43   Federal categorical pretreatment standards
   
52.44   Modification of federal categorical pretreatment standards
   
52.45   Specific pollutant limitations
   
52.46   State requirements
   
52.47   Town’s right of revision
   
52.48   Excessive discharge
   
52.49   Accidental discharges
   
52.50   Fees
   
52.51   Wastewater discharge permit
   
52.52   Reporting requirements for permittee
   
52.53   Monitoring facilities
   
52.54   Inspection and sampling
   
52.55   Pretreatment
   
52.56   Confidential information
   
52.57   Falsifying information
   
52.58   Enforcement
 
   
52.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Board of Aldermen.
   B.O.D. or BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND. A measure of the degree of pollutional
strength of wastes of any nature. B.O.D. expressed in parts per million by
weight, shall mean the calculated pounds of oxygen required to satisfy the
five-day oxygen demand of a million pounds of domestic sewage or industrial
wastes, or a combination of both when tested in accordance with the procedures
given by the state’s Department of Environmental Quality national pollutant
discharge elimination system. B.O.D. is the measure of the pollutional value of
waters of any nature.
   COLOR. The “true color” due to substances in solution which cause any
variation in the hue of the receiving stream and is expressed in parts per
million.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
   DOMESTIC SEWAGE. Liquid waste from bathrooms, toilet rooms, kitchens and
home laundries.
   GARBAGE. Solids wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food
and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTES. The liquid wastes from institutional, commercial and
industrial processes and operations, as distinct from sanitary or domestic
sewage.
   MAY. Is permissive.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or ground water.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions
in grams per liter of solution and indicates the acidity or alkalinity of a
substance. A pH VALUE of 7.0 is considered neutral. A STABILIZED pH will be
considered as a pH which does not change beyond the specified limits when the
waste is subjected to aeration. A pH below 7.0 is acid, above alkaline.
   P.P.M. Parts per million by weight expressed in pounds. One million pounds
of water or sewage equals approximately 120,000 gallons.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. Wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall have
equal rights and is controlled by public authority.
   RECEIVING STREAM. The body of water, stream or watercourse receiving the
discharge waters from the sewage treatment plant or formed by the discharge of
the sewage treatment plant.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage or polluted industrial wastes
and to which storm, surface and ground waters or unpolluted industrial waste
are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such
ground, surface and storm water as may be present.
   SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT. Any arrangement or device and structures for
treating sewage.
   SEWAGE WORKS. All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing
of sewage.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   STORM SEWER or STORM DRAIN. A sewer which carries storm and surface waters
and drainage, but excludes sewage and polluted industrial wastes.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids; and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
(2004 Code, § 52.01) (Ord. 101, passed 7-1-1969)
§ 52.02 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGE.
   No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage,
destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any equipment or materials belonging to
the town, and used for the purpose of making measurement, tests or examinations
and left upon the premises of a person discharging wastes into the sewer. This
protection against damage shall also apply to any part of the public sewer
system. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate
arrest and prosecution.
(2004 Code, § 52.02) (Ord. 101, passed 7-1-1969) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03 SURCHARGES.
   (A)   All persons discharging industrial wastes into the public sewer system
shall be rendered a monthly bill as a surcharge covering the entire cost to the
town incurred in treating wastes having a B.O.D. in excess of 250 parts per
million by weight. The surcharge shall be imposed as provided herein, in
addition to any other charges made for sewer service. This surcharge shall
include:
      (1)   Fixed charges and amortization costs of additional plant capacity
required for treating the industrial wastes; and
      (2)   Charges covering the cost incurred by the town in treating the
wastes in the municipal sewage treatment plant.
   (B)   A surcharge per 1,000 pounds of B.O.D. shall be made to cover the
fixed charge and amortization cost of additional plant capacity as hereinbefore
described. The surcharge covering the cost of treatment of said industrial
wastes shall be arrived at in the following manner: the approving authority
shall fix the rate to be charged during the new fiscal year, at the beginning
of the fiscal year, for the weight of B.O.D. in excess of 250 parts per million
which is discharged into the city’s public sewer. This rate shall be computed
from actual cost per 1,000 pounds of B.O.D. removed from the combined domestic
and industrial wastes as experienced at the municipal treatment plants during
the preceding fiscal year.
   (C)   The combined surcharge as set forth in divisions (A) and (B) above
shall be billed and payable monthly on a separate bill rendered to the proper
person by the town. Failure to pay this bill within ten days shall cause the
bill to become delinquent. After five days of delinquency, the town, acting
through its duly authorized officers, shall sever the water connection serving
the premises and the water connection will not again be turned on until the
bill is paid.
(2004 Code, § 52.03) (Ord. 101, passed 7-1-1969)
§ 52.04 LATE FEE ON WATER AND SEWER BILLS.
   All water and sewer bills are due by the tenth of the month in which they
are issued. If not paid by the twentieth of the month, a 10% late fee will be
automatically added to the past due balance and the total bill amount will be
due.
(2004 Code, § 52.04) (Ord. passed 11-4-1996)
SEWER USE; DISCHARGES
§ 52.15 UNPOLLUTED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into any sanitary
sewers any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof run-off, sub-surface
drainage, cooling water or unpolluted industrial or commercial process water.
   (B)   Storm water and surface drainage shall be admitted to only such sewers
as are specifically designated as combined sewers, storm sewers or storm
drains. Unpolluted process and cooling waters may, upon written application and
approval by the approving authority, be discharged to storm sewers or storm
drains.
(2004 Code, § 52.15) (Ord. 101, passed 7-1-1969) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.16 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall discharge or cause to be
discharged any of the following described waters or wastes to any public
sanitary sewer:
   (A)   Any clothing, rags, textile remnants or wastes, cloth, scrap and the
like, except fibers, scraps and the like, which will pass through a one-fourth
inch mesh screen or its equivalent in screening ability;
   (B)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 160°F;
   (C)   Any water or waste containing more than 100 parts per million by
weight of fats, oils or grease;
   (D)   Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their nature or
quality, may cause fire or explosion, or be in any way injurious to persons,
the sewage system, the sewage treatment works or the operation of the sewage
treatment works;
   (E)   Any liquid wastes in which the suspended solids exceed 600 parts per
million by weight;
   (F)   Any liquid wastes having a B.O.D. of more than 600 parts per million,
except as hereinafter provided for;
   (G)   Any waters or wastes having a stabilized pH lower than 5.5 or higher
than 9.0, or having other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment or personnel of the sewage works;
   (H)   Any waters or wastes containing a poisonous or toxic substance or any
other materials in sufficient quantity to injure or interfere with any sewage
treatment process, or constitute a hazard to humans or animals, or create any
hazard in the receiving stream at the sewage treatment plant;
   (I)   Any waters or wastes containing suspended solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to handle such materials
at the sewage treatment plant;
   (J)   Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance capable of creating a
public nuisance;
   (K)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded;
   (L)   Any ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, bones,
feathers, tar, plastics, wood, paunch manure, butcher’s offal or any other
solid or vicious substances capable of causing obstruction to the flow in
sewers or other interference with the proper operation of the sewage collection
system or the sewage treatment works;
   (M)   Any materials which form excessive amounts of scum that may interfere
with the operation of the sewage treatment works or cause undue additional
labor in connection with its operation;
   (N)   Any waters or wastes containing dyes or other color which cannot be
removed by biological processes and which require special chemical treatment;
and
   (O)   Any waters or wastes containing lint in such quantities as to be
detrimental to sewer lines, sewage pumps or sewage treatment works.
(2004 Code, § 52.16) (Ord. 101, passed 7-1-1969) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.17 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed as prohibiting
any special agreement or arrangement between the town and any person whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be submitted into the
sanitary sowers for treatment by the town, either before or after approved pre-
treatment or pre-handling, and subject to payment therefor to the town as
hereinafter provided.
(2004 Code, § 52.17) (Ord. 101, passed 7-1-1969)
§ 52.18 CONDITIONALLY ADMITTED WASTES.
   (A)   Any waters or wastes discharged by any person, which have the
following characteristics may be admitted into the sanitary sewers
conditionally:
      (1)   A five-day B.O.D. greater than 600 parts per million by weight;
      (2)   Or containing suspended solids of more than 600 parts per million
by weight; and
      (3)   Or having characteristics prohibited in §
52.16 of this chapter.
   (B)   Where necessary in the opinion of the approving authority, the owner
shall provide, at his or her expense, such preliminary handling or treatment as
may be required to:
      (1)   Reduce the B.O.D. to 600 parts per million by weight and the
suspended solids to 600 parts per million by weight; and
      (2)   Or change the objectionable characteristics or constituents to come
within the maximum limits provided for in §
52.16 of this chapter.
   (C)   Where the volume of any waters or wastes discharged by any person
exceeds the limits set forth under divisions (D) through (G) below, the entire
volume of such wastes shall be understood to come within the limitations set
forth under divisions (A) and (B) above.
   (D)   Any waters or wastes discharged by any person, which have an average
working day flow greater than:
      (1)   One-thousand gallons if tributary to the sewage pumping stations;
and
      (2)   One-thousand gallons if tributary to the main gravity system may be
admitted into the sanitary sewers; provided, such water or wastes are
discharged at the rates which will not overload the respective pumping stations
or treatment plant. In case of such hydraulic overloads, the owner may be
required to control the rates of discharge to as to prevent overloads.
   (E)   Domestic wastes shall not be subject to the limitations set forth in
division (D)(1) above, if discharged directly to the sanitary sewers as
produced.
   (F)   Any water or wastes exceeding both the limits set forth under division
(D) above may be admitted to the sewers conditionally.
   (G)   Where necessary in the opinion of the approving authority, the owner
shall provide, at his or her own expense, such preliminary handling as may be
necessary to control the quality and rates of discharge of such waters or
wastes over each 24-hour period. Plans, specifications and other pertinent
information relating to proposed preliminary treatment or handling facilities
shall be submitted for the approval of the approving authority and no
construction of such facilities shall be commenced until such approval is
obtained in writing.
(2004 Code, § 52.18) (Ord. 101, passed 7-1-1969) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.19 APPLICATION TO DISCHARGE INDUSTRIAL WASTE.
   (A)   Any person who is now discharging any industrial wastes into the
town’s public sewers or who desires to discharge any industrial wastes into
such sewers shall make written application to the approving authority giving
complete information as to the nature and characteristics of the waste as
determined by an analysis of a composite sample of the waste made by an
independent laboratory.
   (B)   Any person having been granted authority by the approving authority to
discharge industrial wastes into the town’s public sewers and who shall change
or cause to be changed the nature or quantity of such waste, shall before
making such change, receive the approval of the approving authority of such
change and shall also furnish the approving authority a complete analysis of a
composite sample of the waste as determined by an independent laboratory.
   (C)   If the person or industry shall be located outside the corporate
limits and is now discharging or should wish to make such connection and
discharge such wastes as described above, he or she shall make written
application to the approving authority and shall furnish the approving
authority a complete analysis of a composite sample of the waste as determined
by an independent laboratory.
(2004 Code, § 52.19) (Ord. 101, passed 7-1-1969)
§ 52.20 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   (A)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the approving authority, they are necessary for the proper handling
and control of liquid wastes containing grease, oil or sand in excessive
amounts. Such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or
dwelling, but may be required for industrial or commercial establishments,
public eating places, hospitals, hotels, abattoirs or other institutions. Such
interceptors shall be readily accessible for cleaning and inspection and shall
be maintained by the owner at his or her expense and in continuously efficient
operation at all times.
(2004 Code, § 52.20)
   (B)   (1)   Purpose.
         (a)   This division (B) is designed to implement and enforce the oil
and grease discharge rules of division (A) above. Nothing in this division (B)
shall negate or override requirements contained herein. In the event of any
conflict or discrepancy between this policy and the rest of this chapter, the
chapter shall apply.
         (b)   To ensure compliance with this chapter, this policy provides
specific standards for oil and grease interceptors’ location, type, size,
installation, construction and maintenance. This policy regulates fats, oils
and grease discharges to the publicly-owned treatment works (POTW) and may
require the issuance of permits to certain non-domestic users and enforcement
of general requirements for all users (commercial and residential).
         (c)   The town’s goal with this policy is to prevent excessive
introduction of oil and grease into the sewer system and wastewater treatment
plant. Oil and grease have the potential for creating sanity sewer overflows
(SSOs), hazardous conditions in the collection system, treatment plant
inhibitions, increased treatment cost, fines and other cost for the town.
      (2)   Overview.
         (a)   All food service establishments and other users shall provide
means of preventing grease and oil discharges to the sewer collection system.
Where a grease and oil interceptor currently exists or is required by the town,
it shall be maintained for continuous, satisfactory and effective operation by
the owner, leaseholder or operator at his, her or their expense. Grease and oil
interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the town’s POTW
Director and shall be located as to be readily accessible for cleaning and
inspection. All users are encouraged to use proper grease handling procedures.
         (b)   It is unlawful for any facility producing oil and grease waste
to discharge into the town’s collection system without authorization from the
town. Authorization shall be given to the users in the town’s system in the
form of a wastewater discharge permit. Upon initial inspection and approval, a
certificate shall be issued allowing the discharge of such waste into the
collection system. Each oil and discharge permit shall be valid for five years
from the issue date of the permit. The user shall apply for a new permit a
minimum of 90 days prior to the expiration of the user’s existing permit. The
terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the town
during the term of the permit as codes and policies are modified. The user
shall be informed of any proposed changes in the issued permit at least 60 days
prior to the effective date of the change(s). Any changes or new conditions in
the permit shall include a reasonable schedule for compliance.
         (c)   As a condition precedent to the granting of an oil and grease
permit, the recipient shall agree to hold harmless the town and the town’s
employees from any liabilities arising from the user’s operations under this
permit.
      (3)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division (B), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         CONTROL AUTHORITY. The Town of Bryson City.
         FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT. Any user engaged primarily or incidentally
in the preparation of food for human or animal consumption, unless specifically
excluded in this definition. The term FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT does not
include any user discharging domestic wastewater from premises used exclusively
for residential purposes, so long as the wastewater discharged by such user
complies with division (D) below. The term FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT includes
restaurants, motels, hotels, cafeterias, hospitals, schools, bars,
delicatessens, meat processing operations, bakeries and similar operations.
         GREASE. Includes oils, fats, cellulose, starch, proteins, wax or
grease, whether emulsified or not. These are substances that may solidify or
become viscous at temperatures between 32°F and 150°F (0° and 65°C).
         GREASE GENERATING ESTABLISHMENTS. All retail food establishments,
catering establishments, commercial food preparation facilities, meat
processing facilities and other establishments that may be capable of
accumulating and discharging grease into the sewer system.
         GREASE INTERCEPTOR AND GREASE TRAP. A device utilized to effect the
separation of grease and oils from the wastewater effluent of a user. Such
traps or interceptors may be of the outdoor or underground type normally of a
1,000-gallon capacity or more, or the under-the-counter package units which are
typically less than 100-gallon capacity. For the purpose of this definition,
the terms TRAP and INTERCEPTOR are used interchangeably.
         HAULER. One who transfers waste from the site of a customer to an
approved site for disposal or treatment. The HAULER is responsible for assuring
that all federal, state and local regulations are followed regarding waste
transport.
         INTERFERENCE. A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, inhibits and/or disrupts the POTW; its treatment
processes and/or operations; and/or its sludge processes, use and/or disposal.
INTERFERENCE includes, but is not limited to, a discharge which alone or in
conjunction with discharges from other sources causes, in whole or in part, a
violation of one or more of the town’s NPDES permits and/or non-discharge
permits, and/or to the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits
issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: § 405 of
the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345, hereinafter referred to as the “Act”),
or any criteria, guideline or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.); the Clean Air Act (being 42
U.S.C. §§ 7401 et seq.); the Toxic Substances Control Act (being 15 U.S.C. §§
         OWNER. Any individual, person, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group upon whose property the building or structure is located
or will be constructed.
         PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works or a
combination thereof, as defined by § 212 of the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §
1292), which is owned by the town. This definition includes any devices or
systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation
of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature; any conveyances which convey
wastewater to the POTW treatment plant; plant and sewer maintenance personnel;
and microorganisms associated with the treatment process itself.
         USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution
of wastewater into the POTW or proposes such a contribution.
      (4)   Authority. The town’s Sewer Use Ordinance was adopted on 7-1-1969.
         (a)   Prohibited discharge standards.
            1.   General prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater
which causes interference or pass through. These general prohibitions apply to
all users of a POTW whether or not the user is a significant industrial user or
subject to any national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
            2.   Specific prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances or wastewater:
               a.   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause
obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case
solids greater than one-half inch in any dimension;
               b.   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
               c.   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge
points designated by the POTW Director in accordance herewith; and/or
               d.   Fats, oils or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 100 mg/l unless authorized by the POTW Director.
         (b)   Provision of trap. Grease and oil interceptors shall be provided
when, in the opinion of the POTW Director, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil. All
units shall be of type and capacity approved by the POTW Director and shall be
located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors
shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at
his, her or their expense.
      (5)   Authority to inspect and sample. Authorized employees of the town,
bearing proper identification, will inspect the facilities of any user to
evaluate whether the purpose of this policy and the rest of this chapter are
being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of
premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the town and the
Environmental Protection Agency access at all reasonable times to all areas of
the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying. The town and the Environmental Protection Agency shall have the right
to set up on the user’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a
user has security measures in place which would require proper identification
and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary
arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable
identification, personnel from the town will be permitted to enter, without
delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. Denial
of the town’s access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this policy
and the rest of this chapter, and unreasonable delays may constitute denial of
access.
      (6)   General requirements.
         (a)   All food service establishments shall have grease-handling
facilities approved by the town. Establishments whose grease-handling
facilities or methods are not adequately maintained to prevent floatable oils,
fat or grease from entering the sewerage system shall be notified by the grease
trap inspector at the time of inspection and will be required to sign an
inspection report of any non-compliance and will be given a time frame of two
weeks to correct the non-compliance. If the non-compliance is not corrected in
the two-week time frame it will be turned over to the POTW Director and he or
she will allow one week for the non-compliance to be resolved. If the non-
compliance is not resolved at the end of this one-week period, then further
penalties or other corrective actions will be assessed. Examples of non-
compliance include, but are not necessarily limited to, a collapsed or
deteriorated baffle wall, leaks, infiltration and inflow, improperly located or
missing tees and any other deficiencies that will prevent the grease
interceptor or trap from working properly.
         (b)   All food service establishments grease-handling facilities shall
be subject to review, evaluation and inspection by the town representatives
during normal working hours. Results of inspections will be made available to
facility owner, leaseholder or operator.
         (c)   Food service establishments receiving two consecutive
unsatisfactory evaluations or inspections may be subject to penalties or other
corrective actions as provided for in the rest of this chapter.
         (d)   Food service establishments who continue to violate this
division (B) may be considered grounds for discontinuance of sewer service.
         (e)   Food service establishments whose operations cause or allow
excessive grease to discharge or accumulate in the town collection system may
be liable to the town for costs related to the town service calls for line
blockages, line cleanings and pump repairs and the like, including all labor,
materials and equipment. Failure to pay all service-related charges may also be
grounds for sewer service discontinuance.
         (f)   Regularly scheduled maintenance of grease-handling facilities
and equipment is required to ensure adequate operation. All grease traps must
be cleaned (by a town-approved grease handling and hauling company), maintained
and repaired as needed. All grease traps must be pumped out completely. Outside
traps should be pumped quarterly and small under the sink grease traps should
be pumped monthly or at the discretion of the town. In the maintaining of
grease interceptors, the owner, leaseholder or operator shall be responsible
for approved grease removal and disposal, and shall maintain on-site records of
dates and means of disposal. The introduction of emulsifying agents such as
chemicals, solvents or enzymes directly or indirectly into the grease
interceptor, other than what is considered typical business operational
practices such as dishwashing or sanitation, is strictly prohibited. By
approval from the town, products which reduce fats, oil and grease (FOG), such
as bacteria, may be used in addition to the regular grease interceptor
maintenance program, but shall not be a consideration in determining grease
interceptor seizing or maintenance frequency. In any case, the discharged waste
shall comply with all applicable provisions of the rest of this chapter,
wastewater discharge restrictions and all state and federal laws.
         (g)   The user shall maintain a file on site of the records and other
documents pertaining to the facility’s grease interceptor. The file contents
shall include, but are not limited to, as-built drawings, record of
inspections, log of pumping activities and receipts, log of maintenance
activities, hauler information, disposal information and monitoring data, if
required. The file shall be available at all times for inspection and review by
the town. Records shall be maintained for a period of three years, except for
as-built drawing which should remain for the life of the grease trap at the
food service establishment.
         (h)   Owner shall be responsible for ensuring that no waste or
wastewater pumped from the grease interceptor/grease trap is reintroduced back
into the interceptor.
         (i)   Any food service establishment whose effluent discharge to the
sewerage system is determined by the town to cause interference in the
conveyance or operation of the sewerage system may be required to sample its
grease trap discharge and have it analyzed for oil and grease at the expense of
the owner, leaseholder or operator. Results of such analyses shall be reported
to the town.
         (j)   All grease traps/interceptors shall be designed and installed to
allow for complete access for inspection and maintenance of the inner chamber
(s) and viewing and sampling (sanitary tee) of effluent wastewater discharged
to the sewer.
         (k)   Food service establishments shall adopt procedures for handling
sources of floatable oils, fat or grease originating within their facility. A
notice shall be permanently posted at a prominent place in the facility-
advising employees of the procedures to be followed.
         (l)   Food service establishments shall develop and implement a waste
minimization plan pertaining to the disposal of grease, oils and food
particles. “No Grease” signs or posters shall be posted at each fixture that
drains to the grease trap.
         (m)   Food service establishments should train their employees on
proper grease disposal practices and maintain documentation that each employee
has received such training.
      (7)   Design and construction standards.
         (a)   New facilities.
            1.   All new food service establishments shall be required to
install a grease interceptor, according to this division (B). Grease
interceptors shall be adequately sized, with no interceptor less than 1,000
gallons’ total capacity unless otherwise approved by the town.
            2.   No new food service establishments will be allowed to initiate
operations until grease-handling facilities are approved by the town.
            3.   All grease interceptors, whether singular or two tanks in
series, must have each chamber directly accessible from the surface to provide
means for servicing and maintaining the interceptor in working and operating
condition.
            4.   A basket, screen or other intercepting device shall prevent
passage into the drainage system of solids one-half inch or larger in size. The
basket or device shall be removable for cleaning purposes.
            5.   No food grinders are allowed to be plumbed into the grease
trap. Excess food and scraps should be disposed of into the garbage.
            6.   Designers wishing to install grease interceptor during a shell
phase of construction, where the tenant is unknown or the tenant’s space design
is not far enough along to determine kitchen layout and grease interceptor
capacity, shall install a minimum 3,000-gallon capacity trap.
            7.   Tanks installed in traffic areas shall be traffic rated by
manufactured product only.
            8.   Tenant spaces shall not share a grease interceptor.
            9.   For interceptors that are remotely located (more than ten feet
from tenant space), the designer shall provide (on all drawings) methodology to
handle grease build-up in excessively long grease lines.
            10.   All new facilities shall have a sample point (or box) for
collection of a fats, oils and grease sample for analysis.
         (b)   Existing facilities. All existing facilities should comply with
all of the general requirements set forth in this policy. If the existing
facility ever sells or goes under new ownership, then the facility must comply
with division (B)(7)(c) below, with no exceptions.
         (c)   New food service establishments in existing buildings.
            1.   Where practical, new food service establishments locating in
existing buildings will be required to comply with the grease trap standards
applicable to new facilities. (See division (B)(7)(a) above.)
            2.   Where physically impossible to install “outdoor” units,
“under-the-counter” units may be allowed as with existing food service
establishments provided prior approval of unit type, size, location and the
like is obtained from the town.
      (8)   Exceptions. Under certain circumstances, the interceptor size and
location may necessitate special exceptions to this policy.
         (a)   If an exception to this policy is requested, the user must
demonstrate that the size and location will not cause the facility any problems
in meeting the discharge requirements of the town.
         (b)   The intent of this policy is to ensure compliance with the
town’s wastewater discharge restrictions which are required by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency.
         (c)   This policy is in no way intended to discourage development, but
rather to protect the facilities and the town’s infrastructure as it relates to
the sanitary sewer system.
      (9)   Maintaining a grease interceptor.
         (a)   Pump out schedules shall be properly established and strictly
followed to prevent overflows, downstream blockages, excessive oil and grease
and BOD loading to the POTW. Pump outs shall be complete, including both
influent and effluent sections, the side walls and baffles shall be scraped
down to remove excess accumulation of grease.
         (b)   The food service establishments shall not “hot flush”
(continuously run hot water over 140°F), as this practice will cause a bypass
of the grease trap causing the grease to congeal downstream and cause problems
in the collection system. Any food service establishment found doing this will
be liable for any cost of repairs and/or cleaning of lines.
      (10)   Enforcement. Enforcement of this policy shall be in accordance
with the provisions of the town’s enforcement response plan. Failure to comply
with this standard may be grounds for penalty imposition and/or discontinuance
of service. Additionally, failure to comply may result in the notification to
the county’s Health Department.
      (11)   Modification. This policy may be modified or changed by the town
at any time in accordance with the requirements of the town code of ordinances,
state statutes and federal regulations.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 101, passed 7-1-1969; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-
2025) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.21 HOLDING OR STORAGE TANKS.
   Whenever the total volume of wastes to be discharged by any person in any
one day shall exceed the limits set forth in §
52.18(D) through (G) of this chapter, or where such wastes have considerable
variation in pollutional value, such person shall be required to construct
holding or storage tanks in order to equalize the discharge of wastes over a
24-hour period, the tanks shall be so equipped as to thoroughly mix the waste
so that its quality shall be uniform when discharged to the public sewers.
(2004 Code, § 52.21) (Ord. 101, passed 7-1-1969) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.22 CONTROL OF VOLUME OF DISCHARGE.
   (A)   The control of the volume of the discharge of the wastes to the sewer
shall be by a water works type rate controller or other approved device, the
operation and setting of which shall be directed by the approving authority.
   (B)   Notice shall be given to the approving authority when normal
operations of the industry will be interrupted for 24 hours, or longer, and
wastes will not be available for discharge.
(2004 Code, § 52.22) (Ord. 101, passed 7-1-1969)
§ 52.23 MAINTENANCE OF PRELIMINARY TREATMENT FACILITIES BY OWNER.
   Where preliminary treatment or holding facilities are provided for any
purpose, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his or her own expense.
(2004 Code, § 52.23) (Ord. 101, passed 7-1-1969) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.24 CONTROL MANHOLES.
   Any person discharging industrial wastes into the public sewers may be
required to construct and maintain a suitable control or inspection manhole
either downstream from any treatment, storage or other approved works, or if
pretreatment is not required, at the point where the wastes enter the public
sewers. Such manhole shall be located so as to be readily accessible and shall
be constructed in such a manner as may be approved by the approving authority
so as to facilitate such inspection or measuring as may be necessary for proper
sampling and/or control of the waste discharged.
(2004 Code, § 52.24) (Ord. 101, passed 7-1-1969) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.25 INSPECTION.
   (A)   (1)   The approving authority and duly authorized employees of the
town shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purpose of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   The town shall notify, if available, a representative of the
company, or individual, prior to entering the premises.
   (B)   All tests and analyses of the characteristics of water and wastes to
which reference is made in this chapter shall be made in accordance with the
procedures given in the latest edition of Standard Methods for Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association. Such
tests and analyses shall be determined at the control manhole provided for in §
52.24 of this chapter or at the point of discharge of any waters or wastes at
the site of their origin on the premises of any person discharging such wastes
into the sanitary sewers.
(2004 Code, § 52.25) (Ord. 101, passed 7-1-1969; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-
2025) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.26 MEASUREMENT AND FLOW.
   (A)   The volume of flow used in determining the total discharge of
industrial wastes shall be based upon metered water consumption as shown in the
records of meter readings. In the event that a person discharging wastes into
the public sewer produces evidence to the approving authority that more than
10% of the total volume of water used for all purposes does not reach the
public sewers, then an estimated percentage of total water consumption to be
used in determining industrial waste discharge may be agreed upon between the
approving authority and the person discharging such industrial wastes into the
public sewers.
   (B)   Where any person discharging industrial wastes to the public sewers
procures all or any part of his or her water supply from sources other than the
Water Department of the town, the person discharging the wastes shall install
and maintain, at his or her expense, water meters of a type approved by the
approving authority for the purpose of determining the proper volume of
industrial waste discharged to such sewers.
(2004 Code, § 52.26) (Ord. 101, passed 7-1-1969) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.27 DETERMINATION OF CHARACTER AND CONCENTRATION OF WASTES.
   (A)   The industrial waste of each person discharging such wastes into the
public sewers shall be subject to periodic inspection and a determination of
character and concentration of such wastes shall be made quarterly or more
often as may be deemed necessary by the approving authority or his or her
authorized assistants. Such inspection and tests shall also be made immediately
after any approved process change which may affect the quantity or quality of
the waste discharged.
   (B)   (1)   Samples shall be collected in such manner as to be
representative of the actual quality of the waste.
      (2)   Laboratory methods used in the excavation of such waste shall be
those set forth in Standard Methods, as hereinbefore described, a copy of which
is on file at the office of the Town Clerk for inspection by any interested
parties.
   (C)   The determination of the character and concentration of industrial
wastes by the approving authority shall be used as a basis for charges.
(2004 Code, § 52.27) (Ord. 101, passed 7-1-1969)
§ 52.28 CAMPSITES.
   (A)   All campgrounds within a flood-prone area that are hooked to the
town’s sewer system are required to have a lockable spring loaded sewer cap for
each campsite with a sewer connection.
   (B)   The town must approve of the spring loaded sewer cap before
installation. The town, will have the right of entry at any point deemed
necessary to lock said sewer caps.
(Ord. passed - -)
INDUSTRIAL USE REGULATIONS
§ 52.40 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This subchapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and
indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for
the town and enables the town to comply with all applicable state and federal
laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. and the
general pretreatment regulations (40 C.F.R. part 403).
   (B)   The objectives of this subchapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated,
into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the
system;
      (3)   To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system; and
      (4)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the municipal
wastewater system.
   (C)   This subchapter provides for the regulation of all direct and indirect
contributors to the municipal wastewater system through the issuance of permits
to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of general requirements
for the other uses, authorized monitoring and enforcement activities, require
user reporting, assumes that existing customer’s capacity will not be preempted
and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs
resulting from the program established herein.
   (D)   This subchapter shall apply to the town and to persons outside the
town who are, by contract or agreement with the town, users of the town POTW.
This subchapter is a supplement to Ch. 53 of this code of ordinances, as
amended. Except as otherwise provided herein, the Superintendent of the town
POTW shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(2004 Code, § 52.40) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.41 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings.
      B.O.D. Biochemical oxygen demand.
      C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
      C.O.D. Chemical oxygen demand.
      EPA. Environmental Protection Agency.
      l. Liter.
      mg. Milligrams.
      mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
      NPDES. National pollutant discharge elimination system.
      POTW. Publicly-owned treatment works.
      SIC. Standard industrial classification.
      SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.
      TSS. Total suspended solids.
      U.S.C. United States Code.
   (B)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
      APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Director in an NPDES state with an approved state
pretreatment program and the Administrator of the EPA in a non-NPDES state or
NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program.
      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER.
         (a)   An AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF AN INDUSTRIAL USER may be:
            1.   A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-
president if the industrial user is a corporation; and
            2.   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively.
         (b)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated
above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (B.O.D.). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure, five days at 20°C, expressed in terms of weight and concentration
(milligrams per liter (mg/l)).
      BUILDING SEWER. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user
to the POTW.
      CATEGORICAL STANDARDS. National categorical pretreatment standards or
pretreatment standard.
      CONTROL AUTHORITY. The approval authority, defined hereinabove, or the
Superintendent if the town has an approved pretreatment program under the
provisions of 40 C.F.R. § 403.11.
      COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is
heat.
      DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater
directly to the waters of the state.
      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the
Administrator or other duly authorized official of the agency.
      GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time
basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration
of time.
      HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
      INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction of non-domestic
pollutants from any source regulated under § 307(b) or (c) of the Act, 33
U.S.C. § 1317, into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the
system).
      INDUSTRIAL USER. A source of indirect discharge which does not constitute
a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1342).
      INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of
the town’s NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or
disposal by the POTW in accordance with § 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or
any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C.
§§ 7401 et seq.), the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.),
or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method
of disposal or use employed by the POTW.
      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1311) which applies to
a specific category of industrial users.
      NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or NPDES PERMIT. A permit
issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
      NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD OR PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD. Any regulation developed under the authority of § 307(b) of the Act
(33 U.S.C. § 1317) and 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.
      NEW SOURCE. Any source, the construction of which is commenced after the
publication of proposed regulations prescribing a § 307(c) (33 U.S.C. § 1317)
categorical pretreatment standard which will be applicable to such source, if
such standard is thereafter promulgated within 120 days of proposal in the
Federal Register. Where the standard is promulgated later than 120 days after
proposal, a NEW SOURCE means any source, the construction of which is commenced
after the date of promulgation of the standard.
      pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
      POLLUTANT. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into
water.
      POLLUTION. The human-made or human-induced alteration of the chemical,
physical, biological and radiological integrity of water.
      PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of
discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction
or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or
process changes other means, except as prohibited by 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(d).
      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on
an industrial user.
      PUBLICLY-OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works as defined by §
212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned in this instance by the town.
This definition includes any sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW
treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not
connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this
subchapter, POTW shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the
POTW from persons outside the town who are, by contract or agreement with the
town, users of the town’s POTW.
      POTW TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.
      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the town’s wastewater
disposal system who has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average
work day, or has a flow greater than 5% of the flow in the town’s wastewater
treatment system, or has in his or her wastes toxic pollutants as defined
pursuant to § 307 of the Act (42 U.S.C. § 1317) of (state) statutes, and rules
or is found by the town, (state control agency) or the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment
system, the quality of sludge, the system’s effluent quality or air emissions
generated by the system.
      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the executive office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
      STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any storm of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
      SUPERINTENDENT. The person designated by the town to supervise the
operation of the publicly-owned treatment works and who is charged with certain
duties and responsibilities by this subchapter, or his or her duly authorized
representative.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is
removable by laboratory filtering.
      TOWN. The Town of Bryson City or the Board of Aldermen of the town.
      TOXIC POLLUTANT. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as
toxic in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental
Protection Agency under the provision of CWA § 307(a) (the Clean Water Act) or
other acts.
      USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits contribution of
wastewater into the town’s POTW.
      WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes
from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions,
together with may be present, whether treated or untreated, which is
contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
      WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT. As set forth in §
52.51 of this chapter.
      WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
(2004 Code, § 52.41) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-
20-2025)
§ 52.42 GENERAL DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation
or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users
of a POTW, whether or not the user is subject to national categorical
pretreatment standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances
to any POTW:
      (1)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time, shall two successive readings
on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at
any point in the system) be more than 5%, nor any single reading over 10% of
the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. Prohibited materials include, but
are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene,
ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates,
bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides and any other substances which the
town, the state or EPA has notified the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to
the system;
      (2)   Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow
in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment
facilities such as, but not limited to: grease; garbage with particles greater
than one-half inch in any dimension; animal guts or tissues; paunch manure;
bones; hair; hides or fleshings; entrails; whole blood; feathers; ashes;
cinders; sand; spent lime; stone or marble dust; metal; glass; straw; shavings;
grass clippings; rags; spent grains; spent hops; waste paper; wood; plastics;
gas; tar; asphalt residues; residues from refining or processing of fuel or
lubricating oil; mud; or glass grinding or polishing wastes;
      (3)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0, unless the POTW is
specifically designed to accommodate such wastewater, or wastewater having any
other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment and/or personnel of the POTW;
      (4)   Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere
with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or to
exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic
pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant
to the Clean Water Act;
      (5)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for maintenance and repair;
      (6)   Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case
shall a substance discharged to the POTW, cause the POTW to be in non-
compliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations
developed under § 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345); any criteria, guidelines
or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.); the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. §§
7401 et seq.); the Toxic Substances Control Act (15 U.S.C. §§ 2601 et seq.); or
state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used;
      (7)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or
state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards;
      (8)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions;
      (9)   Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case
wastewater with a temperature at the introduction into the POTW which exceeds
40°C (104°F) unless the POTW treatment plant is designed to accommodate such
temperature;
      (10)   (a)   Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD
and the like) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which a
user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW.
         (b)   In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain
concentration or qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer
than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration,
quantities or flow during normal operation;
      (11)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the
Superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; and
      (12)   Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance.
   (B)   When the Superintendent determines that a user is contributing to the
POTW any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts as to interfere
with the operation of the POTW, the Superintendent shall advise the user of the
impact of the contribution on the POTW and develop effluent limitations for
such user to correct the interference with the POTW.
(2004 Code, § 52.42) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-
20-2025) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.43 FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment
standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if
more stringent than limitations imposed under this subchapter for sources in
that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under
this subchapter.
   (B)   The Superintendent shall notify all affected users of the applicable
reporting requirements under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12.
(2004 Code, § 52.43) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985)
§ 52.44 MODIFICATION OF FEDERAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Where the town’s wastewater treatment system achieves consistent
removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may
apply to the approval authority for modification of specific limits in the
federal pretreatment standards.
   (B)   CONSISTENT REMOVAL shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant
or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system
to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the
system 95% of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set
forth in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7 of general pretreatment regulations for existing and
new sources of pollution promulgated pursuant to the Act.
   (C)   The town may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal
pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 C.F.R. § 403.7 are
fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained.
(2004 Code, § 52.44) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-
20-2025)
§ 52.45 SPECIFIC POLLUTANT LIMITATIONS.
   No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of:
0.10 mg/l   arsenic
0.13 mg/l   cadmium
0.815 mg/l  copper
0.18 mg/l   cyanide
0.20 mg/l   lead
0.30 mg/l   mercury
0.942 mg/l  nickel
0.096 mg/l  silver
0.572 mg/l  total chromium
0.549g mg/l zinc
 
(2004 Code, § 52.45) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-
20-2025) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.46 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this subchapter.
(2004 Code, § 52.46) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985)
§ 52.47 TOWN’S RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The town reserves the right to establish, by ordinance, more stringent
limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if
deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in §
52.40 of this chapter.
(2004 Code, § 52.47) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985)
§ 52.48 EXCESSIVE DISCHARGE.
   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal
categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific
limitation developed by the city or state. (Comment: dilution may be an
acceptable means of complying with some of the prohibitions set forth in §
52.42 of this chapter, such as the pH prohibition.)
(2004 Code, § 52.48) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.49 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGES.
   (A)   (1)   Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this subchapter.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be
provided and maintained at the owner or user’s own cost and expense. Detailed
plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection
shall be submitted to the town for review and shall be approved by the town
before construction of the facility. All existing users shall complete such a
plan by 1-1-1983. No user who commences contribution to the POTW after the
effective date of this subchapter shall be permitted to introduce pollutants
into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the
town.
      (2)   Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall
not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the user’s
facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this subchapter. In the case
of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately
telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include
location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume and corrective
actions.
   (B)   Within five days following an accidental discharge, the user shall
submit to the Superintendent a detailed written report describing the cause of
the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar
future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, fish kills or any other damage to person or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other
liability which may be imposed by this subchapter or other applicable law.
   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the users bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or
suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
(2004 Code, § 52.49) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985)
§ 52.50 FEES.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide for the
recovery of costs from users of the town’s wastewater disposal system for the
implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges or
fees shall be set forth in the town’s schedule of charges and fees.
   (B)   Charges and fees.
      (1)   The town may adopt charges and fees, which may include:
         (a)   Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
town’s pretreatment program;
         (b)   Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
         (c)   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
         (d)   Fees for permit applications;
         (e)   Fees for filing appeals;
         (f)   Fees for consistent removal by the town of pollutants otherwise
subject to federal pretreatment standards; and
         (g)   Other fees as the town may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
      (2)   These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this subchapter
and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the town.
(2004 Code, § 52.50) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985)
§ 52.51 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT.
   (A)   Wastewater dischargers. It shall be unlawful to discharge without a
town permit to any natural outlet within the town, or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the town and/or to the POTW any wastewater, except as
authorized by the Superintendent in accordance with the provisions of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Wastewater contribution permits.
      (1)   General permits. All significant users proposing to connect to or
to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before
connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant users
connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a wastewater contribution
permit within 180 (optional) days after the effective date of this subchapter.
      (2)   Permit application.
         (a)   Users required to obtain a wastewater contribution permit shall
complete and file with the town, an application in the form prescribed by the
town, and accompanied by a fee of $100. Existing users shall apply for a
wastewater contribution permit within 30 (optional) days after the effective
date of this subchapter, and proposed new users shall apply at least 90
(optional) days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support
of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for
evaluation, the following information:
            1.   Name, address and location, (if different from the address);
            2.   SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;
            3.   Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not
limited to, those mentioned in §§
52.42 through
52.49 of this chapter as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory;
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to § 304(g) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1314(g))
and contained in 40 C.F.R. part 136, as amended;
            4.   Time and duration of contribution;
            5.   Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates,
including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any;
            6.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and
details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the size,
location and elevation;
            7.   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on
the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged;
            8.   Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in
the discharge which are limited by any town, state or federal pretreatment
standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation
and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user
to meet applicable pretreatment standards;
            9.   If additional pretreatment and/or O&M be required to meet the
pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide
such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule
shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule.
               a.   The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the
form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to
the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user
to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such as, hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for
major components, commencing construction, completing construction and the
like).
               b.   No increment referred to in division (B)(2)(a)9.a. above
shall exceed nine months.
               c.   Not later than 14 days following each date the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
Superintendent including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it
expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and
the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule
established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Superintendent.
            10.   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes
and rate of production;
            11.   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and
maximum per day);
            12.   Number and type of employees and hours of operation of plant
and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; and
            13.   Any other information as may be deemed by the town to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
         (b)   The town will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may
require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data
furnished, the town may issue a wastewater contribution permit subject to terms
and conditions provided herein.
      (3)   Permit modifications. In nine months of the promulgation of a
national categorical pretreatment standard, the wastewater contribution permit
of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance with
such standard within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user,
subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously
submitted an application for a wastewater contribution permit as required by
division (B)(2) above, the user shall apply for a wastewater contribution
permit within 180 days after the promulgation of the applicable national
categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing
wastewater contribution permit shall submit to the Superintendent within 180
days after the promulgation of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment
standard the information required by divisions (B)(2)(a)8. and (B)(2)(a)9.
above.
      (4)   Permit conditions. Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly
subject to all provisions of this subchapter and all other applicable
regulations, user charges and fees established by the town. Permits may contain
the following:
         (a)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to a community sewer;
         (b)   Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics;
         (c)   Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
         (d)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
         (e)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for
tests and reporting schedule;
         (f)   Compliance schedules;
         (g)   Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports (see §
52.52 of this chapter);
         (h)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records
relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the town, and affording town
access thereto;
         (i)   Requirements for notification of the town or any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume
or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the
wastewater treatment system;
         (j)   Requirements for notification of slug discharges as per §
52.58(B) of this chapter; and
         (k)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the town to ensure
compliance with this subchapter.
      (5)   Permits duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five (optional) years. A permit may be issued for a
period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user
shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration
of the user’s existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be
subject to modification by the town during the term of the permit as
limitations or requirements as identified in §§
52.42 through
52.49 of this chapter are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall
be informed of any proposed changes in his or her permit at least 30 days prior
to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit
shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
      (6)   Permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not
be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises or a new or changed operation without the approval of the town. Any
succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the
existing permit.
(2004 Code, § 52.51) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-
20-2025) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.52 REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR PERMITTEE.
   (A)   Compliance date report. Within 90 days following the date for final
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new
source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW,
any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the
Superintendent a report indicating the nature and concentration of all
pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by
pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow
for these process units in the user facility, which are limited by such
pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the
applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being set on a consistent
basis and, if not, what additional O&M and/or pretreatment is necessary to
bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of
the industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional.
   (B)   Periodic compliance reports.
      (1)   Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance
date of such pretreatment standard or, in the case of a new source, after
commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the Superintendent
during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the
pretreatment standard or by the superintendent, a report indicating the nature
and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such
pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all
daily flows which during the reporting period exceed the average daily flow
reported in §
52.51(B)(2)(a)5. of this chapter. At the discretion of the Superintendent and
in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays,
budget cycles and the like, the Superintendent may agree to alter the months
during which the above reports are to be submitted.
      (2)   The Superintendent may impose mass limitations on users which are
using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in
other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such
cases, the report required by division (B)(1) above shall indicate the mass of
pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user.
These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the
discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration or production
and mass where requested by the Superintendent, of pollutants contained therein
which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of
monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All
analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the
Administrator pursuant to § 304(9) of the Act and contained in 40 C.F.R. part
136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the
Administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
approved by the Administrator. (Comment: where 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not
include a sampling or analytical technique for the pollutant in question.
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set
forth in the EPA publication, Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of
Industrial Effluent for Priority Pollutants, April 1977, and amendments
thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the
Administrator.)
(2004 Code, § 52.52) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985)
§ 52.53 MONITORING FACILITIES.
   (A)   The town shall require to be provided and operated at the user’s own
expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s premises, but the
town may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on
the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk
area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked
vehicles.
   (B)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
facility, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in
a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
   (C)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the town’s
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the town.
(2004 Code, § 52.53) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985)
§ 52.54 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   The town shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the
purpose of this subchapter is being met and all requirements are being complied
with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or
discharged shall allow the town or its representative ready access at all
reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of his, her or its
duties. The town, approval authority and, (where the NPDES state is the
approval authority), EPA shall have the right to set up on the user’s property
such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance
monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in
force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into
their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security
guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the
town, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for
the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities.
(2004 Code, § 52.54) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985)
§ 52.55 PRETREATMENT.
   (A)   (1)   Users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required
to comply with this subchapter and shall achieve compliance with all federal
categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by
the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat
wastewater to a level acceptable to the town shall be provided, operated and
maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment
facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the town for review,
and shall be acceptable to the town before construction of the facility. The
review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user
from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
effluent acceptable to the town under the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of
operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the town prior to the
user’s initiation of the changes.
   (B)   The town shall annually publish in The Smoky Mountain Times newspaper
a list of the users which were not in compliance with any pretreatment
requirements or standards at least once during the 12 previous months. The
notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the
user(s) during the same 12 months.
   (C)   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall
be made available to officials of the EPA or approval authority upon request.
(2004 Code, § 52.55) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-
20-2025)
§ 52.56 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall
be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction
unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the town that the release of such information would divulge
information processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets of the user.
   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon
written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this subchapter,
the national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit, state
disposal system permit and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however,
that, such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any
state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person
furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be
recognized as confidential information.
   (C)   Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be
transmitted to any governmental agency or to the general public by the town
until and unless a ten-day notification is given to the user.
(2004 Code, § 52.56) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985)
§ 52.57 FALSIFYING INFORMATION.
   No person shall knowingly make any false statements, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained pursuant to this subchapter or wastewater
contribution permit, or falsify, tamper with or knowingly render inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required under this subchapter.
(2004 Code, § 52.57) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.58 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Harmful contributions.
      (1)   The town may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or a
wastewater contribution permit when such suspension is necessary, in the
opinion of the town, in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health
or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or
causes the town to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
      (2)   Any person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater contribution permit shall immediately stop or
eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply
voluntarily with the suspension order, the town shall take such steps as deemed
necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or
minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The town
shall reinstate the wastewater contribution permit and/or the wastewater
treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the non- complying
discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the
causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence shall be submitted to the town within 15 days of the date of
occurrence.
   (B)   Revocation of permit. Any user who violates the following conditions
of this subchapter, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to
having his or her permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this
section:
      (1)   Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents
and characteristics of his or her discharge;
      (2)   Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;
      (3)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose
of inspection or monitoring; or
      (4)   Violation of conditions of the permit.
   (C)   Notification of violation. Whenever the town finds that any user has
violated or is violating this subchapter, wastewater contribution permit or any
prohibition, limitation or requirements contained herein, the town may serve
upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within
30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction
thereof shall be submitted to the town by the user.
   (D)   Show cause hearing.
      (1)   The town may order any user who causes or allows an unauthorized
discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the Board of Aldermen why the
proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on
the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the Board of
Aldermen regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken,
the proposed enforcement action and directing the user to show cause before the
Board of Aldermen why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The
notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified
mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing. Service
may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
      (2)   The Board of Aldermen may itself conduct the hearing and take the
evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the
assigned department to:
         (a)   Issue in the name of the Board of Aldermen notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of
evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings;
         (b)   Take the evidence; and
         (c)   Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the Board of
Aldermen for action thereon.
      (3)   At any hearing held pursuant to this subchapter, testimony taken
must be under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded,
will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing
upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
      (4)   After the Board of Aldermen has reviewed the evidence, it may issue
an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a
specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate
treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been
installed on existing treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are
necessary and appropriate may be issued.
   (E)   Legal action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or
other wastes into the town’s wastewater disposal system contrary to the
provisions of this subchapter, federal or state pretreatment requirements or
any order of the town, the Town Attorney may commence an action for appropriate
legal and/or equitable relief in the Circuit Court of the county.
(2004 Code, § 52.58) (Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   If any person shall violate any provision of §§
52.01 through
52.04 and
52.15 through
52.27 of this chapter, he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
fined not more than $50 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
   (B)   Any user who is found to have violated an order of the Board of
Aldermen or who willfully or negligently failed to comply with any provision of
§§
52.40 through
52.56 of this chapter, and the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued
hereunder, shall be fined not less than $100, nor more than $1,000, for each
offense. Each day on which a violation shall occur or continue shall be deemed
a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties provided herein,
the town may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs, court reporters’
fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the
person found to have violated §§
52.40 through
52.56 of this chapter or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued
hereunder.
   (C)   Any person who violates §
52.57 of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than $1,000 or
imprisoned for not more than six months, or both.
(2004 Code, § 52.99) (Ord. 101, passed 7-1-1969; Ord. 1-500, passed 1-7-1985;
Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
Editor’s note:
   Adopted by town on October 18, 2021; Revised by American Legal Publishing
CHAPTER 53: WATER
Section
Water System
   
53.01   Service contracts
   
53.02   Supervision by Board
   
53.03   Director of Public Works; duties
   
53.04   Director of Water Plant
   
53.05   Water connections required; separate connections
   
53.06   Connections to be made under supervision
   
53.07   Applications for connections
   
53.08   Cross-connections
   
53.09   Cut-off valves recommended
   
53.10   Unauthorized persons not to interfere with cut-off valves
   
53.11   Town may make taps and connections
   
53.12   Separate taps for each unit
   
53.13   Right of entry
   
53.14   Water meters
   
53.15   Connections outside of town
   
53.16   Unauthorized use of water
   
53.17   Leaks
   
53.18   Water for building purposes
   
53.19   Unnecessary waste of water
   
53.20   Injury to property and fixtures; damage to elements of the town water
system
   
53.21   Tampering with meters
   
53.22   Continuity of service
   
53.23   Meters; rates
   
53.24   Water deposits
   
53.25   Meter reading; billing; collecting
   
53.26   Policies and procedures for delinquent accounts
   
53.27   Suspension of service
Water Shortages
   
53.40   Definition
   
53.41   Declaration of water shortage
   
53.42   Stage I Water Shortage Condition
   
53.43   Stage II Water Shortage Condition
   
53.44   Stage III Water Shortage Condition
   
53.45   Lifting of restrictions
   
53.46   Enforcement
   
53.47   Discontinuance of service for violation
   
53.48   Authority
 
   
53.99   Penalty
WATER SYSTEM
§ 53.01 SERVICE CONTRACTS.
   All pertinent provisions of this chapter shall govern the terms and
conditions of the contracts under which the town furnishes water service to any
person, or whereby the town makes any water connections or performs any work of
any kind in connection with the furnishing of water service.
(2004 Code, § 53.01)
§ 53.02 SUPERVISION BY BOARD.
   (A)   The water system shall be under the supervision of the Board.
   (B)   The duty of enforcing full compliance with all rules and regulations
governing all connections with the mains shall be vested in the Board of
Aldermen or its authorized agent.
(2004 Code, § 53.02) (Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
§ 53.03 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS; DUTIES.
   The Director of Public Works shall perform the following duties.
   (A)   He or she shall have general supervision over all the operations of
the town’s distribution and collection systems.
   (B)   He or she shall see that all rules and regulations of the town are
enforced.
(2004 Code, § 53.03)
§ 53.04 DIRECTOR OF WATER PLANT.
   (A)   The water plant operator in responsible charge shall have general
supervision over all the operations of the water plant.
   (B)   He or she shall see that all the rules and regulations for the water
plant are enforced.
§ 53.05 WATER CONNECTIONS REQUIRED; SEPARATE CONNECTIONS.
   All owners of improved property located within the corporate limits and on
or within a distance of 200 feet of any town water line shall connect their
premises with the town water system. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the
continued use of water from private wells for any purpose other than domestic
use. There shall be no cross-connection of the town water system with any
private well or any other source of water supply.
(2004 Code, § 53.04)
§ 53.06 CONNECTIONS TO BE MADE UNDER SUPERVISION.
   The construction of laterals for water connections, and the necessary
excavation therefor, shall be done by the town or, if done by a licensed
plumber, it shall be done under the supervision of the town.
(2004 Code, § 53.05)
§ 53.07 APPLICATIONS FOR CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The application for a connection to the water mains and for the
use of water must be signed by the owner of the premises to be so supplied, or
his or her duly authorized agent, on the proper form provided for that purpose.
      (2)   An application signed by the tenant only will not be considered.
   (B)   All applications for the connection to the town’s water system outside
the town limits must be made on proper forms and approved by the Board of
Aldermen.
(2004 Code, § 53.06)
§ 53.08 CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   See
Ch. 54 of this code of ordinances for provisions concerning cross-connections.
§ 53.09 CUT-OFF VALVES RECOMMENDED.
   A stop and waste cock, or cut-off valve, must be placed by the property
owner at the property line, or at such point where the pipe leaves the street
line; such cock or valve to be under the control of the property owner or
tenant, to be used in case of a break or other necessity whereby pipes to be
repaired can be cut off without using the street corporation cut-off. As many
additional stops or waste cocks as desired by the owner may be placed within
the premises to be used according to desire or convenience. (2004 Code, §
53.10)
§ 53.10 UNAUTHORIZED PERSONS NOT TO INTERFERE WITH CUT-OFF VALVES.
   Unauthorized persons who may interfere with the valves or cut-off of the
street mains or curb cocks, or any part of the water works system, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in §
53.99 . Plumbers, duly licensed, may, in case of accident, shut off the water
at curb cocks.
(2004 Code, § 53.11) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.11 TOWN MAY MAKE TAPS AND CONNECTIONS.
   The town reserves the right to make all and furnish all connections up to
the property line if inside town limits. If outside town limits, the town will
make the water tap at the town’s main line and the property owner will be
responsible for all lines and easements to reach the town’s line.
(2004 Code, § 53.12)
§ 53.12 SEPARATE TAPS FOR EACH UNIT.
   (A)   Each and every customer shall have his or her own individual water and
sewer connection. No piggyback connection in which one customer connects to
another customer’s service line shall be allowed or approved. No dwelling,
whether located on the same parcel or on an adjoining parcel, shall be served
through the same service connection. Any customer permitting or participating
in a piggyback connection shall be subject to have his or her water and sewer
service disconnected. If plumbing cannot be separated for the purposes of this
section, then the account must stay in the landowner’s name.
   (B)   A residential tapping privilege shall not entitle a customer to
connect a commercial or industrial business, such as a beauty parlor or repair
shop, to the town lines without notifying the town and paying the additional
amount required in the town rate structure.
   (C)   The failure of a customer to comply with the provisions in this
section shall constitute a breach of contract by the customer. Any customer
found to be violating any provision of this section shall be served by the town
with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a time
limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offending customer shall,
within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violations. Any customer who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
stated in the notice shall be disconnected from the system at the convenience
of the town.
   (D)   A single-family residential dwelling shall have a separate meter for
each living unit.
   (E)   Commercial establishments shall have a separate meter for each unit.
   (F)   All customers that currently receive service to multiple users through
single meter shall be charged per unit rates as outlined in the town rate
structure.
   (G)   All fire lines shall be metered properly in accordance with the town
standards. If a separate fire line cannot be separated from the domestic line,
then a compound meter must be installed in accordance with the town standards,
at the cost of the customer.
   (H)   (1)   The following requirements must be met for a new multi-unit
customer to have individual meters.
         (a)   The water lines must meet the town’s specifications, and
installation certified by a licensed engineer who affirms that they were
installed in accordance to the state approved plans.
         (b)   The owner is responsible for paying all costs associated with
the installation of the individual meters.
         (c)   Easements are required for the town-maintained lines and
appendages.
         (d)   The town will determine the size of the meters.
         (e)   The owner must provide a list of tenants showing the name, unit
number, physical address and physical location in the park, complexity or
development.
         (f)   The owner is responsible for notifying the tenants that they
must set up an account and pay a deposit.
         (g)   The owner is responsible for meter access at all times and to
protect the meters from damage.
      (2)   Grandfathered customers not converting to individual meters will be
billed in accordance with the town rate structure, which bills per unit rates.
All multi-unit accounts on an individual meter must stay in the landowner’s
name.
(Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
§ 53.13 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Whenever it becomes necessary to enter any premises, stores or dwellings to
inspect any water pipe fixtures, meters or appliances authorized employees of
the town shall make demand at a reasonable hour for the right of inspection,
and should the employee, engineer, inspector or other agent authorized to enter
said premises or dwelling be opposed or refused admittance in the performance
of his or her duty, the party or parties so opposing shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and the supply of water may be cut off until such examination is
made and the required information is obtained or repairs and alterations are
made, as deemed necessary.
(2004 Code, § 53.13) (Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
§ 53.14 WATER METERS.
   (A)   Any water meters furnished by the town shall remain the property of
the town.
   (B)   (1)   At the request of any consumer, the town will test the accuracy
of a water meter alleged to be recording improperly.
      (2)   If the meter is found to be inaccurate, the consumer’s water bill
may be adjusted accordingly.
      (3)   If the meter is found to be accurate, the consumer will be charged
a fee as outlined in the fee schedule adopted annually by the Board of
Aldermen.
(2004 Code, § 53.14) (Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
§ 53.15 CONNECTIONS OUTSIDE OF TOWN.
   No connection of any water line or system outside of the town shall be made
to any part of the town water system without special permission from the Board
on such terms as the Board shall prescribe.
(2004 Code, § 53.15)
§ 53.16 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF WATER.
   (A)   Only authorized town employees may connect or reconnect water service.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any
change in any water line which shall have the effect of taking any water from
the water main pipes or lines of the town without passing through a water meter
that has been installed by the town.
   (C)   Unauthorized use of the town’s fire hydrants is considered tampering
with a public water supply; tampering is federal offense. Records and documents
must be maintained as to its operation and water usage. These records are
reviewed by the state and other federal agencies. All water used throughout the
water distribution system must be accounted for; this includes water sold,
flushing to maintain water quality, fire fighting, leaks and water used by non-
town fire departments and the like.
   (D)   If water is found to be in use without being turned on by an
authorized town employee, or if water is used for any other purpose than that
paid for, the consumer of the water shall be guilty of a violation of this
chapter.
(2004 Code, § 53.16) (Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
§ 53.17 LEAKS.
   If a break occurs, beyond the meter or a defect is found in any pipe or
fixture, causing or permitting a leakage or waste of water, it shall be the
duty of the owner of the premises or the consumer to have the break or defect
repaired.
(2004 Code, § 53.17)
§ 53.18 WATER FOR BUILDING PURPOSES.
   (A)   Any person desiring water for building purposes shall make an
application for a connection to the town’s water system.
   (B)   When said tap is made, a meter will be placed and the consumer will be
charged for water services and usage until the structure is completed or
occupied; then, other services will be added to the bill such as sewer and/or
garbage if feasible at the location of the services.
(2004 Code, § 53.19)
§ 53.19 UNNECESSARY WASTE OF WATER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any spigot or other water
opening on his or her premises to become out of repair so as to allow water to
waste, and any person so offending shall be subject to a penalty as set forth
in §
53.99  of this chapter for every day the spigot or opening shall remain
unrepaired after notice from the Chief of Police or other designated officer to
repair the same.
(2004 Code, § 53.20) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.20 INJURY TO PROPERTY AND FIXTURES; DAMAGE TO ELEMENTS OF THE TOWN WATER
SYSTEM.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, deface or destroy the
building, machinery, fences, trees or other property of the town water system,
or in any way to contaminate the town water supply.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to break, damage or cause to
broken or damaged any public fire hydrant, water main, any portion of a
complete service connection, valve box or any other element of the town’s water
system. In addition to any applicable penalties for violating this section,
such person shall pay the reasonable cost of any necessary repairs.
   (C)   If any of the structures mentioned in the previous section is broken
or damaged by accident or otherwise, it shall be the duty of the person causing
the damage to report the location and description of the damage to the Police
Department, Fire Department or town. Failure to make the report shall be
unlawful.
   (D)   If a driveway is constructed over an existing meter box, the town may
relocate the service at the customer’s expense.
(2004 Code, § 53.21) (Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.21 TAMPERING WITH METERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, after the water has been turned off for
failure to pay the water bill, to turn the water on at the meter or to bypass
the meter or in any manner to obtain water at no cost.
(2004 Code, § 53.22) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.22 CONTINUITY OF SERVICE.
   The town shall not be liable for any damage that may result to consumers for
shutting off a water main or service for any cause whatever, even in case where
no notice is given, and no reduction from water bills will be made therefor. It
is recommended that all parties who use town water for a pump system, or other
service where a stoppage of the supply would be liable to produce damage, to
see to it that there is a tank or cistern from which water may be taken during
the period water is cut off.
(2004 Code, § 53.23)
§ 53.23 METERS; RATES.
   (A)   All premises using the town water supply must be equipped with an
adequate water meter furnished by the town and billing will commence as soon as
meter is installed.
   (B)   All consumers of water provided by the town water supply shall pay
such rates for the water as may be set from time to time by the Board of
Aldermen. Bills for water used shall be dated and sent out at such times as may
be directed by the Board, and payment shall be made within ten days from the
date of billing.
(2004 Code, § 53.24) (Ord. 102, passed 8-2-1965)
§ 53.24 WATER DEPOSITS.
   Each consumer applying for water service to a residence or business owned
and occupied by him or her shall make a cash deposit as established by the
Board.
(2004 Code, § 53.25)
§ 53.25 METER READING; BILLING; COLLECTING.
   (A)   Meters will be read and bills rendered monthly, but the town may vary
dates or length of period covered, temporarily or permanently, if necessary or
desirable.
   (B)   Bills for water will be figured in accordance with the rate schedule
then in effect, and will be based on the amount consumed for the period covered
by the meter readings, but the amount payable for each billing period shall not
be less than the minimum charge prescribed in the schedule of rates.
   (C)   Charges for service commence when the meter is installed and
connection is made, whether used or not.
   (D)   All water and sewer bills are due by the tenth of the month in which
they are issued. If not paid by the twentieth of the month a 10% late fee will
be automatically added to the past due balance and the total bill amount will
be due.
   (E)   Delinquent notices will be mailed to the consumer and, if not paid
within 15 days after date of mailing, water service may be discontinued.
   (F)   Failure to receive bills mailed or notices shall not prevent the bills
from becoming delinquent, nor relieve the consumer from payment.
(2004 Code, § 53.26) (Ord. passed 11-4-1996)
§ 53.26 POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FOR DELINQUENT ACCOUNTS.
   (A)   Any account that is three months delinquent will receive a disconnect
notice during the third month of delinquency if no payment has been received.
In order to avoid a disconnect, the oldest bills must be paid in full along
with one half of the amount owed on the second oldest bill.
   (B)   If no payment is made during the third month of delinquency, services
will be disconnected during the last five days of the month.
   (C)   In order for services to be reconnected, the customer must pay a $50
reconnect fee plus one half of what is owed on the account.
(2004 Code, § 53.27) (Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
Editor’s note:
   Approved August 11, 2020
§ 53.27 SUSPENSION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   When water service is discontinued and all bills are paid, including
penalties, the deposit will be refunded.
   (B)   (1)   On discontinuance of service for non-payment of bills, the
deposit will be applied toward settlement of the account.
      (2)   Any balance will be refunded to the consumer, but if the deposit is
not sufficient to cover the amount due and payable, the town may proceed to
collect the balance in any way provided by law for the collection of debts.
   (C)   The town reserves the right to discontinue water service without
notice for any one or more of the following additional reasons:
      (1)   To prevent fraud or abuse;
      (2)   Consumer’s willful disregard of the town’s rules and regulations;
      (3)   Emergency repairs;
      (4)   Insufficiency of supply due to circumstances beyond the town’s
control;
      (5)   Legal process;
      (6)   Direction of public authorities; or
      (7)   Strike, riot, fire, flood, accident or any unavoidable cause.
   (D)   The town may, in addition to prosecution by law, permanently refuse
service to any consumer who tampers with a meter or other measuring device.
(2004 Code, § 53.28)
WATER SHORTAGES
§ 53.40 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   WATER SHORTAGE.
      (1)   Deemed to exist when water demand by customers connected to the
town water system reaches the point where continued or increased demand will
equal or exceed the system supply and transmission capabilities.
      (2)   When demand results in the condition whereby customers cannot be
supplied with water to protect their health and safety, then the demand must be
substantially curtailed to relieve the WATER SHORTAGE.
(2004 Code, § 53.40) (Ord. passed 11-9-1987)
§ 53.41 DECLARATION OF WATER SHORTAGE.
   In the event it appears that water demand on the town water system may
exceed supply and transmission capabilities, the Public Works Director may
recommend to the Town Clerk that voluntary water conservation measures be
implemented. The Town Clerk, following consultation with the Board of Aldermen,
may declare a Stage I Water Shortage Condition Advisory requesting voluntary
water conservation by consumers. In the event that voluntary conservation
measures fail to relieve the demand on the system, the town may advance to a
Stage II or Stage III Water Shortage Condition. The Town Clerk, following
consultation with the Board of Aldermen may, with or without the recommendation
of the Public Works Director, declare that a Stage II or Stage III Water
Shortage Condition exists.
(2004 Code, § 53.41) (Ord. passed 11-9-1987)
§ 53.42 STAGE I WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION.
   (A)   In the event a Stage I Water Shortage Condition is declared, the
following guidelines shall apply.
      (1)   An extensive publicity campaign will be initiated using public
media and specialized methods to inform the public of an impending or existing
water shortage.
      (2)   Conservation measures will be encouraged and recommended.
   (B)   In the event a Stage I Water Shortage Condition is declared, the
following guidelines shall apply and the public shall be encouraged to adhere
to the following.
      (1)   Limit car washing to the minimum.
      (2)   Limit lawn and garden watering to that which is necessary for
plants to survive.
      (3)   Do not wash down outside areas such as sidewalks, patios, parking
lots, service bays or aprons or the like.
      (4)   Do not leave faucets running while shaving or rinsing dishes.
      (5)   Water shrubbery to the minimum required, reusing household water
when possible.
      (6)   Limit use of clothes washers and dishwashers and, when used,
operate fully loaded.
      (7)   Use showers for bathing rather than bathtubs and limit showers to
no more than four minutes.
      (8)   Limit flushing of toilets by multiple usage.
      (9)   Use of disposable and biodegradable dishes is encouraged.
      (10)   The use of flow-restrictive and water-saving devices.
      (11)   Limit hours of operation of water-cooled air conditioners.
      (12)   All residences, businesses and institutions are requested to
temporarily delay new landscape work until the water shortage has ended.
(2004 Code, § 53.42) (Ord. passed 11-9-1987) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.43 STAGE II WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION.
   (A)   In the event the Town Clerk issues a declaration of a Stage II Water
Shortage Condition, then it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to use or permit the use of water from the town water system for
any purpose hereinafter set forth until such time as the declaration of water
shortage has been rescinded. In exercising the authority for declaring a water
shortage condition, consideration shall be given to water storage levels and
available sources of supply, available usable storage on hand, drawdown rates,
the projected supply capability, outlook for precipitation, daily water use
patterns and availability of water from other sources.
   (B)   In the event a Stage I Water Shortage Condition is in effect and town
storage facilities drop five feet or less of storage, then a Stage II Water
Shortage may be proclaimed. In addition to the voluntary guidelines already in
effect, it shall be unlawful to use water supplied by the town water system in
the following manner:
      (1)   (a)   To water lawns, grass, shrubbery, trees, flowers and
vegetable gardens, except in accordance with the schedule set forth below for
specific areas in the service area. Such watering shall be done by a hand-held
hose or container or by drip irrigation system only.
         (b)   All areas may water on Sunday and Thursday between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
      (2)   To fill newly constructed swimming and/or wading pools or refill
swimming and/or wading pools which have been drained;
      (3)   To wash automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes or any
other types of mobile equipment, including commercial washing;
      (4)   To wash down outside areas such as streets, driveways, service
station aprons, parking lots, office buildings, exteriors of existing or newly
constructed homes or apartments, sidewalks or patios, or to use water for any
other similar purposes;
      (5)   To use water from public or private fire hydrants for any purpose
other than fire suppression or other public emergency;
      (6)   To operate or induce water into any ornamental fountain, pool or
other structure making similar use of water;
      (7)   To serve drinking water in restaurants, cafeterias or other food
establishments, except upon request;
      (8)   To operate water-cooled air conditioners or other equipment that
does not recycle cooling water, except when health and safety are adversely
affected; and
      (9)   To use water for any unnecessary purpose or to intentionally waste
water.
(2004 Code, § 53.43) (Ord. passed 11-9-1987) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.44 STAGE III WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION.
   (A)   In the event the Town Clerk issues a declaration of a State III Water
Shortage Condition, then it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to use or permit the use of water from the town water system for
any purpose hereinafter set forth until such time as the declaration of water
shortage has been rescinded. In exercising the authority for declaring a water
shortage condition, consideration shall be given to water storage levels and
available sources of supply, available usable storage on hand, drawdown rates,
the projected supply capability, outlook for precipitation, daily water use
patterns and availability of water from other sources.
   (B)   In the event a Stage II Water Shortage Condition exists and town
storage facilities drop seven feet or less, then a Stage III Water Shortage may
be declared. In addition to the restrictions for Stage I and Stage II Water
Shortage Conditions, the following restrictions shall also apply:
      (1)   To induce water into any pool;
      (2)   Use water outside a structure for any use other than an emergency
involving a fire;
      (3)   Fire protection to be maintained by drafting of ponds, rivers and
the like, wherever possible;
      (4)   The use of throw-away utensils and plates is encouraged and
recommended at all eating establishments; and
      (5)   To operate an evaporative air conditioner which recycles water,
except during operating hours of business.
(2004 Code, § 53.44) (Ord. passed 11-9-1987) Penalty, see §
53.99
§ 53.45 LIFTING OF RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Water shortage conditions will expire when the Town Clerk, after
consultation with the Board of Aldermen and upon recommendation of the Public
Works Director, deems that the condition which caused the alert has abated.
   (B)   The expiration or cancellation of a water shortage declaration shall
be promptly and extensively publicized.
(2004 Code, § 53.45) (Ord. passed 11-9-1987)
§ 53.46 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Every police officer of the town shall, in connection with his or her
duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   The Town Clerk shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of
this subchapter by the discontinuance of water service as specified in §
53.47 of this chapter in the event of violation hereof.
(2004 Code, § 53.46) (Ord. passed 11-9-1987)
§ 53.47 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE FOR VIOLATION.
   Pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 160A-174 and the town water
regulations, service may be temporarily discontinued for willful disregard of
this chapter and a $55 reconnect fee may be imposed before restoration of
service. In the event of continued gross non-compliance with this chapter, the
removal of the meter will be deemed proper, service will be discontinued and
all tap fees and deposits forfeited. Reconnection will only be made by payment
of current due amounts, and new tap fees and deposits shall also be paid.
(2004 Code, § 53.47) (Ord. passed 11-9-1987)
§ 53.48 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The Town Manager shall have the authority to enact the following water
shortage response provisions whenever the trigger conditions outlined in §§
53.42 through
53.44 of this chapter are met.
   (B)   In the absence of the Town Manager, the Water Plant Superintendent/ORC
will assume this role:
      (1)   Bryson City Town Manager
         828-488-3335
      (2)   Russell Ball
         Water Treatment Plant Supervisor
         russellball@brysoncitync.gov
         1-828-488-1004 1-828-736-1174
(Ord. passed 11-9-1987; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
§ 53.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor, punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed $50 or
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days as provided by G.S. § 14-4 and, in addition
thereto, such violation may be enjoined and restrained as provided in G.S. §
160A-175.
(2004 Code, § 53.99) (Ord. passed 11-9-1987; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-
2025)
Editor’s note:
   Adopted by Town on January 10, 2022; Revised by Am. Legal
CHAPTER 54: CROSS-CONNECTIONS
Section
   
54.01    Introduction; purpose and applicability
   
54.02    Objectives
   
54.03    Responsibilities
   
54.04    Definitions
   
54.05    Right of entry
   
54.06    Elimination of cross-connections; degree of hazard
   
54.07    Installation of assemblies; testing and repair
   
54.08    Facilities requiring protection
   
54.09    Connections with unapproved sources of supply
   
54.10    Fire protection systems
   
54.11    Enforcement
 
   
54.99    Penalty
§ 54.01 INTRODUCTION; PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to define the authority of the town as
the water purveyor (hereinafter, the “town”) in the elimination of all cross-
connections within its public potable water supply.
   (B)   This chapter shall apply to all users connected to the town’s public
potable water supply regardless of whether the user is located within the town
limits or outside of the town limits.
   (C)   This chapter will comply with the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act
(Pub. Law No. 93-523), the state’s Administrative Code (Title 15A, Chapter 08)
and the State Building Code (Volume II) as they pertain to cross-connections
with the public water supply.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
§ 54.02 OBJECTIVES.
   The specific objectives of this chapter are as follows:
   (A)   To protect the public potable water supply against actual or potential
contamination by isolating within each consumer’s water system, contaminants or
pollutants which could, under adverse conditions, backflow through uncontrolled
cross-connections into the public water system;
   (B)   To eliminate or control existing cross-connections, actual or
potential, between each consumer’s potable water system and non-potable or
industrial piping system(s); and
   (C)   To provide a continuing inspection program of cross-connection control
which will systematically and effectively control all actual or potential
cross-connections that may be installed in the future.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 54.03 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Health Agency.
      (1)   The state’s Department of Environmental Quality (Division of Health
Services) has the responsibility for promulgating and enforcing laws, rules,
regulations and policies to be followed in carrying out an effective cross-
connection control program.
      (2)   The state’s Division of Health Services also has the primary
responsibility of ensuring that the water purveyor operates the public potable
water system free of actual or potential sanitary hazards, including
unprotected cross-connections. They have the further responsibility of ensuring
that the water purveyor provides an approved water supply at the service
connection to the consumer’s water system and, further, that the purveyor
requires the installation, testing and maintenance of an approved backflow
prevention assembly on the service connection as required.
   (B)   Water purveyor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided herein, it is the town’s
responsibility to take reasonable steps to prevent foreseeable risks to a safe
water supply, beginning at the purveyor’s raw water intake and ending at the
point of delivery to each consumer’s water system. In addition, the town is
required to exercise reasonable vigilance to ensure that the consumer has taken
the proper steps to protect the public potable water system. To ensure that the
proper precautions are taken, the town is required to determine the degree of
hazard or potential hazard to the public potable water system; to determine the
degree of protection required; and to ensure proper containment protection
through an on-going inspection program.
      (2)   When it is determined that a backflow prevention assembly is
required for the protection of the public system, the town shall require the
consumer, at the consumer’s expense, to install an approved backflow prevention
assembly at each service connection, to test immediately upon installation and,
thereafter, at a frequency as determined by the town, to properly repair and
maintain such assembly or assemblies and to keep adequate records of each test
and subsequent maintenance and repair, including materials and/or replacement
parts.
   (C)   Plumbing inspections.
      (1)   The Plumbing/Building Inspection Department of the county has the
responsibility to not only review building plans and inspect plumbing as it is
installed; they have the explicit responsibility of preventing cross-
connections from being designed and built into the plumbing system within its
jurisdiction. Where the review of building plans suggests or detects the
potential for cross-connections being made an integral part of the plumbing
system, the Plumbing Inspector has the responsibility, under the state’s
Building Code, for requiring that such cross-connections be either eliminated
or provided with backflow prevention equipment approved by the state’s Building
Code.
      (2)   The Inspector should inquire about the intended use of water at any
point where it is suspected that a cross-connection might be made or where one
is actually called for by the plans. When such is discovered, it shall be
mandatory that a suitable, approved backflow prevention assembly approved by
the state’s Building Code, the state’s Department of Environmental Quality and
the town be required by the plans and be properly installed. Building
inspectors must notify the Town Manager or authorized representative
immediately upon the discovery of any cross-connection or potential cross-
connection during the inspection process.
   (D)   Consumer. The consumer has the primary responsibility of preventing
pollutants and contaminants from entering the consumer’s potable water system
and the public potable water system. The consumer’s responsibility starts at
the point of delivery from the public potable water system and includes all
components of the consumer’s water system or systems. The consumer, at the
consumer’s own expense, shall install, operate, test and maintain approved
backflow prevention assemblies as directed by the town or the Building
Department. The consumer shall maintain accurate records of tests and repairs
made to the backflow prevention assemblies and shall maintain such records for
a minimum period of three years. The records shall be on forms approved by the
town and shall include the list of materials or replacement parts used.
Following any repair, overhaul, re-piping or relocation of an assembly, the
consumer shall have it tested to ensure it is in good operating condition and
will prevent backflow. Tests, maintenance and repairs of backflow prevention
assemblies shall be made by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester.
   (E)   Certified backflow prevention assembly tester.
      (1)   When employed by the consumer to test, repair, overhaul or maintain
backflow prevention assemblies, a backflow prevention assembly tester will have
the following responsibilities: the tester will be responsible for making
competent inspections and for repairing or overhauling backflow prevention
assemblies and making reports of such repair to the consumer and responsible
authorities on forms approved by the town. The tester shall include the list of
materials or replacement parts used. The tester shall be equipped with and be
competent to use all the necessary tools, gauges, manometers and other
equipment necessary to properly test, repair and maintain backflow prevention
assemblies. It will be the tester’s responsibility to ensure that original
manufactured parts are used in the repair of or replacement of parts in a
backflow prevention assembly.
         (b)   It will be the tester’s further responsibility not to change the
design, material or operational characteristics of an assembly during repair or
maintenance without prior approval of the town and the Building Department. A
certified tester shall perform the work and be responsible for the competency
and accuracy of all tests and reports.
         (c)   A certified tester shall provide a copy of all test and repair
reports to the consumer and to the town within ten business days of any
completed test or repair work. A certified tester shall maintain such records
for a minimum period of three years.
      (2)   All certified backflow prevention assembly testers must obtain and
employ backflow prevention assembly test equipment that has been evaluated and/
or approved by the town and the Building Department. All test equipment shall
be registered with the town, and shall be checked for accuracy at least
annually, calibrated, if necessary, and certified as to such calibration,
employing an accuracy/calibration method acceptable to the town.
      (3)   All certified backflow prevention assembly testers must be
certified or recertified within the prior 24 months through an approved
backflow prevention certification program before submitting an acceptable
verification pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 54.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR-GAP SEPARATION. A physical separation between the free flowing discharge
end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving
vessel. An approved AIR-GAP SEPARATION shall be at least double the diameter of
the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the receiving
vessel, in no case less than one inch (2.54 cm).
   APPROVED. As herein used in reference to a water supply, a water supply that
has been approved by the state’s Department of Environmental Quality. The term
APPROVED, as herein used in reference to air-gap separation, a pressure vacuum
breaker, a double check valve assembly, a double check detector assembly, a
reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, a reduced pressure
principle detector assembly or other backflow prevention assemblies or methods,
shall mean an approval by the town.
   BACKFLOW. The undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and
other liquids, gases or other substances into the distribution pipes of the
consumer or public potable water system from any source or sources.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY, APPROVED.
      (1)   An assembly used for containment and/or isolation purposes that has
been investigated and approved by the town and has been shown to meet the
design and performance standards of the American Society of Sanitary Engineers
(ASSE), the American Water Works Association (AWWA) or the Foundation for
Cross-connection Control and Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern
California.
      (2)   The APPROVAL OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES by the town is based
on a favorable report by the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and
Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California, recommending such
an approval. To be approved, an assembly must be readily accessible for in-line
testing and maintenance, and shall successfully complete a one-year field
evaluation within the town’s water system.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY, UNAPPROVED. An assembly that has been
investigated by the town and has been determined to be unacceptable for
installation. Consideration for disapproval and removal from the “approved
list” shall be based upon, but not limited to, the following criteria:
      (1)   Poor performance standards (significant failure rate);
      (2)   Lack of or unavailability of repair parts; and/or
      (3)   Poor service or response from assembly’s factory representative(s).
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY; TYPES. An assembly used to prevent backflow
into a consumer or public potable water system. The TYPE OF ASSEMBLY used
should be based on the degree of hazard, either existing or potential (as
defined herein). The types are:
      (1)   Double check valve assembly (DCVA);
      (2)   Double check detector assembly (fire system) (DCDA);
      (3)   Pressure vacuum breaker (PVB);
      (4)   Reduced pressure principle assembly (RP); and
      (5)   Reduced pressure principle-detector assembly (fire system) (RPDA).
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TESTER, CERTIFIED. A person who has proven
their competency to the satisfaction of the town. Each person who is certified
to make competent tests, or to repair, overhaul and make reports on backflow
prevention assemblies shall be knowledgeable of applicable laws, rules and
regulations and must hold a current certificate of completion from an approved
training program in the testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE, APPROVED. A device used for isolation purposes
that has been investigated by the town and found to be acceptable, based upon
it meeting the design and performance standards of the American Society of
Sanitary Engineers (ASSE), the American Water Works Association (AWWA) or other
equivalent association.
   BACK-PRESSURE BACKFLOW. Any elevation in the consumer water system (by pump,
elevation of piping or steam and/or air pressure) above the supply pressure at
the point of delivery, which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the
normal direction of flow.
   BACK-SIPHONAGE BACKFLOW. A reversal of the normal direction of flow in the
pipeline due to a negative pressure (vacuum) being created in the supply line
with the backflow source subject to atmospheric pressure.
   CHECK VALVE, APPROVED. A check valve that is drip-tight in the normal
direction of flow when the inlet pressure is at least one psi and the outlet
pressure is zero. The check valve shall permit no leakage in a direction
reversed to the normal flow. The closure element (e.g., clapper, poppet or
other design) shall be internally loaded to promote rapid and positive closure.
An APPROVED CHECK VALVE is only one component of an approved backflow
prevention assembly (i.e., pressure vacuum breaker, double check valve
assembly, double check detector assembly, reduced pressure principle assembly
or reduced pressure detector assembly).
   CONSUMER. Any person, firm or corporation using or receiving water from the
town’s water system.
   CONSUMER’S POTABLE WATER SYSTEM. The portion of the privately owned potable
water system lying between the point of delivery and point of use and/or
isolation protection. This system will include all pipes, conduits, tanks,
receptacles, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances used to produce, convey,
store or use potable water.
   CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system commencing at the point of
delivery and continuing throughout the consumer’s plumbing system, located on
the consumer’s premises, whether supplied by a public potable water or an
auxiliary water supply. The system or systems may be either a potable water
system or an industrial piping system.
   CONTAINMENT. Preventing the impairment of the public potable water supply by
installing an approved backflow prevention assembly at the service connection.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water that creates a
potential or actual hazard to the public health through the introduction of
hazardous or toxic substances or through the spread of disease by sewage,
industrial fluids or waste.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any unprotected actual or potential connection or
structural arrangement between a public or a consumer’s water system and any
other source or system through which it is possible to introduce any
contamination or pollution, other than the intended potable water with which
the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable
sections, swivel or changeover devices and other temporary or permanent devices
through which or because of which backflow can or may occur are considered to
be CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of two independently
acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing shut-off valves
attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located test
cocks. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a non-health hazard
(i.e., pollutant).
   DOUBLE CHECK-DETECTOR ASSEMBLY. A specially designed assembly composed of a
line-size approved double check valve assembly with a specific bypass water
meter and a meter-sized approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall
register (in U.S. gallons) accurately for only very low rates of flow and shall
show a registration for all rates of flow. This assembly shall only be used to
protect against a non-health hazard (i.e., pollutant).
   HAZARD, DEGREE OF. Derived from the evaluation of conditions within a system
that can be classified as either a pollutant (non-health) hazard or a
contamination (health) hazard.
   HAZARD, HEALTH. An actual or potential threat of contamination of a
physical, hazardous or toxic nature to the public or consumer’s potable water
system to such a degree or intensity that there would be a danger to health.
   HAZARD, NON-HEALTH. An actual or potential threat to the quality of the
public or the consumer’s potable water system. A NON-HEALTH HAZARD is one that,
if introduced into the public water supply system could be a nuisance to water
customers, but would not adversely affect human health.
   HAZARD, POLLUTANT. An actual or potential threat to the quality or the
potability of the public or the consumer’s potable water system but that would
not constitute a health or a system hazard, as defined. The maximum degree or
intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded
under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable,
or could cause minor damage to the system or its appurtenances.
   HEALTH AGENCY. The North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality.
   INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS. Any fluid or solution that may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health or non-health hazard if introduced into a
public or consumer potable water system. Such FLUIDS may include, but are not
limited to: process waters; chemicals in fluid form; acids and alkalis; oils;
gases; and the like.
   INDUSTRIAL PIPING SYSTEM, CONSUMER’S. Any system used by the consumer for
transmission of or to confine or store any fluid, solid or gaseous substance
other than an approved water supply. Such a system would include all pipes,
conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances used to
produce, convey or store substances that are or may be polluted or
contaminated.
   ISOLATION. The act of confining a localized hazard within a consumer’s water
system by installing approved backflow prevention assemblies.
   POINT OF DELIVERY. At the property line of the customer, adjacent to the
public street where the town’s mains are located, or at a point on the
customer’s property where the meter is located. The customer shall be
responsible for all water piping and control devices located on the customer’s
side of the POINT OF DELIVERY.
   POLLUTION. An impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does
not create an actual hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and
unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such water for domestic use.
   POTABLE WATER. Water from any source that has been investigated by the
state’s Department of Environmental Quality and which has been approved for
human consumption.
   PUBLIC POTABLE WATER SYSTEM. Any publicly- or privately-owned water system
operated as a public utility, under a current State Department of Environmental
Quality permit, to supply water for public consumption or use. This system will
include all sources, facilities and appurtenances between the source and the
point of delivery such as valves, pumps, pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles,
fixtures, equipment and appurtenances used to produce, convey, treat or store
potable water for public consumption or use.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY. An assembly
containing within its structure a minimum of two independently acting, approved
check valves, together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically
independent, pressure differential relief valve located between the check
valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The first check valve
reduces the supply pressure a predetermined amount so that during normal flow
and at cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the checks shall be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
pressure differential relief valve, by discharge to atmosphere, shall operate
to maintain the pressure between the checks less than the supply pressure. The
unit shall include tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the
assembly and each assembly shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
The assembly is designed to protect against a health hazard (i.e.,
contaminant).
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE-DETECTOR ASSEMBLY. A specially designed assembly
composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly with a specific bypass water meter and a meter sized approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. The meter shall register (in
U.S. gallons) accurately for only very low rates of flow, and shall show a
registration for all rates of flow. This assembly shall be used to protect
against health hazard (i.e., contaminant).
   SERVICE CONNECTIONS. The terminal end of a service connection from the
public potable water system (i.e., where the town loses jurisdiction and
sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the consumer’s
water system).
   VACUUM BREAKER, ATMOSPHERIC. The terminal end of a service connection from
the public potable water system (i.e., where the town loses jurisdiction and
sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the consumer’s
water system).
   VACUUM BREAKER, PRESSURE. An assembly containing an independently operating
internally loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded air inlet
valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly is to be
equipped with properly located test cocks and tightly closing shut-off valves
attached at each end of the assembly. This assembly is designed to protect
against a health hazard (i.e., contaminant) under a backsiphonage condition
only.
   WATER PURVEYOR. The owner or operator of a public potable water system,
providing an approved water supply to the public.
   WATER SUPPLY, APPROVED. Any public potable water supply that has been
approved by the state’s Department Environmental Quality.
   WATER SUPPLY, AUXILIARY. Any water supply on or available to the premises
other than the purveyor’s approved public potable water supply. AUXILIARY WATER
SUPPLIES may include water from another purveyor’s public water supply or any
natural source such as well, spring, river, stream and the like. These waters
may be polluted, contaminated or objectionable and constitute an unacceptable
water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control.
   WATER SUPPLY, UNAPPROVED. A water supply which has not been approved for
human consumption by the state’s Department of Environmental Quality.
   WATER, USED. Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public water
system to a consumer’s water system after it has passed through the point of
delivery and is no longer under the control of the water purveyor.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 54.05 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   An authorized representative from the town shall have the right to enter,
upon presentation of proper credentials and identification, any building,
structure or premises during normal business hours, or at any time during the
event of an emergency, to perform any duty imposed by this chapter. Those
duties may include sampling and testing of water or inspections and
observations of all piping systems connected to the public water supply. Where
a user has security measures in force that would require proper identification
and clearance before entry into his, her or their premises, the user shall make
necessary arrangements with the security guards so that upon presentation of
suitable identification, town personnel will be permitted to enter, without
delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. Refusal
to allow entry for these purposes may result in discontinuance of water
service. On request, the consumer shall furnish to the town any pertinent
information regarding the water supply system on such property where cross-
connections and backflow are deemed possible.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 54.06 ELIMINATION OF CROSS-CONNECTIONS; DEGREE OF HAZARD.
   (A)   When cross-connections are found to exist, the owner or his or her
agent, occupant or tenant will be notified in writing to disconnect the same
within the time limit established by the town. Degree of protection required
and maximum time allowed for compliance will be based upon the potential degree
of hazard to the public water supply system.
   (B)   The maximum time limits are as follows.
      (1)   Cross-connections with private wells or other auxiliary water
supplies shall be immediately disconnected.
      (2)   All facilities which pose a health hazard to the potable water
system must have a containment assembly in the form of a reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly within 60 days.
      (3)   All industrial and commercial facilities not identified as a
“health hazard” shall be considered non-health hazard facilities. All non-
health hazard facilities must install, as a minimum containment assembly, a
double check valve assembly within 90 days.
      (4)   If, in the judgment of the town, an imminent health hazard exists,
water service to the building or premises where a cross-connection exists may
be terminated unless an air gap is immediately provided or the cross-connection
is immediately eliminated.
      (5)   Based upon recommendation from the town, the consumer is
responsible for installing sufficient internal isolation backflow prevention
assemblies and/or methods (i.e., air gap, pressure vacuum breakers, reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, double check valve assembly).
Disclaimer: the town may make recommendations, upon facility inspection, as to
the usages of isolation devices/assemblies, but does not assume or have
responsibility whatsoever for such installations.
      (6)   In the event that the authorized representative of the town does
not have sufficient access to every portion of a private water system (i.e.,
classified research and development facilities; federal government property) to
allow a complete evaluation of the degree of hazard associated with such
private water systems, an approved reduced pressure principle assembly shall be
required as a minimum of protection.
      (7)   No person shall fill special use tanks or tankers containing
pesticides, fertilizers, other toxic chemicals or their residues from the
public water system except at a location equipped with an air gap or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly properly
installed on the public water supply.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.07 INSTALLATION OF ASSEMBLIES; TESTING AND REPAIR.
   (A)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance
with the specifications furnished by the town and/or the manufacturer’s
installation instructions and/or in the latest edition of the state’s Building
Code, whichever is most restrictive.
   (B)   All new construction plans and specifications, when required by the
state’s Building Code and the state’s Department of Environmental Quality,
shall be made available to the town for review and approval, and to determine
the degree of hazard.
   (C)   Ownership, testing and maintenance of the assembly shall be the
responsibility of the customer.
   (D)   All double check valve assemblies must be installed in drainable pits
wherever below ground installation is necessary.
   (E)   Reduced pressure principle assemblies must be installed in a
horizontal position and in a location in which no portion of the assembly can
become submerged in any substance under any circumstances (pit and/or below
grade installations are prohibited). Double check valve assemblies may be
installed in a vertical position with prior approval from the town; provided,
the flow of water is in an upward direction. It is also required that backflow
devices be located as close and in immediate proximity to the metering device
as is physically possible whenever a backflow device is required.
   (F)   Any installed unapproved backflow prevention assembly must be replaced
with an approved backflow prevention assembly.
   (G)   The installer is responsible to make sure a backflow prevention
assembly is working properly upon installation and is required to furnish the
following information to the town within 15 days after a reduced pressure
principle backflow preventer (RP), double check-detector assembly (DCDA),
pressure vacuum breaker (PVB) or reduced pressure principle detector assembly
(RPDA) is installed:
      (1)   Service address where assembly is located;
      (2)   Owner (and address, if different from service address);
      (3)   Description of assembly’s location;
      (4)   Date of installation;
      (5)   Installer (include name, certification number and project permit
number);
      (6)   Type of assembly, size of assembly;
      (7)   Manufacturer, model number, serial number; and
      (8)   Test results/reports.
   (H)   When it is not possible to interrupt water service, provisions shall
be made for a parallel installation of backflow prevention assemblies. The town
will not accept an unprotected bypass around a backflow preventer when the
assembly is in need of testing, repair or replacement.
   (I)   The consumer shall, upon notification, install the appropriate
containment assembly not to exceed the following time frame:
      (1)   Health hazard: 60 days; and
      (2)   Non-health hazard: 90 days.
   (J)   Following installation, all RP, DCVA, PVB, DCDA and RPDA assemblies
are required to be tested by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester
within ten days.
   (K)   (1)   Testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be made by a
certified backflow prevention assembly tester. Such tests are to be conducted
upon installation and annually thereafter or at a frequency established by the
town. A record of all testing and repairs is to be retained by the customer.
Copies of the records must be provided to the town within ten business days
after the completion of any testing and/or repair work.
      (2)   Any time that repairs to backflow prevention assemblies are deemed
necessary, whether through annual or required testing or routine inspection by
the owner or by the town, these repairs must be completed within a specified
time in accordance with the degree of hazard. In no case shall this time period
exceed:
         (a)   Health hazard facilities: 14 days; and
         (b)   Non-health hazard facilities: 21 days.
      (3)   All backflow prevention assemblies with test cocks are required to
be tested annually or at frequency established by the town’s regulations.
Testing requires a water shutdown usually lasting five to 20 minutes. For
facilities that require an uninterrupted supply of water and, when it is not
possible to provide water service from two separate meters, provisions shall be
made for a parallel installation of backflow prevention assemblies.
      (4)   All certified backflow prevention assembly testers must obtain and
employ backflow prevention assembly test equipment which has been evaluated
and/or approved by the town. All test equipment shall be registered with the
town. All test equipment shall be checked for accuracy annually (at a minimum),
calibrated, if necessary, and certified to the town as to such accuracy/
calibration, employing a calibration method acceptable to the town.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for any customer or certified tester to submit
any record to the town which is false or incomplete in any material respect. It
shall be unlawful for any customer or certified tester to fail to submit to the
town any record which is required by this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.08 FACILITIES REQUIRING PROTECTION.
   (A)   Approved backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed on the
service line to any premises that the town has identified as having a potential
for backflow.
   (B)   The following types of facilities or services have been identified by
the town as having a potential for backflow of non-potable water into the
public water supply system. Therefore, an approved backflow prevention assembly
will be required on all such services according to the degree of hazard
present. Other types of facilities or services not listed below may also be
required to install approved backflow prevention assemblies if determined
necessary by the town. As a minimum requirement, all commercial services will
be required to install a double check valve assembly, unless otherwise listed
below.
DCVA = Double Check Valve Assembly
RP = Reduced Pressure Principle Assembly
DCDA = Double Check Detector Assembly
RPDA = Reduced Pressure Detector Assembly
AG = Air Gap
PVB = Pressure Vacuum Breaker
Aircraft and missile plants                                                 RP
Automotive services stations, dealerships and the like
   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
   Health hazard                                                         RP
Automotive plants                                                           RP
Auxiliary water systems
   Approved public/private water supply                                  DCVA
   Unapproved public/private water supply                                AG
   Used water and industrial fluids                                      RP
Bakeries
   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
   Health hazard                                                         RP
Beauty shops/barber shops
   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
   Health hazard                                                         RP
Beverage bottling plants                                                    RP
Breweries                                                                   RP
Buildings - hotels, apartment houses, public and private buildings or other
structures having unprotected cross-connections
   (Under 5 stories) No health hazard                                    DCVA
   (Under 5 stories) Health hazard                                       RP
   (Over 5 stories) All                                                  RP
Canneries, packing houses and rendering plants                              RP
Chemical plants - manufacturing, processing, compounding or treatment       RP
Chemically contaminated water systems                                       RP
Commercial car-wash facilities                                              RP
Commercial greenhouses                                                      RP
Commercial sales establishments (department stores, malls and the like)
   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
   Health hazard                                                         RP
Concrete/asphalt plants                                                     RP
Dairies and cold storage plants                                             RP
Dye works                                                                   RP
Film laboratories                                                           RP
Fire systems
   Systems 3/4-inch to 2-inch
      No health hazard                                                DCDA
      Health hazard (booster pumps, foam, antifreeze solution and the RPDA)
   Systems 2-1/2-inch to 10-inch, or larger
      No health hazard                                                DCDA
      Health hazard (booster pumps, foam, antifreeze solution and the RPDA)
   Fire protection services                                               
Hospitals, medical buildings, sanitariums, morgues, mortuaries, autopsy
facilities, nursing and convalescent homes, medical clinics and veterinary  RP
hospitals
Industrial facilities
   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
   Health hazard                                                         RP
Laundries
   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
   Health hazard (i.e., dry cleaners)                                    RP
Lawn irrigation systems (split taps)
   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
   Health hazard: (booster pumps, chemical systems)                      RP
Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing and fabricating plants            RP
Mobile home parks
   No health hazard                                                      DCVA
   Health hazard                                                         RI
Oil and gas production, storage or transmission properties                  RP
Paper and paper products plants                                             RP
Pest control (exterminating and fumigation)                                 RP
Plating plant                                                               RP
Power plants                                                                RP
Radioactive materials or substances, plants or facilities handling          RP
Restaurants
   No health hazard                                                      DCDA
   Health hazard                                                         RP
Restricted, classified or other closed facilities                           RP
Rubber plants (natural or synthetic)                                        RP
Sand and gravel plants                                                      RP
Schools and colleges                                                        RP
Sewage and storm drain facilities                                           RP
Swimming pools                                                              RP
Waterfront facilities and industries                                        RP
NOTES TO TABLE:
All assemblies and installations shall be subject to inspection and approval by
the town.
 
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 54.09 CONNECTIONS WITH UNAPPROVED SOURCES OF SUPPLY.
   (A)   No person shall connect or cause to be connected any supply of water
not approved by the state’s Department of Environmental Quality to the water
system supplied by the town. Any such connections allowed by the town must be
in conformance with the backflow prevention requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   In the event of contamination or pollution of a public or consumer
potable water system, the consumer shall notify the town immediately in order
that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome and eliminate the
contamination or pollution.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
54.99
§ 54.10 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   (1)   All connections for fire protection systems connected with the
public water system, two inches and smaller, shall be protected with an
approved double check valve assembly as a minimum requirement. All fire systems
using toxic additives or booster pumps shall be protected by an approved
reduced pressure principle assembly at the main service connection.
      (2)   Water through a fire service shall be used only to extinguish a
fire on the inside and outside of the structure(s) that it serves, and to test
the fire system; whenever testing of a fire protection system is deemed
excessive by the town, a metering device may be required to be installed by the
customer, at the customer’s expense. A fire service is specifically not to be
used for domestic, maintenance or irrigation purposes.
   (B)   All connections for fire protection systems connected with the public
water system greater than two inches, shall be protected with an approved
double check detector assembly as a minimum requirement. All fire protection
systems using toxic or hazardous additives or booster pumps shall be protected
by an approved reduced pressure principle detector assembly at the main service
connection.
   (C)   All existing backflow prevention assemblies two and one-half inches
and larger installed on fire protection systems (that were initially approved
by the town, or the county, as applicable) shall be allowed to remain on the
premises, as long as they meet all criteria as required in other areas of this
chapter, and are being properly maintained, tested and repaired as required by
this chapter, if, however, the existing assembly must be replaced (once it can
no longer be repaired), or in the event of proven water theft through an
unmetered source, the consumer shall be required to install an approved double
check detector assembly or reduced pressure principle detector assembly or
compound metering device as required by this provision. In the case of devices
that currently exist, but fail to meet the requirements of this chapter, no
grandfathering will be allowed and the customer will be required to comply with
this chapter at the customer’s expense.
   (D)   (1)   Public fire hydrants; location of hydrants. Water used for
public fire protection shall be delivered through fire hydrants. Hydrants shall
be located and installed on the water system in accordance with the town’s
standard specifications.
      (2)   Private fire protection.
         (a)   General. Private fire protection may be provided from the water
system through connections supplying sprinklers, standpipe, water spray, foam,
yard hydrant and other fire protection systems. All connections to a fire
protection system shall extend from the water system directly to the customer’s
fire protection system, and shall be used exclusively for the fire protection
system with no intermediate connections for any other domestic use.
         (b)   Fire protection systems.
            1.   When a customer’s water system includes a fire prevention or
fire protection system, the customer shall install and maintain an approved
backflow prevention device. The type and location of this device shall be as
approved by the town during the required plan review process.
            2.   When a customer’s water system includes a private fire hydrant
located in excess of 50 feet (as measured by distance in feet of pipe) from a
connection, the customer shall install and maintain a double-check valve
assembly with a detector meter at a location approved in writing by the town.
            3.   Should the town have cause to believe that water is being used
through a connection serving a fire protection system or hydrant for purposes
other than fire protection (including unrepaired leaks), and the customer’s
water system in not equipped with a detector check valve, then the town may
cause a detector check valve or meter to be installed in customer’s water
system at the expense of the customer.
         (c)   Fire line meter. All new dedicated fire lines must be metered,
unless a detector check meter is approved by the town based upon property
location and/or property size (e.g., existing buildings in business district).
If a customer fails to properly maintain a detector check valve, a detector
check valve is ineffective in detecting water usage, or water is being conveyed
to the customer’s fire protection system or hydrant is used for other purposes
than fire protection, the town shall cause the installation of a fire line
meter, approved by the Town Manager, on customer’s water system at the
customer’s expense. A water line that is used for domestic and fire purposes
must be metered, and said meter must be approved by the town. Any and all
detector-check valves or fire line meters and their location of installation
shall be approved in writing by the Town Manager.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 54.11 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The owner, manager, supervisor or person in charge of any installation
found not to be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be
notified in writing with regard to the corrective action(s) to be taken. The
time for compliance shall be in accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   The owner, manager, supervisor or person in charge of any installation
which remains in non-compliance after the time prescribed in the initial
notification, shall be considered in violation of this chapter, and may be
issued a civil citation by the town. Said citation shall specify the nature of
the violation and the provision(s) of this chapter violated, and further notify
the offender that the civil penalty for said violation is as set forth in §
54.99(A) of this chapter and is to be paid to the town and payment remitted at
Town Hall within 30 days. If the penalty prescribed herein is not paid within
the time allowed, the town may initiate a civil action in the nature of a debt
and recover the sums set forth in §
54.99(A) of this chapter, plus the cost of the action.
   (C)   If, in the judgment of the town, any owner, manager, supervisor or
person in charge of any installation found to be in non-compliance with the
provisions of this chapter neglects his or her responsibility to correct any
violation, it may result in discontinuance of water service until compliance is
achieved.
   (D)   Enforcement of this program shall be administered by the Town Manager
or his or her authorized representative.
   (E)   Requests for extension of time shall be made in writing to the town.
All other appeals shall be made in accordance with the following procedures.
      (1)   Adjudicatory hearings. A customer assessed a civil penalty under
this section shall have the right to an adjudicatory hearing before a hearing
officer designated by the Town Manager upon making written demand, identifying
the specific issues to be contended, to the town within 30 days following
notice of final decision to assess a civil penalty. Unless such demand is made
within the time specified herein, the decision on the civil penalty assessment
shall be final and binding.
      (2)   Appeal hearings. Any decision of the town hearing officer made as a
result of an adjudicatory hearing held under division (E)(1) above may be
appealed by any party to the Town Manager upon filing a written demand within
ten days of receipt of notice of the decision. Hearings held under this section
shall be conducted in accordance with the town’s hearing procedures. Failure to
make written demand within the time specified herein shall bar further appeal.
The Town Manager shall make a decision on the appeal within 90 days of the date
the appeal was filed and shall transmit a written copy of his or her decision
by registered or certified mail.
      (3)   Official record. When a final decision is issued under division (E)
(2) above, the town shall prepare an official record of the case that includes:
         (a)   All notices, motions and other like pleadings;
         (b)   A copy of all documentary evidence introduced;
         (c)   A certified transcript of all testimony taken, if testimony is
transcribed. If testimony is taken and not transcribed, then a narrative
summary of any testimony taken; and
         (d)   A copy of the final decision of the Town Manager.
      (4)   Appeal. Any customer against whom a final decision of the town is
entered, pursuant to the hearing procedure under division (E)(2) above, may
appeal the order or decision by filing a written petition for judicial review
within 30 days after receipt of notice by certified mail of the order or
decision to the general court of justice of the county or of the county where
the order or decision is effective, along with a copy to the town. Within 30
days after receipt of the copy of the petition of judicial review, the town
shall transmit to the reviewing court the original or a certified copy of the
official record, as outlined in division (E)(3) above.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 54.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any offender who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in the notification mentioned in §
54.11 of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to $1,000 per
violation. Each day in which a violation of any provision of this chapter shall
occur or continue shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   Failure of a customer (or certified tester on behalf of a customer) to
submit any record required by this chapter, or the submission of falsified
reports/records may result in a civil penalty of up to $1,000 per violation
assessed against the customer. If a certified backflow prevention assembly
tester submits falsified records to the town, the town shall take the necessary
actions to revoke certification to test backflow prevention assemblies within
the potable water system for a time period not to exceed five years. The tester
will then be required to complete an approved certification course to acquire a
new certification. Falsification made to records/reports after becoming re-
certified shall result in the permanent revocation of backflow testing
certification, in addition to a civil penalty (as stated herein).
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
Editor’s note:
   Adopted by town on September 7, 2021; Revised by American Legal Publishing
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC AND PARKING RULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Compliance with traffic code
   
70.03   Obedience to police
   
70.04   Enforcement authority
   
70.05   Application of traffic code to drivers of government vehicles
   
70.06   Application of traffic code to persons propelling pushcarts or riding
animals
   
70.07   Accident reports
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.20   Installation and maintenance
   
70.21   Obedience to devices
   
70.22   Necessity of signs
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this traffic code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department, police
vehicles, emergency vehicles of municipal departments and such ambulances
designated or authorized by the Chief of Police.
   BLOCK. A portion of any street located between two intersections adjacent to
each other.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to a street or highway when 50%
or more of frontage thereon, for a distance of 300 feet or more, is occupied by
buildings which are in use for business purposes.
   CROSSWALK. The portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of sidewalks at intersections.
Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines
or other markings on the surface.
   DRIVER. The operator of a vehicle as defined in G.S. § 20-4.01(25). The
terms DRIVER and OPERATOR and their cognates are synonymous.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curblines
or, if none, then the lateral edge of roadway lines of two or more highways
which join one another at any angle whether or not one such highway crosses the
other.
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate INTERSECTION. In the event that such
intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of two roadways such highways shall be regarded as a separate
INTERSECTION.
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall
mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the
town.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and devices
not inconsistent with this chapter, placed or erected by authority of the
governing body or an official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS. Any device, whether manually or automatically
operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
   PARK. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading merchandise or passengers.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder. In the event a highway includes
two or more separate roadways the term ROADWAY, as used herein, shall refer to
any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways collectively.
   STANDING. Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
   STOP. When required, means complete cessation of movement.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between property lines of every way or
place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for purpose of vehicular traffic.
   VEHICLE. Every device, in upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power
or used exclusively upon fixed rails or tracks; provided that, for the purposes
of this traffic code, bicycles shall be deemed VEHICLES and every rider of a
bicycle upon a highway shall be subject to the provisions of this traffic code
applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except those which, by their nature, can
have no application. This term shall not include a device which is designed for
and intended to be used as a means of transportation for a person with a
mobility impairment, is suitable for use both inside and outside a building and
whose maximum speed does not exceed 12 mph when the device is being operated by
a person with a mobility impairment.
(2004 Code, § 70.01) (Ord. 2, passed 4-11-1988)
§ 70.02 COMPLIANCE WITH TRAFFIC CODE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this traffic code.
(2004 Code, § 70.02) (Ord. 2, passed 4-11-1988) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.03 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction given by a police officer in the performance of his or her duties or
the exercise of powers prescribed by this traffic code.
(2004 Code, § 70.03) (Ord. 2, passed 4-11-1988) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The town police officers shall, at all times, have the duty of
enforcing the traffic regulations of the town and the traffic laws of the
state, and to direct all traffic in conformance with such regulations and laws,
and shall have the power and duty, in the event of a fire or other emergency or
to expedite traffic or to ensure safety, to direct traffic as conditions may
require, notwithstanding any provisions of the state law or the regulations of
the town.
   (B)   The Chief of Police of the town shall, at all times, have the
authority to designate parking areas, including, but not limited to, restricted
and limited parking areas.
   (C)   In the event of fire, the members of the Fire Department of the town
shall have the same powers in regard to the direction of traffic as vested in
the town police officers.
(2004 Code, § 70.04) (Ord. 2, passed 4-11-1988)
§ 70.05 APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC CODE TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this traffic code shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by, or used in the service of, the United States Government, the state,
county or town, and it shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any of the
provisions of this traffic code, except as otherwise permitted in this traffic
code or by state law.
(2004 Code, § 70.05) (Ord. 2, passed 4-11-1988) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.06 APPLICATION OF TRAFFIC CODE TO PERSONS PROPELLING PUSHCARTS OR RIDING
ANIMALS.
   Every person propelling any pushcart, or riding an animal upon a roadway,
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this traffic code, applicable to the driver of any vehicle,
except those provisions of this traffic code which, by their very nature, can
have no application.
(2004 Code, § 70.06) (Ord. 2, passed 4-11-1988)
§ 70.07 ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle involved in a collision resulting in injury to
or death of any person of total property damage to an apparent extent of $200
or more shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice
of the collision to the Police Department, if the collision occurs within the
town.
   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the driver
of any motor vehicle which collides with another motor vehicle left parked or
unattended on any street or highway in the town, shall immediately report the
collision to the owner of such parked or unattended motor vehicle.
      (2)   Such report shall include the time, date and place of the
collision, the driver’s name, address, operator’s or chauffeur’s license number
and the registration number of the vehicle being operated by the driver at the
time of the collision. Such report may be oral or in writing.
      (3)   In the event the driver if, for any reason, is unable to make the
report required by this division (B), such driver shall make and file a report
of the collision in the same manner and subject to the same requirements as in
the case of a collision as provided in division (A) above.
   (C)   The Police Department may require the driver of a vehicle involved in
a collision which is required to be reported by this section to file a
supplemental report when the original report is insufficient, in the opinion of
the Department, and the Department may require witnesses of a collision to
render reports.
(2004 Code, § 70.07)
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.20 INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to designate those
intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by official traffic-control
signals and he or she shall install such signals as shall be necessary.
   (B)   The Town Clerk shall also install and maintain such other traffic-
control devices as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this traffic
code.
(2004 Code, § 70.20)
§ 70.21 OBEDIENCE TO DEVICES.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle or any pedestrian to
disobey the instructions of any official traffic-control device or signal
placed in accordance with the provisions of this traffic code, unless otherwise
directed by a police officer then on duty.
(2004 Code, § 70.21) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.22 NECESSITY OF SIGNS.
   (A)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are required shall
be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not visible or in the proper position
and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
   (B)   Whenever a particular section does not state that signs are required,
such section shall be effective without signs being placed to give notice
thereof.
(2004 Code, § 70.22)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this traffic code for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   If any person shall violate an ordinance regulating the operation or
parking of vehicles, he or she shall be responsible for an infraction and shall
be required to pay a penalty of not more than $50.
(G.S. § 14-4(b)) (2004 Code, § 70.99) (Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC AND PARKING RULES
Section
Traffic Rules
   
71.01   Spilling of vehicle loads
   
71.02   Speed limits
Parking Rules
   
71.15   Parking so as to interfere with Police, Fire and Sanitary Divisions
   
71.16   Designation and marking of restricted areas
   
71.17   Prohibited places; no signs required
   
71.18   Unlawful parking
   
71.19   Parking not to obstruct traffic
   
71.20   Passenger and freight loading zones; permits
   
71.21   Impoundment of parked vehicles
TRAFFIC RULES
§ 71.01 SPILLING OF VEHICLE LOADS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to overload any truck or vehicle while
transporting and moving dirt, stone or any other material over the public
streets of the town to the extent of permitting or allowing the dirt, stone or
any other material to fall from or be thrown from the vehicle while traveling
on and over the streets without removing the dirt, stone or any other material
from the streets the same day on which it was permitted or allowed to be
deposited upon the public streets.
(2004 Code, § 71.05) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.02 SPEED LIMITS.
   A vehicle may not be operated at a speed in excess of the following:
   (A)   Those speed limits established by ordinance of the town from time to
time, such speed limits to be posted by traffic-control sign; or
   (B)   Those speed limits established and enforced by the state under G.S. §
20-141(b).
(2004 Code, § 71.16) Penalty, see §
70.99
PARKING RULES
§ 71.15 PARKING SO AS TO INTERFERE WITH POLICE, FIRE AND SANITARY DIVISIONS.
   No vehicle shall be so parked in any private alleys, private roadways or
driveways as to block, interrupt or interfere with the passage of any truck or
vehicle of the Sanitary, Fire or Police Divisions of the city, servicing the
people and such residential, business and industrial property abutting thereon.
(2004 Code, § 72.06) (Ord. 2, passed 4-11-1988) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.16 DESIGNATION AND MARKING OF RESTRICTED AREAS.
   The Board of Aldermen is hereby authorized to designate streets and alleys
or portions thereof, where the parking of vehicles shall be prohibited, limited
or restricted, and to erect signs or markings indicating such prohibition,
limitation or restriction. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a
vehicle in violation of any such sign or marking.
(2004 Code, § 72.25) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.17 PROHIBITED PLACES; NO SIGNS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the
following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk;
      (2)   Within an intersection;
      (3)   On a crosswalk;
      (4)   Within 20 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control
signal located at the side of a street or roadway;
      (5)   Grade crossing approach. No vehicle shall park on either side of
any street leading to a grade crossing, within 50 feet of the closest rail;
provided that, where existing permanent structures are located closer than 50
feet, parking may be permitted in front of such structures, unless otherwise
prohibited and if such parking does not block the view in either direction of
the approach of a locomotive or train;
      (6)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, if such
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (7)   Upon the intervening space, physical barrier or clearly indicated
dividing section used to divide a street or highway into two or more roadways;
      (8)   Within any area marked as a fire lane in accordance with the
provisions of state statutes; and
      (9)   Within any area designated for handicapped parking in accordance
with the provisions of state statutes, unless the vehicle is driven by or is
transporting a person who is handicapped and said vehicle displays a
distinguishing license plate, a removable windshield placard or a temporary
removable windshield placard.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his or her control
into any such prohibited area or away from a curb such distance as is unlawful.
(2004 Code, § 72.26) (Ord. 2, passed 4-11-1988; Res. passed 7-12-1999) Penalty,
see §
70.99
§ 71.18 UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall stand, or park, a vehicle upon any street for the
principal purposes of:
      (1)   Displaying it for sale;
      (2)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle, excepting repairs
necessitated by an emergency;
      (3)   Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons;
      (4)   Storage of any detached trailer, or van, when the towing unit has
been disconnected; and
      (5)   Transferring merchandise, or freight, from one vehicle to another.
   (B)   No person shall stand or park on any street any vehicle for the
primary purpose of advertising.
(2004 Code, § 72.27) (Ord. 2, passed 4-11-1988) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.19 PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.
   (A)   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley,
in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten
feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
   (B)   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is a sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk
to accommodate the vehicle he or she is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
(2004 Code, § 72.28) (Ord. 2, passed 4-11-1988) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.20 PASSENGER AND FREIGHT LOADING ZONES; PERMITS.
   (A)   (1)   The Chief of Police shall have authority from time to time to
determine, designate and locate passenger loading zones and freight loading
zones on the highways, streets and roadways within the town and shall direct
and maintain, or cause to be maintained appropriate signs indicating the same.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to stop, stand
or park such vehicle for any period of time longer than is necessary for the
expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or freight in any placed marked
as a passenger loading zone, and it shall also be unlawful for the driver of
any vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle for a period of time longer
than is necessary for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or
material in any place marked as a freight loading zone, and in no case shall a
stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed the space of 15 minutes,
unless specially permitted by a permit issued by the Chief of Police.
   (B)   The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to issue, in special cases
where he or she deems it necessary, a permit for any vehicle used to transport
merchandise or material to park the same back to the curb for the purpose of
loading or unloading freight; provided, however, that, such permit shall
definitely specify the time to be permitted and the driver of such vehicle
shall have the permit in his or her possession at the time and place of loading
or unloading.
(2004 Code, § 72.32) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.21 IMPOUNDMENT OF PARKED VEHICLES.
   Any motor vehicle left parked or standing on any street or other public
place in the town in violation of the provisions of this subchapter or left
standing on any street or other public place in the town for a continuous
period of 24 hours or longer may be taken into possession and impounded by the
Police Department.
(2004 Code, § 72.55)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
      
93.   NUISANCES
      
94.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
95.   TREES
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Administration
   
90.03   Exempt vehicles
   
90.04   Duty of motor vehicle owner
   
90.05   Junked motor vehicle regulated; removal authorized
   
90.06   Removal of abandoned or junked vehicles; notice to registered owner
prior to towing
   
90.07   Impoundment
   
90.08   Protection against criminal and civil liability
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303(b)(1), means
a motor vehicle that:
      (1)   Has been left upon a street or highway in violation of a law or
ordinance prohibiting parking;
      (2)   Is left on property owned or operated by the town for longer that
24 hours;
      (3)   Is left on private property without the consent of the owner,
occupant or lessee thereof for two hours or longer; or
      (4)   Is left on any public street or highway for longer than seven days
or is determined by law enforcement to be a hazard to the motoring public.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. An abandoned vehicle that does not display a current
license plate and that:
      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked;
      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it was
originally intended to move; or
      (3)   Is more than five years old and worth less than $100.
   MOTOR VEHICLE OR VEHICLE. Any machine designed or intended to travel over
land by self propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 90.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Police Department and the Town Manager shall be responsible for
administration and enforcement of this section. The Police Department shall be
responsible for administering the removal and disposition of vehicles to be
abandoned on the public streets and highways within the town, and on property
owned by the town. The Town Manager shall be responsible for administering the
removal and disposition of abandoned or junked vehicles on private property.
The town may contract with private tow truck operators or towing businesses to
remove, store and dispose of abandoned and junked vehicles.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 90.03 EXEMPT VEHICLES.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle which is:
   (A)   Located in a bona fide automobile graveyard or junkyard as defined in
G.S. § 136-143, in accordance with the Junkyard Control Act, G.S. §§ 136-141 et
seq.;
   (B)   In an enclosed building;
   (C)   An enclosed area at the place of business of an automobile repair
business; and/or
   (D)   Covered with a fitted car cover designed for that vehicle and parked
on the property so that the vehicle cannot be seen from a public street.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 90.04 DUTY OF MOTOR VEHICLE OWNER.
   It shall be unlawful for any period of time to abandon a vehicle falling
within the definition aforementioned in this chapter. No person shall leave or
allow to remain any abandoned, junked or otherwise discarded vehicle on
property under his or her control. If a motor vehicle is abandoned on a public
street or upon property owned or operated by the town, it shall be the duty of
the owner of such vehicle, after due notice, to cause the removal of such
vehicle immediately and to pay all costs to such incident to such removal.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.05 JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE REGULATED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant
of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered
removed.
   (B)   The Town Manager may order the removal of a junked motor vehicle, in
writing, that the aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the
burdens imposed on the private property owner. The finding shall be based on a
balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent owner against the corresponding
gain to the public by promoting or enhancing community, neighborhood or area
appearance. The following, among other relevant factors, may be considered:
      (1)   Protection of property values;
      (2)   Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities;
      (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;
      (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and
      (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of area
residents.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.06 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED OR JUNKED VEHICLES; NOTICE TO REGISTERED OWNER
PRIOR TO TOWING.
   (A)   An abandoned or junked vehicle which is to be removed shall be towed
only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to possession of
the vehicle. The designated official or the police officer in charge of
directing the removal of such vehicle shall make a diligent search to ascertain
the identity or whereabouts of the owner of said vehicle. Such search shall
include an inquiry directed to the state’s Department of Motor Vehicles.
Written notice by first class mail of such removal shall be promptly given to
the registered owner of the vehicle, if his or her identity is known. The
person who mails the notice shall retain a written record to show the name and
address to which it was mailed and the date mailed. If the names and addresses
cannot be obtained or if the vehicle to be removed is an abandoned vehicle,
notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield or some other obvious place
on the vehicle a notice indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the town
on a specified date, no sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed or
mailed, unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor by that
time.
   (B)   (1)   If the said owner of the vehicle does not remove the vehicle and
chooses to appeal the determination of abandonment or junked, an appeal must be
made to the Town Manager in writing and he or she will schedule a meeting and
hear the appeal within a reasonable amount of time, not less than ten, nor more
than 30, days after receiving the request for an appeal.
      (2)   Further proceedings to remove said vehicle shall be on hold until
the appeal is heard and decided upon.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 90.07 IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   Any abandoned or junked vehicle which has been ordered removed will be
removed to a storage area by the tow truck operator or towing business
contracting such services for the town. An authorized town official shall
immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle and include
the following information:
      (1)   The description of the vehicle;
      (2)   The location and company who is holding the said vehicle;
      (3)   The violation which the owner is charged; and
      (4)   The procedure for the owner to follow to redeem the vehicle.
   (B)   If the vehicle is registered in the state, notice shall be given
within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice shall be
given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the removal of the vehicle.
   (C)   Whenever an abandoned or junked vehicle motor vehicle is removed, and
the vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates, the authorized
town official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle
identification number to determine the last known registered owner of the
vehicle and to notify the owner of the information listed in divisions (A)(1)
through (A)(4) above.
   (D)   No person duly acting in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any owner or
other person legally entitled to possession of any abandoned, lost, or stolen
vehicle, for the removal, storage or sale thereof in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. The town will not remove or dispose of any motor
vehicle that is used on a regular basis for business of personal use.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
§ 90.08 PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL AND CIVIL LIABILITY.
   No person shall be held to answer, in any civil or criminal action, to any
owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned or
junked motor vehicle for disposing of the vehicle as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
   
91.01   County regulations adopted by reference
 
   
91.99   Penalty
§ 91.01 COUNTY REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   All animal control for the town goes through the county and the town hereby
adopts the county’s regulations, and any and all amendments thereto, are hereby
incorporated herein as if set out in full.
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Inspections. Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce
any of the provisions of this article, or whenever the officer has reasonable
cause to believe that there exists in any household or upon any premises any
violation of this article, the officer is hereby empowered to enter and inspect
such property at any reasonable time and perform any duty imposed upon him or
her by this section as follows:
      (1)   If such property is unoccupied, the officer shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having control of the
property;
      (2)   If such property is occupied, the officer shall first present
proper credentials to the occupant and request entry, explaining the reasons
therefore; and
      (3)   If such entry is refused or cannot be obtained because the owner or
other person having control or charge of the property cannot be located after
due diligence, the officer may seek an appropriate warrant issued and served as
provided by law.
   (B)   Filing false reports. It shall be unlawful for any person to file a
false report with the Department of Animal Control, or to provide false
information to an officer involving any investigation of any reported violation
of this article. A violation of this provision shall constitute a Class 3
misdemeanor as set forth in G.S. § 14-4. The maximum fine for a violation under
this chapter is $500 or a maximum 30 days imprisonment.
   (C)   Frivolous or unfounded complaints. It shall be unlawful for any person
to repeatedly file frivolous or unfounded complaints with the Department of
Animal Control in order to intimidate or harass any member of such Department
or any animal owner, or to otherwise hinder or interfere with any function of
the Department of Animal Control. A violation of this provision shall
constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor as set forth in G.S. § 14-4. The maximum fine
for a violation under this chapter is $500 or a maximum 30 days imprisonment.
   (D)   Interference. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with,
hinder, resist, or obstruct the officer while the officer is carrying out any
duty created under this article. A violation of this provision shall constitute
a Class 3 misdemeanor as set forth in G.S. § 14-4. The maximum fine for a
violation under this chapter is $500.00 or a maximum 30 days imprisonment.
   (E)   Concealment of animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to conceal
any animal for the purpose of evading any federal, state or local law. A
violation of this provision shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor as set forth
in G.S. § 14-4. The maximum fine for a violation under this chapter is $500 or
a maximum 30 days imprisonment.
   (F)   Violation of this section may subject the violator to criminal as well
as civil action. In addition to the civil penalties or fees imposed under this
section, violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor for which a criminal
summons or warrant may be issued. A violation of this chapter shall constitute
a Class 3 misdemeanor as set forth in G.S. § 14-4. The maximum fine for a
violation under this chapter is $500 or a maximum 30 days imprisonment. Each
day’s violation of this section is a separate offense. Payment of a fine
imposed in criminal proceedings pursuant to this section does not relieve the
violator of his or her liability for taxes, civil penalties or fees imposed
under this section.
(Ord. 9-2-2025-2, passed 10-20-2025)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
   
92.01   Purpose
   
92.02   Fees
   
92.03   Conflicting provisions
   
92.04   Responsibilities
   
92.05   Right of access
   
92.06   Establishment of primary fire limits
   
92.07   Control of open burning
   
92.08   Authority at emergency scenes
   
92.09   Investigations
   
92.10   False alarms and interfering with fire protection systems
   
90.11   Blocking of fire lanes
   
90.12   Permits
   
92.13   Periodic inspections
   
92.14   Remediation
   
92.15   Unsafe buildings
   
92.16   Records and reports
 
   
92.99   Penalty
§ 92.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This chapter acts to create and establish a fire district, and provide
the town with rules and regulations to improve public safety by promoting the
control of fire hazards; regulating the installment, use and maintenance of
equipment; regulating the use of structures, premises and open areas; providing
for the abatement of fire hazards; establishing the responsibilities and
procedures for code enforcement; and setting forth the standards for compliance
and achievement of these objectives.
   (B)   This chapter shall be known as the “Town of Bryson City Fire
Prevention Ordinance.” This code adopts, by reference, the North Carolina State
Building Code: Fire Prevention Code, and its incorporated standards and codes
as published in the Building Code. The same are hereby adopted and incorporated
as fully as if set out verbatim herein. Not less than one copy of the current
issue of the North Carolina State Building Code: Fire Prevention Code and the
adopted standards and codes shall be filed in the office of the town Fire
Chief, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the incorporated
area of the municipality.
   (C)   (1)   Any law, statute, code, standard, rule or regulation adopted by
reference and incorporated into this chapter is deemed to include any
amendments that may be made to the law, statute, code, standard, rule or
regulation.
      (2)   Amendments to anything adopted by reference and incorporated into
this ordinance, which amendments are adopted and published by the North
Carolina State Building Code Council, shall be effective in the town at the
time the amendments become a part of the Fire Code expressed within or adopted
by the North Carolina State Building Code. Amendments to anything else adopted
by reference herein shall be effective in the town when duly adopted by the
agency responsible for their adoption under governing state law.
   (D)   This chapter shall not be construed to hold the town responsible or
liable for any damage to persons or property by reason of the inspection or re-
inspection authorized in this chapter, or failure to inspect or re-inspect, or
the permits issued or denied as pursuant to this chapter, or by reason of the
approval or disapproval of any equipment authorized pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 6-11-2025, passed 7-8-2025)
§ 92.02 FEES.
   Fees may be established by the Town Board of Alderman for permits,
certificates, approvals and other functions performed under this chapter and
shall be payable to the town. Upon adoption of the fee schedule, the fee shall
accompany each application for permit, approval, certificate or other fee
related code provision. No fee shall be charged for any function unless
specifically adopted by the Board of Alderman.
(Ord. 6-11-2025, passed 7-8-2025)
§ 92.03 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   All former ordinances or parts thereof conflicting or inconsistent with the
provisions of this article are hereby repealed. In the event of conflicts
between the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code and this chapter, the more
restrictive provisions shall prevail.
(Ord. 6-11-2025, passed 7-8-2025)
§ 92.04 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, is the Fire Code Official charged
with the administration and enforcement of the North Carolina State Building
Code: Fire Prevention Code and any future iterations thereof, and shall be
responsible for the enforcement of this Chapter, the North Carolina State
Building Code: Fire Prevention Code, and all laws and ordinances covering the
following:
   (A)   The prevention of fires;
   (B)   The storage, sale and use of combustible, flammable or explosive
materials;
   (C)   The installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm
systems, and fire extinguishing equipment;
   (D)   The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes;
   (E)   The means and adequacy of exit in case of fire from factories,
schools, hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters
and amphitheaters;
   (F)   The adequacy of ingress, egress and regress to and from the
construction and/or development of a tract of land into individual residential
dwelling units, including mobile homes, modular homes or manufactured homes
designed for and occupied by one family only, and being completely detached
from other dwellings, and one or more buildings thereon for multifamily use,
including, but not limited to, condominiums, townhouses, row houses, apartments
and other forms of group housing;
   (G)   The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires; and
   (H)   The maintenance of fire cause and loss records.
(Ord. 6-11-2025, passed 7-8-2025)
§ 92.05 RIGHT OF ACCESS.
   (A)   The Fire Chief and authorized representatives have the right to enter
any structure or premises without permission or warrant if there is a dangerous
condition or emergency constituting an immediate threat to life, property or
public safety for the purpose of eliminating, controlling or abating the
dangerous condition or emergency.
   (B)   The Fire Chief or authorized designee may make periodic inspections in
accordance with the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code. In exercising this
power, members of the department shall have a right to enter on any premises
within the jurisdiction at all reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection
or other enforcement action, upon presentation of proper credentials.
(Ord. 6-11-2025, passed 7-8-2025)
§ 92.06 ESTABLISHMENT OF PRIMARY FIRE LIMITS.
   (A)   The primary fire limits for the town are recognized as the principal
business portions of the town.
   (B)   The primary fire limits are hereby established as: Academy Street from
the intersection of Veteran’s Boulevard through the 200 block of Bennett Hill
Street; Main Street from the Veterans Boulevard intersection to 345 Main
Street; Rector Street from the Academy Street Intersection to the Main Street
Intersection; Everett Street from the intersection of Main Street to the
intersection of Bryson Walk; Veterans Boulevard from the intersection of
Fryemont Street to the intersection of Main Street; Highway 19 South from the
intersection of Main Street to the intersection of Slope Street; Slope Street
from the intersection of Highway 19 South to the intersection of Bryson Walk;
Bryson Walk from the intersection of Slope Street to the intersection of
Everett Street; Mitchell Street from the intersection of Slope Street to the
intersection of Everett Street; Highway 19 South from the Slope Street
intersection to Hughes Branch Road; Island Street from the Everett Street
intersection to Greenlee Street; Greenlee Street from the Island Street
intersection to Bryson Street; Bryson Street from the Everett Street
Intersection to Collins Street; Collins Street from the Bryson Street
intersection to the Depot Street intersection; Depot Street from the Everett
Street Intersection to 234 Deep Creek; and Fry Street in its entirety.
   (C)   No frame or wooden building or structure or addition thereto shall
hereafter be erected, altered, repaired or moved, either into the limits or
from one place to another within the limits, except upon approved permit by the
local inspection department and State Fire Marshal or the State Fire Marshal’s
designee.
(Ord. 6-11-2025, passed 7-8-2025)
§ 92.07 CONTROL OF OPEN BURNING.
   A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize the kindling or
maintaining of any open burning within town limits unless conducted and
approved in accordance with this section.
   (A)   Fuel. It is illegal to burn synthetic materials, refuse or salvageable
materials for fuel. It is always illegal to burn trash and other non-vegetative
materials. These sanctions are provided for persons who willfully or
negligently violate any environmental standard pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.6A.
   (B)   Prohibited open burning. The Fire Chief shall have the authority to
issue an open burn ban when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make
such fires hazardous. Exception: Prescribed burning for the purpose of reducing
the impact of wildland fire when authorized by the Fire Code Official or fire
suppression and mitigation agency.
   (C)   Permit required. A permit shall be obtained from the town office in
accordance with § 105.6 of the North Carolina Fire Prevention Code prior to
kindling a fire for recognized silvicultural or range or wildlife management
practices, prevention or control of disease or pests, or a bonfire. Application
for such approval shall only be presented by and permits issued to the owner of
the land upon which the fire is to be kindled.
   (D)   Authorization. Where required by state or local law or regulations,
open burning shall only be permitted with prior approval from the state or
local air quality management authority, provided that all conditions specified
in the authorization are followed.
   (E)   Extinguishment authority. Where open burning creates or adds to a
hazardous situation, the Fire Chief or his or her designee is authorized to
order the extinguishment of the open burning operation.
   (F)   Location. The location for open burning shall be not less than 50 feet
from any structure, and provisions shall be made to prevent the fire from
spreading to within 50 feet of any structure.
   (G)   Exceptions. Exceptions include:
      (1)   Fires in approved containers that are not less than 15 feet from a
structure; and
      (2)   The minimum required distance from a structure shall be 25 feet
where the pile size is three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in
height.
   (H)   Bonfires. A bonfire shall not be conducted within 50 feet of a
structure or combustible material unless the fire is contained in a barbecue
pit. Conditions that could cause a fire to spread within 50 feet of a structure
shall be eliminated prior to ignition. A bonfire shall require a permit and
inspection prior to occurrence by the Fire Code Official.
   (I)   Recreational fires. Recreational fires shall not be conducted within
25 feet of a structure or combustible material. Conditions that could cause a
fire to spread within 25 feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to
ignition.
   (J)   Portable outdoor fireplaces. Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be used
in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions and shall not be operated
within 15 feet of a structure or combustible material. Exception: Portable
outdoor fireplaces used at one-family and two-family dwellings.
   (K)   Attendance. Open burning, bonfires, recreational fires and use of
portable outdoor fireplaces shall be constantly attended until the fire is
extinguished. A minimum of one portable fire extinguisher with a minimum 4-
A rating or other approved on-site fire-extinguishing equipment, such as dirt,
sand, water barrel, garden hose or water container, shall be available for
immediate utilization.
(Ord. 6-11-2025, passed 7-8-2025) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.08 AUTHORITY AT EMERGENCY SCENES.
   (A)   The Fire Chief or officer of the Fire Department in charge at the
scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life or
property, or any part thereof, shall have the authority to direct such
operation as necessary to extinguish or control any fire, perform any rescue
operation, investigate the existence of suspected or reported fires, gas leaks
or other hazardous conditions or situations, or take any other action necessary
in the reasonable performance of duty. In the exercise of such power, the Fire
Chief is authorized to prohibit any person, vessel or thing from approaching
the scene, and is authorized to remove, or cause to be removed or kept away
from the scene, any vehicle, vessel or thing that could impede or interfere
with the operations of the Fire Department, and, in the judgement of the Fire
Chief, any person not actually and usefully employed in the extinguishing of
such fire or in the preservation of property in the vicinity thereof.
   (B)   The Fire Chief or officer of the Fire Department in charge at the
scene of an emergency is authorized to place ropes, guards, barricades or other
obstructions across any street, alley, place or private property in the
vicinity of such operations to prevent accidents or interference with the
lawful efforts of the Fire Department to manage and control the situation and
to handle fire apparatus.
   (C)   Persons shall not obstruct the operations of the Fire Department in
connection with extinguishment or control of any fire, or actions relative to
other emergencies, or disobey any lawful command of the Fire Chief or officer
of the Fire Department in charge of the emergency, or any part thereof, or any
lawful order of a police officer assisting the Fire Department. Any person,
including the owner of property which is burning, who shall willfully interfere
in any manner with firefighters engaged in the performance of their duties
shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
(Ord. 6-11-2025, passed 7-8-2025) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.09 INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The Fire Chief shall be responsible for causing the investigation of
the origin, cause and circumstances of every fire occurring within the
jurisdiction of this chapter where property has been destroyed or damaged, and
if possible, determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or
design. Such investigations shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of such
fire.
   (B)   Fatalities resulting from a fire shall be reported to office of State
Fire Marshal within 24 hours.
   (C)   The appropriate law enforcement agency will be requested if the origin
and cause investigation lead the investigating fire officer to suspect a crime
has potentially been committed.
   (D)   The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, will be notified by Public
Safety Communications of every structure fire occurring in the town.
   (E)   The Fire Chief or his or her designee shall be responsible for
investigating the cause, origin and circumstances of every structure fire
occurring within the jurisdiction of this chapter where property has been
destroyed or damaged, and if possible, determine whether the fire is the result
of carelessness or design. Such investigations shall begin immediately upon the
occurrence of such fire.
(Ord. 6-11-2025, passed 7-8-2025)
§ 92.10 FALSE ALARMS AND INTERFERING WITH FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to wantonly and
willfully give or cause to be given, or to advise, counsel or aid and abet
anyone in giving a false alarm of fire, or to break the glass key protector, or
to pull the slide, arm or lever of any station or signal box of any fire alarm
system, except in case of fire, or willfully misuse or damage a portable fire
extinguisher, or in any way to willfully interfere with, damage, deface, molest
or injure any part or portion of any fire alarm, fire detection, smoke
detection or fire extinguishing system.
   (B)   Persons shall not render a system or device inoperative during an
emergency unless by direction of the Fire Chief or Fire Department official in
charge of the incident. For the purpose of this chapter, occupants resetting a
fire alarm system prior to Fire Department arrival is considered rendering the
system inoperative.
(Ord. 6-11-2025, passed 7-8-2025) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 90.11 BLOCKING OF FIRE LANES.
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand, whether attended
or unattended, upon any public vehicular area, street, highway or roadway in
any area designated as a fire lane. This prohibition includes designated fire
lanes in shopping centers or mall parking lots and all other public vehicular
areas. Provided, however, persons loading or unloading supplies or merchandise
may park temporarily in a fire lane located in a shopping center or mall
parking lot as long as the vehicle is not left unattended. The prima facie rule
of evidence created by G.S. § 20-162.1 is applicable to prosecutions for
violation of this section.
   (B)   The owner of a vehicle parked in violation of this subsection shall be
deemed to have appointed any state, county or municipal law enforcement officer
as his or her agent for the purpose of arranging for the transportation and
safe storage of such vehicle. No aw enforcement officer removing such vehicle
shall be held civilly or criminally liable in any way for any acts or omissions
arising out of or caused by carrying out or enforcing any provision of this
subsection, unless the conduct of the officer amounts to wanton misconduct or
intentional wrongdoing.
   (C)   Any vehicle unlawfully parked in a properly designated and signed fire
lane may be removed and impounded.
(Ord. 6-11-2025, passed 7-8-2025) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 90.12 PERMITS.
   (A)   Operational permits listed as mandatory in § 105.6 and construction
permits identified in § 105.7 of the North Carolina Fire Code shall be obtained
from the Fire Chief or authorized representative prior to work being conducted.
The owner or authorized agent shall complete an application and provide the
required documentation for the Fire Code Official to review prior to approval.
   (B)   The required inspections and acceptance testing shall be completed
prior to a certificate of completion being issued. Property owners, operators
and/or contractors performing operations identified as an optional permit are
not required to complete an application for a permit, however, they are
responsible for following all requirements identified within the Fire Code.
(Ord. 6-11-2025, passed 7-8-2025)
§ 92.13 PERIODIC INSPECTIONS.
   The Fire Chief, or his or her designee, shall cause to be inspected all
premises on a periodic basis for compliance with this article and other fire
prevention regulations as follows.
 
Semi-  Public schools
annual
       Assembly — Restaurants, clubs, gyms, and places of entertainment and the like.
       Hazardous — Hazardous materials, flammable liquids and explosives facilities and
       the like.
       Institutional — Hospital, nursing homes, licensed care facilities, jails and the
       like.
Annual Residential — Apartments, hotels, motels, dormitories and the like.
       High-Rise Buildings — All use types.
       Adult and child day care operations.
       Assisted family living and 24-hour adult care facilities.
       Substance abuse recovery, violence recovery and protection centers, physical and
       mental recovery centers.
Every  Factory-Industrial Facilities — Manufacturing and assembly plants and the like.
2      Educational Facilities — Private schools, except public schools are inspected
years  every 6 months.
       Assembly — With an occupant load less than 100.
       Businesses — Banks, barber and beauty shops, gas stations and self-service,
       educational. occupancies above the twelfth grade, print shops, professional
Every  service offices (architects, attorneys, dentists, physicians, engineers) and the
3      like.
years  Mercantile — Department stores, drug stores, markets, retail or wholesale stores
       and the like.
       Storage Facilities — Warehouses, garages and hangers.
       Churches and synagogues.
       Miscellaneous — Tanks, silos, greenhouses and the like.
 
(Ord. 6-11-2025, passed 7-8-2025)
§ 92.14 REMEDIATION.
   (A)   Whenever any fire inspector shall find in any building, or upon any
premises or other places, combustible or explosive matter or dangerous
accumulations of waste paper, boxes, shavings or any highly flammable
materials, and which is so situated as to endanger property; or shall find
obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors, windows, likely
to interfere with operations of a fire department or egress of occupants; or
any violation listed in the Fire Code of the North Carolina State Building
Code, the inspector shall order the remediation of same.
   (B)   Any owner or occupant may appeal to the North Carolina State Building
Code Council through the procedure provided for by the North Carolina State
Building Code.
   (C)   The service of any such order may be made upon the occupant of the
premises to whom it is directed, either by delivering a copy to such occupant
personally, electronic delivery (email) or by leaving it with any person in
charge of the premises, or if no such person is found upon the premises, by
affixing a copy thereof in a conspicuous place or on the door to the entrance
of said premises.
(Ord. 6-11-2025, passed 7-8-2025)
§ 92.15 UNSAFE BUILDINGS.
   (A)   If during an inspection of a premises, a building or structure, or any
building system, in whole or in part, constitutes a clear and inimical threat
to human life, safety or health, the Fire Code Official shall issue such notice
or orders to remedy the conditions as shall be deemed necessary and shall refer
the building to the County Building Inspections Department for any repairs,
alterations, remodeling, removing or demolition required.
   (B)   Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe
or deficient because of inadequate means of egress or which constitute a fire
hazard or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or which
involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be
deemed an unsafe condition. A vacant structure that is not secured against
unauthorized entry shall be deemed unsafe.
   (C)   The Fire Code Official or Fire Department official in charge of an
incident shall be authorized to order the immediate evacuation of any occupied
building deemed unsafe where such building has hazardous conditions that
present imminent danger to building occupants. Persons so notified shall
immediately leave the structure or premises and shall not enter or reenter
until authorized to do so by the Fire Code Official or Fire Department official
in charge of the incident. The Fire Code Official is also authorized to require
the disconnection of any utility service to the building until such time as the
unsafe condition has been remediated.
   (D)   Where conditions exist that are deemed hazardous to life and property,
the Fire Code Official or Fire Department official in charge of the incident is
authorized to abate summarily such hazardous conditions that are in violation
of the North Carolina Fire Code.
   (E)   The owner, the owner’s authorized agent, operator or occupant of a
building or premises deemed unsafe by the Fire Code Official shall abate or
cause to be abated or corrected such unsafe conditions either by repair,
rehabilitation, demolition or other approved corrective action. In accordance
with G.S. § 160D-1119(d), this section shall apply to residential buildings as
well as non-residential buildings or structures.
   (F)   Should the owner fail to take corrective action, a hearing shall be
held in accordance with G.S. § 160D-1121. Owners may appeal the order by giving
notice of appeal to the inspector and Town Clerk within ten days following the
issuance of the order. In absence of appeal, the order of the inspector shall
be final. If the owner of the building or structure fails to comply with an
order of the governing board following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of
a Class 1 misdemeanor (G.S. § 160D-1124).
   (G)   Whenever any violation is denominated a misdemeanor under the
provisions of this chapter, the local government, either in addition to or in
lieu of other remedies, may initiate any appropriate action or proceedings to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation or to prevent the occupancy
of the building or structure involved to include removal of the building (G.S.
§ 160D-1125).
(Ord. 6-11-2025, passed 7-8-2025) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.16 RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   The Fire Chief shall maintain a record of all fires, inspections and facts
concerning the same, including injuries, deaths, rescue of persons and
statistics as to the extent of such fires and the damage caused thereby. The
Fire Chief shall submit an annual report of activities to the Town Board of
Alderman, which shall contain all proceedings under this section and any
recommendations for amendments which the Fire Chief deems appropriate.
(Ord. 6-11-2025, passed 7-8-2025)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise noted, a violation of this chapter shall be a
misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $50 or by imprisonment for
not more than 30 days, or by both such fines and imprisonment.
      (1)   The imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the
violation nor shall the violation be permitted to continue.
      (2)   Such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations
or defects within a reasonable time, and when not otherwise specified, the
application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced
removal of prohibited conditions.
      (3)   Proof of such unlawful act or failure shall be deemed prima facie
evidence that such act is that of the owner or other person in control of the
premises.
   (B)   (1)   Violations of the North Carolina State Building Code: Fire
Prevention Code § 107.6, concerning overcrowding, as well as any future
iterations thereof, may, in addition to the penalties set forth above and/or
any other penalties and/or remedies available at law, be punished as a civil
penalty as follows:
         (a)   First offense: Written warning or $50 fine;
         (b)   Second offense: $100 fine; and
         (c)   Third offense: $500 fine.
      (2)   Upon the discovery of any violation of the North Carolina State
Building Code: Fire Prevention Code § 107.6, concerning overcrowding, the Fire
Chief, or his or her designee, is authorized to order the evacuation of a
building, premise, or portion thereof, to abate the overcrowded condition.
      (3)   The town may initiate any appropriate action or proceedings to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation or to prevent the occupancy
of the building or structure who is in violation of the North Carolina Fire
Prevention Code or this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   For violation of §
92.07(A), G.S. § 143.215.6A provides for a fine up to $25,000 per of $25,000
per day for continuous violations.
      (2)    In addition to the violation for burning illegal fuels, a
violation of §
92.07 may result in the assessment of a civil penalty up $500 per violation. In
addition, a violation of this chapter shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor as
set forth in G.S. § 14-4. The maximum fine for a violation under this chapter
is $500 or a maximum 30 days.
   (C)   Violation of §
92.10 may result in a Class 2 misdemeanor and a $500 fine. Repeated false
alarms due to alarm malfunction, improper care of fire protection systems or
testing of systems may result in a fine of $100 per occurrence.
   (D) Any person violating §
90.11, including the owner of an improperly parked vehicle, and the owner of
any other unlawful obstruction, shall be subject to a civil penalty in the
amount of $50 to be recovered by the town. The offender shall be issued a
written citation to be placed on the vehicle or on the obstruction, or given to
the owner of the vehicle or obstruction.
   (E)   Any owner or occupant failing to comply with such order within a
reasonable period after service, and described in §
92.14, shall be subject to a penalty of $50 for each violation deemed to be
“life safety,” and $100 per violation for every other violation. Any violation
that is not corrected within seven days of imposition shall be a continuing
violation and the owner or occupant shall thereafter be subject the specified
penalty for each day the violation continues.
(Ord. 6-11-2025, passed 7-8-2025)
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES
Section
   
93.01   Conditions constituting nuisance
   
93.02   Abatement
   
93.03   Enforcement by county’s Health Officer
§ 93.01 CONDITIONS CONSTITUTING NUISANCE.
   (A)   The following specified conditions, among others, constituted a
nuisance condition.
   (B)   However, the following conditions are not to be deemed an exclusive
list.
      (1)   Stagnant water. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow
stagnant water to accumulate or stand in ponds, holes, ditches, vats or the
like, upon any lot or premises so as to be detrimental to health. Such stagnant
water shall be subject to abatement as a nuisance.
      (2)   Cleanliness of premises. Any person who permits any house,
building, yard, lot or any other part of the premises under his or her control
to become so filthy as to be injurious to health shall be guilty of an offense,
and such condition shall be subject to abatement as a nuisance.
      (3)   Cutting of weeds and removal of accumulations. It shall be unlawful
and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to allow weeds, grass or
vegetation to grow on any premises or vacant lot in the town to a height that
is unsightly or creates an unsanitary condition.
      (4)   Allowing dead animals to remain on property. It shall be unlawful
and is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person to allow a dead carcass
of any animal to remain upon any property longer than 15 hours.
      (5)   Sweeps refuse onto streets, sidewalks, alleys. It shall be unlawful
and is hereby declared to be a nuisance for any person to sweep or otherwise
convey from a dwelling, store, office or any other place, any litter or garbage
into any street, sidewalk or alley in the town.
      (6)   Slaughterhouses prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in business as an abattoir or to conduct any slaughtering operations in
the town.
(2004 Code, § 93.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.02 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever a nuisance shall exist on any premises in the town, the Chief
of Police shall give notice to the owner or occupant of the premises of the
existence of the nuisance and shall direct that the nuisance be abated. It
shall be unlawful for any person receiving a notice to abate a nuisance given
pursuant to this section to fail to start abatement of the nuisance within 24
hours after the notice is given.
   (B)   In the event the owner or occupant of the premises shall fail to abate
a nuisance on his or her premises after having been given notice pursuant to
division (A) above, the town may abate the nuisance and the costs of abatement
shall be certified to the Tax Collector and collected as taxes.
(2004 Code, § 93.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.03 ENFORCEMENT BY COUNTY’S HEALTH OFFICER.
   (A)   The county’s Health Officer is authorized to enforce all laws adopted
by the town pertaining to the health of the citizens of the town.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any reason to interfere with or resist the
county’s Health Officer or his or her duly authorized agents or assistants in
the performance of any of their duties.
   (C)   The county’s Health Officer and his or her duly appointed assistants
shall have the right to enter any building or any premises at all reasonable
times to ascertain whether conditions are sanitary and to enforce the
sanitation laws of the town.
(2004 Code, § 93.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 94: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Board approval of new streets
   
94.02   Regulation of awnings
   
94.03   Riding bicycles, skates and skateboards on sidewalks
Excavation and Repair
   
94.15   Excavations; permit required
   
94.16   Application; fees
   
94.17   Street repair; after excavation
   
94.18   Excavations; leaving unprotected
   
94.19   Streets not to be damaged by tractors or harrows
   
94.20   Sidewalk construction
   
94.21   Damage to town property
   
94.22   Driveways; permit required
Parades and Demonstrations
   
94.35   Permit required
   
94.36   Application
   
94.37   Authority of officer to determine whether minors may participate
   
94.38   Findings prerequisite to issuance of permit
   
94.39   Terms and conditions
   
94.40   Grounds for denial
   
94.41   Conduct of persons engaged in demonstrations
   
94.42   Duty of designated demonstration leader
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 BOARD APPROVAL OF NEW STREETS.
   Before any new street offered for dedication to the town is accepted as
such, and officially recognized as a town-maintained street, the Board must
give its approval, finding that the street complies with engineering standards
set by the Board, and that the best interests of the town would be served by
accepting the street as a town street.
(2004 Code, § 94.01)
§ 94.02 REGULATION OF AWNINGS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AWNING. Any shelter, cover or other object placed, erected or extending
over any street or sidewalk.
      PERSON. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, association, corporation or
the title holder or holders of property adjoining any street or sidewalk within
the corporate limits of the town.
      STREET or SIDEWALK. The entire width between property lines of every way
or place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public as a matter of right, for the purposes of a walkway or vehicular
traffic, and shall include any highway, street, road, alley, driveway or
sidewalk open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purpose of
vehicular traffic or a walkway, but is not limited thereto.
   (B)   No person shall construct, erect, place or permit an awning to be
placed or maintained at a height of less than seven feet over any street or
sidewalk within the corporate limits of the town.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of the town to enforce the provisions of this
section.
(2004 Code, § 94.02) (Ord. passed 5-5-1950) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.03 RIDING BICYCLES, SKATES AND SKATEBOARDS ON SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle, skates or skateboard
upon the sidewalks within the corporate limits of the town.
(2004 Code, § 94.03) (Ord. passed 8-3-1987) Penalty, see §
10.99
EXCAVATION AND REPAIR
§ 94.15 EXCAVATIONS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall make any excavation or opening or dig any ditch, trench,
tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public
place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires or poles or
for any other purposes unless a written permit therefor has been issued by some
officer of the town vested with proper authority; provided that, a permit shall
not be required where the work is performed under a contract with the town, but
in the event the work requires a sidewalk or street to be wholly or partially
obstructed, the party performing the work shall notify the town at least two
hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless prevented by sudden
emergency.
(2004 Code, § 94.15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.16 APPLICATION; FEES.
   All persons desiring a permit to make an opening in any street or sidewalk,
as set forth in §
94.15 of this chapter, shall make written application therefor, which
application shall show the location of the proposed opening, the purpose
therefor and the approximate number of square yards of surface to be cut. A fee
may be required by the Board for such permit.
(2004 Code, § 94.16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.17 STREET REPAIR; AFTER EXCAVATION.
   When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the
town shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making the excavation
or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening, and the
refilling shall be done in accordance with the standards and specifications of
the town.
(2004 Code, § 94.17) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.18 EXCAVATIONS; LEAVING UNPROTECTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who obtains a
permit under the sections of this chapter to do any excavation of any kind
which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley,
sidewalk or public place of the town without placing and maintaining proper
guard rails three feet from the ground and signal lights or other warnings at,
in or around the same, sufficient to warn the public of the excavation or work
and to protect all persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of
the excavation or work.
(2004 Code, § 94.18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.19 STREETS NOT TO BE DAMAGED BY TRACTORS OR HARROWS.
   (A) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to drag, or
run or cause to be dragged or run any harrow or other implement, engine,
machine or tool on any asphalt or other type of permanently paved street of the
town which shall be likely in any way to injure or cut the surface thereof.
   (B) Any person violating division (A) above shall be liable to the town for
the cost of repairing any and all damage caused.
(2004 Code, § 94.19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.20 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
   No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any individual, firm or
corporation of any brick, wood or other material without a written permit from
the town.
(2004 Code, § 94.20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.21 DAMAGE TO TOWN PROPERTY.
   No person shall injure, tamper with, remove, paint on or deface any bridge,
culvert, ditch and drain, sign, sign post, street light, traffic signal,
bulletin board or other town property on the streets and sidewalks or
elsewhere, except employees of the town in the performance of their duties.
(2004 Code, § 94.22) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.22 DRIVEWAYS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall begin to construct, reconstruct, repair, alter or grade any
driveway on the public streets, unless a written permit therefor has been
issued by the town.
(2004 Code, § 94.23) Penalty, see §
10.99
PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
§ 94.35 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or block the streets
or sidewalks of the town by any exhibition, demonstration, organized
demonstration, picket line or commercial venture, so as to prevent the normal
flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic; except that, a special permit may be
granted pursuant to this subchapter by the Chief of Police, by authority of the
Board of Aldermen or, in the absence of the Chief of Police, by the next
highest police officer, for temporary and peaceful occupancy of a limited
portion of said streets or sidewalks for purposes other than hostile
demonstrations or commercial gain. Participation in such illegal exhibition,
demonstration, organized demonstration or picket line by any individual through
leadership, organization or physical participation therein, shall be unlawful.
   (B)   There shall be no parade, demonstration, aggregation or assembling of
groups in the public streets or in or around any public building in town,
except upon the issuance of a permit therefor, under the regulations set out in
this subchapter. The Chief of Police or, in his or her absence, the next
highest ranking officer of the Police Department, by authority of the Board of
Aldermen, is authorized to issue permits required by this section.
(2004 Code, § 94.35) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.36 APPLICATION.
   (A)   A written application for a period required by this subchapter shall
be filed 24 hours in advance of the proposed parade, picket line or group
demonstration, on a form prescribed by the Police Department.
   (B)   The application shall be signed by the person or group of persons
filing such application, and the application shall state the proposed place,
time, purpose and size of such parade, picket line or demonstration and whether
or not any minors are going to participate.
   (C)   Such application shall also specify the person to be in charge of such
parade or demonstration.
(2004 Code, § 94.36)
§ 94.37 AUTHORITY OF OFFICER TO DETERMINE WHETHER MINORS MAY PARTICIPATE.
   (A)   If the application filed for a permit required by this subchapter
specifies that minors are to be permitted to participate in the parade or
demonstration, the police officer having authority to issue the permit shall
determine whether or not said minors shall be permitted to participate and
shall base his or her determination upon whether or not the purpose, time or
place of the participation will be detrimental to or endanger the health,
welfare or safety of such minors.
   (B)   The police officer shall have the authority, if he or she deems
necessary, to require parents’ written permission for participation in any such
parade or demonstration by a minor.
(2004 Code, § 94.37)
§ 94.38 FINDINGS PREREQUISITE TO ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The officer having authority under this subchapter to issue the permit
sought pursuant to this subchapter, in considering the issuance of the permit,
shall, among other considerations provided, consider and find as a requisite
for issuance that:
   (A)   The activity in question will not require excessive diversion of
police from other necessary duties;
   (B)   The activity in question will not interfere with the rights of
property owners in the area to enjoy peaceful occupancy and use of their
property;
   (C)   The activity in question can be conducted without unreasonable
interference with normal vehicular or pedestrian traffic in the area and will
not prevent normal police or fire protection to the public and will not be
likely to cause injury to persons or property or provoke disorderly conduct or
create disturbances; and
   (D)   This section shall not be violated at any time, and no permit, as
contemplated by this subchapter, shall be issued for demonstrations, parades
and such other purposes allowed under this subchapter to be used and exercised
between times deemed inappropriate by said officer issuing permit.
(2004 Code, § 94.38)
§ 94.39 TERMS AND CONDITIONS.
   (A)   A permit issued pursuant to this subchapter may set the starting time
and duration of the parade, demonstration or picket line, and may set the speed
of its travel; the space between persons or vehicles; the portions or areas of
the streets and sidewalks to be used; the length of the parade, group or line
and such other requirements as the issuing officer may include in the permit
for the control of free movement of traffic upon the streets and sidewalks, or
for the health, safety and property rights of the participants and general
public. Failure to comply with such requirements as set forth in the permit
shall be unlawful.
   (B)   A permit for a parade, demonstration or picket line issued under this
subchapter shall also designate the person in charge of the parade,
demonstration and picket line.
(2004 Code, § 94.39) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.40 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL.
   The police officer having authority under this subchapter to issue a permit
shall refuse the permit when the activity or purpose stated in the application
would violate any provision of this code or other ordinance of the town or
statute of the state, or when the activity or purpose would endanger the public
health or safety or hinder or prevent the orderly movement of pedestrian or
vehicular traffic on the streets or sidewalks.
(2004 Code, § 94.40)
§ 94.41 CONDUCT OF PERSONS ENGAGED IN DEMONSTRATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons to shout,
scream, sing or make any other noises with their voices which shall be
unreasonably loud and disturbing to the public in general. By the terms of this
section, it shall be considered that shouting, screaming, singing or the making
of any other noises with voices by any person shall be considered as being
unreasonably loud and disturbing when it can be heard throughout the distance
of three city blocks or 1,200 feet, whichever is the least.
   (B)   Any gathering of persons or any group of persons upon the streets or
sidewalks for the purpose of creating, or which creates mechanical or vocal
sound which is of such intensity or nature as to interfere with the rights of
peaceful occupancy by property owners in the adjoining areas, is unlawful, and
no individual shall participate in, lead, direct or encourage such actions.
   (C)   Nothing provided in this section shall be construed to prevent the
orderly expression of spectators at any regularly organized sport event or the
peaceful assembly of any group for orderly expression or communication between
those assembled.
(2004 Code, § 94.41) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.42 DUTY OF DESIGNATED DEMONSTRATION LEADER.
   The person designated in a permit issued pursuant to this subchapter as
being in charge of the parade, demonstration or picket line shall accompany the
parade, demonstration or picket line and shall carry the permit with him or her
while so accompanying the parade, demonstration or picket line.
(2004 Code, § 94.42)
CHAPTER 95: TREES
Section
General Provisions
   
95.01   Purpose
   
95.02   Definitions
Tree Care; Prohibitions; Licensing
   
95.15   Street tree species
   
95.16   Spacing
   
95.17   Public tree care
   
95.18   Tree topping
   
95.19   Removal of stumps
   
95.20   Interference with Planning Board
   
95.21   License and bond
Administration and Enforcement
   
95.35   Administration by Planning Board
   
95.36    Review by Town Board
 
   
95.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the planting, maintenance and
removal of trees on municipally owned public property and rights-of-way within
the town and on municipally-owned property, wherever located. In order to
protect and conserve trees on public property and rights-of-way, this chapter
provides for the pruning, treatment and removal of trees and shrubs as is
deemed necessary by the town’s Board of Aldermen or a person or board acting
under the authority of the Board of Aldermen. This chapter is also intended to
provide for the trimming or removal of trees on public land when they obscure
street lights, interfere with utility lines or constitute a hazard to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or otherwise endanger the public health, safety
or welfare. It is also the purpose of this chapter to encourage the protection
of trees and express the Town Board’s intent to use trees to create a more
natural and amenable human environment. This chapter is not intended to be
punitive, nor to cause hardship, to any person who uses the upmost care and
diligence to protect trees within the town or on town property.
(2004 Code, § 95.01) (Ord. passed 6-12-2000)
§ 95.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARK TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in public
parks having individual names and all areas owned by the town or to which the
public has free access as a park.
   STREET TREES. Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
lying within rights- of-way on either side of all streets, avenues, ways or
sidewalks within the town.
(2004 Code, § 95.02) (Ord. passed 6-12-2000)
TREE CARE; PROHIBITIONS; LICENSING
§ 95.15 STREET TREE SPECIES.
   The Planning Board shall be responsible for an official street tree species
list comprised of three groups of trees: small trees; medium trees; and large
trees. No trees other than those included in the list may be planted as street
trees without written permission of the Planning Board.
(2004 Code, § 95.15) (Ord. passed 6-12-2000) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.16 SPACING.
   The Planning Board will be responsible for establishing guidelines for the
spacing of town trees in accordance with the three species size classes listed
in §
95.15 of this chapter. The guidelines will cover spacing between trees, the
distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks, the
distance street trees may be planted from any street corner, the location of
trees relative to overhead and underground water lines, sewer lines,
distribution lines, transmission lines or other utilities and any other areas
involving the spacing of street trees, park trees or town-owned trees.
(2004 Code, § 95.16) (Ord. passed 6-12-2000)
§ 95.17 PUBLIC TREE CARE.
   (A)   The town shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues,
lanes, squares and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public safety
or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
   (B)   The Board of Aldermen may remove or cause or order to be removed any
publicly-owned tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by
reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines,
water lines or other public improvements or is infected with any injurious
fungus, insect or pest.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by
adjacent property owners provided that the selection and location of said trees
is in accordance with the guidelines established by the Planning Board and the
Planning Board may reserve the right to approve or disapprove any plantings to
be placed in the rights-of-way of any streets, roads, alleys, avenues, ways or
sidewalks.
(2004 Code, § 95.17) (Ord. passed 6-12-2000)
§ 95.18 TREE TOPPING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful as normal practice, except as described below,
for any person, firm or town department to top any street tree, park tree or
other tree on public property. TOPPING is defined as the severe cutting back of
limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree’s crown to
such a degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
   (B)   Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes or certain trees that
interfere with or are an eminent threat to utility wires or other obstructions
where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this
provision at the determination of the Planning Board.
(2004 Code, § 95.18) (Ord. passed 6-12-2000) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.19 REMOVAL OF STUMPS.
   All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of
the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of
the ground.
(2004 Code, § 95.19) (Ord. passed 6-12-2000) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.20 INTERFERENCE WITH PLANNING BOARD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
Planning Board in its administration and enforcement of this chapter or of any
of its agents while engaging in and about the planting, cultivation, mulching,
pruning, spraying or removing of any street trees, park trees or trees on
public grounds as authorized in this chapter.
(2004 Code, § 95.20) (Ord. passed 6-12-2000) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.21 LICENSE AND BOND.
   No person or firm shall engage in the business or occupation of pruning,
treating or removing street or park trees within the town without first
securing the appropriate business license and obtaining liability insurance in
the minimum amounts of $300,000 for bodily injury and $300,000 property damage;
provided, however, that, no such license shall be required of any public
service company or town employee doing such work in pursuit of his or her
public service endeavors and that no such insurance shall be required of any
town employee doing such work.
(2004 Code, § 95.21) (Ord. passed 6-12-2000) Penalty, see §
95.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 95.35 ADMINISTRATION BY PLANNING BOARD.
   (A)   The Planning Board for the town is hereby invested with full power and
authority to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be the responsibility of the Planning Board to study,
investigate, counsel and develop and/or update bi-annually, and administer a
written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal
or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public
areas. Such plan will be presented bi-annually to the Board of Aldermen and
upon its acceptance and approval shall constitute the official comprehensive
town tree plan.
      (2)   The Planning Board, when requested by the Board of Aldermen, shall
consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend any special matter
or question coming within the scope of its work.
   (C)   The Planning Board shall keep a journal of its proceedings as it
relates to the administration and enforcement of this chapter.
(2004 Code, § 95.35) (Ord. passed 6-12-2000)
§ 95.36 REVIEW BY TOWN BOARD.
   The Board of Aldermen shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and
decisions of the Planning Board in administering and enforcing this chapter.
Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the Planning Board in
administering and enforcing this chapter to the town’s Board of Aldermen which
Board may hear the appeal and make a final decision.
(2004 Code, § 95.36) (Ord. passed 6-12-2000)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon conviction
or plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $100.
(2004 Code, § 95.99) (Ord. passed 6-12-2000)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAXES
      
111.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
      
112.   ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES
      
113.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
CHAPTER 110: PRIVILEGE LICENSE TAXES
Section
   
110.01   Schedule of license taxes
§ 110.01 SCHEDULE OF LICENSE TAXES.
   (A)   The town shall require a license and the payment of taxes as follows:
cyber-gambling establishments:
      (1)   Are any for-profit business or enterprise, whether as a principal
or an accessory use, where persons utilize electronic machines, including, but
not limited to, computers and gaming terminals, to conduct games of chance,
including, but not limited to, sweepstakes, and where cash, merchandise or
other items of value are redeemed or otherwise distributed, whether or not the
value of such distribution is determined by electronic games played or by
predetermined odds; and
      (2)   Such businesses or enterprises have as a part of its operation the
running of one or more games or processes with any of the following
characteristics:
         (a)   Payment, directly or as an intended addition to the purchase of
a product, whereby the customer receives one or more electronic sweepstakes,
tickets, cards, tokens or similar items entitling or empowering the customer to
enter a sweepstakes, and without which item the customer would be unable to
enter the sweepstakes; or
         (b)   Payment, directly or as an intended addition to the purchase of
a product, whereby the customer can request a no purchase necessary free entry
of one or more sweepstakes tickets or other item entitling the customer to
enter a sweepstakes.
   (B)   This term CYBER-GAMBLING ESTABLISHMENTS include, but is not limited
to, internet cafés, internet sweepstakes, video sweepstakes or cybercafés who
have a finite pool of winners. This does not include any lottery endorsed or
permitted by the state.
   (C)   Licenses for cyber-gambling establishments shall be $2,500 per
location and $700 per machine/terminal.
   (D)   This section, as amended, became effective on and after 7-1-2012.
(2004 Code, § 110.16) (Ord. passed - -)
CHAPTER 111: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
111.01   Adoption of state law
   
111.02   Possession in public place
   
111.03   Drinking in public places
   
111.04   Town liquor control store
§ 111.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   The state law regulating intoxicating liquors, as expressly set out in G.S.
Ch. 18B, and any and all other regulations governing the use and sale of
intoxicating liquors, is hereby specifically adopted as if fully set forth
herein.
(2004 Code, § 112.01)
§ 111.02 POSSESSION IN PUBLIC PLACE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or display beer, wine,
whiskey or other alcoholic beverages in or on a street or sidewalk or in a
public place, except as expressly permitted by state statutes.
(2004 Code, § 112.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.03 DRINKING IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, or to offer a drink to
another person or persons of, any alcoholic beverage, as that term is defined
by G.S. § 18B-101, in any public park, parkway, public street, public alleyway,
public sidewalk, public parking area or lot or any other property owned,
controlled or maintained by the town.
   (B)   The terms and provisions of this section shall not apply to the
following locations:
      (1)   Those locations where the state’s Board of Alcoholic Control or any
other duly constituted authority has issued or hereafter issues a permit or
license pursuant to the laws of the state; or
      (2)   Those locations under the supervision and control of the Director
of Parks and Recreation which the Director designates as permitted locations
under such regulations as the Director establishes.
(2004 Code, § 112.03) (Ord. 105, passed - -1980) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04 TOWN LIQUOR CONTROL STORE.
   (A)    As approved by vote of the electorate of the town, a liquor control
store is authorized to operate in the town. Pursuant to Session Law 2017-87,
the sale of malt beverages, fortified and unfortified wine and mixed beverages
in premises permitted pursuant to G.S. § 18B-1001 located with the corporate
limits of the town shall be permitted beginning at 10:00 a.m. on Sunday until
the time limits of G.S. § 18B-1004.
   (B)   The Mayor and the Board of Aldermen hereby create a Town Board of
Alcoholic Beverage Control composed of a Chairperson and two other members. The
Chairperson of the Board shall be designated by the Mayor and governing body of
the town and shall serve for his or her first term a period of three years; one
member shall serve for his or her first term a period of two years and the
other member shall serve for a period of one year. All terms shall begin with
the date of their appointments and, after the terms shall have expired, their
successors in office shall serve for a period of three years. Their successors,
or any vacancy occurring in the Board shall be named or filled by the Mayor and
the governing body of the town.
   (C)   The town’s Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control shall have all the
powers and duties imposed by G.S. § 18B-701 and shall be subject to the powers
and authority of the state’s Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control as provided in
G.S. §§ 18B-200 et seq. The Board of Alcoholic Beverage Control and the
operation of any town liquor stores authorized under the provisions of this
section shall be subject to and in pursuance with the provisions of G.S. Ch.
18B, Art. 7, governing local alcoholic beverage control boards, being G.S. §§
18B-700 et seq.
(2004 Code, § 112.04) (Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 2-5-2018)
CHAPTER 112: ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLES
Section
   
112.01   Permit required
   
112.02   Operating specifications
   
112.03   Route system
   
112.04   Health of animals
   
112.05   Animal working conditions
   
112.06   Use of certain equipment
   
112.07   Water; stall and stable conditions
   
112.08   Supervision of Chief of Police
   
112.09   Removal of animal from service for violation
   
112.10   Condition of vehicles
   
112.11   Trailers
   
112.12   Requirements for drivers
   
112.13   Alcoholic beverages
   
112.14   Insurance coverage
§ 112.01 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle for tours by the general
public without a permit from the Town Clerk. Any violation of the standards set
forth hereinafter in this chapter shall be grounds for suspension or
termination of the permit.
(2004 Code, § 113.01) (Res. passed 5-3-1999)
§ 112.02 OPERATING SPECIFICATIONS.
   Animal-drawn vehicles shall adhere to the following operating specifications
during the hours of operations:
   (A)   Vehicles shall travel in the curb lane, except when passing parked
vehicles or other obstructions which prevent use of the curb lane;
   (B)   Vehicles shall not travel on streets or roads with grades equal to or
greater than 10%;
   (C)   Vehicles shall not stop within the roadway other than at designated
loading and unloading areas except when necessary to avoid conflict with other
traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-
control sign or signal; and
   (D)   Vehicles shall observe all applicable rules of the road as required
for motor vehicles.
(2004 Code, § 113.02) (Res. passed 5-3-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.03 ROUTE SYSTEM.
   (A)   A proposed detailed route system of an animal-drawn vehicle for hire
shall be submitted to the Chief of Police for review, recommendation and
approval. The Chief of Police shall designate streets and hours of the day that
animal-drawn vehicles will be prohibited. A route system shall be submitted for
each vehicle to be placed into operation.
   (B)   This detailed route system shall include the following information:
      (1)   The hours of operation for the vehicle;
      (2)   The days of week the vehicle will be in operation;
      (3)   The duration of the operation during the year; and
      (4)   All locations for loading and unloading passengers.
(2004 Code, § 113.03) (Res. passed 5-3-1999)
§ 112.04 HEALTH OF ANIMALS.
   No animal shall be permitted to pull any vehicle for hire unless the animal
is in good health and meets at least the following requirements.
   (A)   The animal must be at least 30 months old.
   (B)   The animal must weigh no less than 900 pounds.
   (C)   The animal shall have no open sores or wounds, shall not be lame or
have any other ailment. Any animal found to have an ailment shall not be used
without the approval of a licensed veterinarian.
   (D)   The animal must be groomed daily and shall not have fungus, dirty coat
or show symptoms of illness or irritation.
   (E)   The animal must have adequate flesh and muscle tone. The ribs showing
on the animal must be no deeper than one-fourth inch.
   (F)   The animal must be no more than six months’ pregnant.
(2004 Code, § 113.04) (Res. passed 5-3-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.05 ANIMAL WORKING CONDITIONS.
   (A)   No animal used, as provided in this chapter, shall be worked under any
of the following conditions, and any owner allowing conditions to exist shall
be found in violation of this chapter:
      (1)   The animal or combination of animals shall not pull any combined
weight, including passengers and driver in excess of two times the animals’
body weight. No animal or combination of animals shall pull any vehicle which
is occupied by a number of persons which exceeds such vehicle’s normal safe-
seating capacity;
      (2)   No animal shall work more than ten hours in any 24-hour period and
shall have at least one 20-minute rest break or two ten-minute rest breaks per
hour;
      (3)   The animal pulling a vehicle for hire shall not move at a speed
faster than a slow trot;
      (4)   The animal shall not work more than 50 hours in any seven-day
period and no more than five consecutive days;
      (5)   The animal shall not be worked with equipment, other than normal
blinders, which causes an impairment of vision; and
      (6)   The animal shall not be subjected to any condition or treatment
which will impair the good health and physical condition of the animal.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, working hours of animals shall include
time spent on rest breaks and all time the animals are available for hire.
(2004 Code, § 113.05) (Res. passed 5-3-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.06 USE OF CERTAIN EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Use of harness. 
      (1)   No animal will be worked without a padded saddle or bit.
      (2)   The harness must be oiled and cleaned so as to be soft at all
times.
      (3)   The harness will be properly fitted and maintained and kept free of
makeshift materials such as wire, sisal rope and hazardous rusty chain.
   (B)   Use of whips. No driver of an animal-drawn vehicle may whip an animal
with more than a light touch by a light whip.
   (C)   Apron bags. No animal shall pull a vehicle for hire unless such animal
is wearing an apron bag (manure catcher). Apron bags must be properly fitting
and constructed of sturdy material to ensure the comfort of the animal and
complete waste disposal.
   (D)   Shoes. No animal shall be used to pull a vehicle for hire without
properly fitting shoes on each properly trimmed hoof. Should an animal throw a
shoe during its shift, the hoof must be examined by the driver and any nails
removed. If the animal’s hoof is grown more than one-fourth inch from the
quick, the horse may complete the shift, but must be shod prior to the next day
shift.
(2004 Code, § 113.06) (Res. passed 5-3-1999; Ord. passed 2-5-2018) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 112.07 WATER; STALL AND STABLE CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Water. Adequate water for animals pulling vehicles for hire will be
provided in the stables at all times and in working areas as often as needed
and as climate and working conditions require.
   (B)   Stalls and stables. 
      (1)   Ventilation and fresh air shall be provided in stalls housing
animals used to pull vehicles for hire so as to minimize drafts, odors and
moisture condensation.
      (2)   Ceilings in stalls and stables must be at least ten feet high from
bedding flooring.
      (3)   Bedding in stalls and stables shall be highly absorbent and
comfortable, if in direct contact with the animal, and shall be provided as
follows:
         (a)   Bedding shall be deep enough so as not to show wetness under the
pressure of the animal;
         (b)   Bedding so used shall not be a type that will harm or in anyway
be a discomfort to the animal;
         (c)   Bedding shall be deep enough to provide warmth to the animal;
         (d)   Surfaces, including floors, with bedding shall be free of odor
and waste and shall be cleaned and disinfected regularly;
         (e)   Stalls and stables shall be structurally sound and maintained in
good repair to protect the animals from injury and to contain them;
         (f)   Stalls and stable floors or surfaces shall be constructed and
maintained to protect the animals feet and legs from injury;
         (g)   Stalls and stables shall be constructed and maintained so as to
enable animals to remain dry and clean;
         (h)   Stalls shall be constructed and maintained to provide sufficient
space to allow each animal to turn about freely and to easily stand, sit or lie
in a comfortable, normal position;
         (i)   Stalls and stables shall be constructed and maintained so that
the animals contained therein have easy access to food and water, and such food
and water shall be kept free of contamination; and
         (j)   Stalls and stables shall be kept sanitary and receive periodic
cleaning to remove feces and other waste materials, including trash and dirt so
as to minimize disease hazards and reduce odors.
(2004 Code, § 113.07) (Res. passed 5-3-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.08 SUPERVISION OF CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   Whenever any animal-drawn vehicle is operated for commercial purposes
to provide rides to the general public, the fitness of the animal and its
humane treatment shall be under the supervision of the Chief of Police who
shall have power to determine:
      (1)   Physical fitness of the animal and limitation of work and
conditions of work;
      (2)   Condition and fitness of the harness;
      (3)   Care and treatment of such animals; and
      (4)   Emergency conditions of animals if unfit to pull vehicles for hire.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall inspect any such animals at least once every
three months and may delegate the duties of the Chief of Police hereunder to
other qualified agents.
(2004 Code, § 113.08) (Res. passed 5-3-1999)
§ 112.09 REMOVAL OF ANIMAL FROM SERVICE FOR VIOLATION.
   (A)   Upon discovery of a violation of any section of this chapter relating
to animal-drawn vehicles for hire, the Chief of Police may issue an order to
the person responsible for the violation, requiring removal of the subject
animal from service.
   (B)   No animal which has been removed from service for violation of this
section shall be returned to service until the animal has been inspected by the
Chief of Police or his or her designees and approved for return to service in
writing.
   (C)   Any person who refuses to comply with the order of the Chief of
Police, or he or she complies with the order and returns the animal to service
before being inspected or approved by the Chief of Police, shall be subject to
revocation of its authority to operate a commercial animal-drawn vehicle.
(2004 Code, § 113.09) (Res. passed 5-3-1999)
§ 112.10 CONDITION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   Vehicles for hire pulled by animals must be properly lubricated and
wheels must spin freely. Such vehicles for hire must be inspected and approved
in writing for service by the Chief of Police every 12 months and are subject
to removal from service pending repair and re-inspection.
   (B)   Animal-drawn vehicles operated commercially for hire by the general
public shall conform to the following vehicle specifications.
      (1)   The wheel base shall be equal to or less than 14 feet.
      (2)   The total overall length of the vehicle shall be equal to or less
than 28 feet.
      (3)   The maximum overall width shall be equal to or less than 78 inches.
      (4)   The tires shall be rubber or other resilient materials. Metal tires
shall be prohibited.
      (5)   Vehicles shall be equipped with hydraulic brakes.
      (6)   The vehicle shall be drawn by no more than two animals.
      (7)   Vehicles shall be equipped with one red light on each outer
extremity of the rear of the vehicle body, mounted between two and five feet
above the road surface. Similarly mounted yellow lights shall be mounted on the
front of the vehicle body. Each light shall be no less than four inches in
diameter. Vehicles shall also be equipped with a slow moving vehicle emblem.
      (8)   Vehicles shall have canopy protection from sun and rain.
      (9)   Vehicles shall be reasonably accessible to disabled passengers.
(2004 Code, § 113.10) (Res. passed 5-3-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.11 TRAILERS.
   Any trailer or vehicle involved in transporting animals governed in this
chapter must be in good working order and must be near the working location to
provide speedy removal of any animal in an emergency situation.
(2004 Code, § 113.11) (Res. passed 5-3-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.12 REQUIREMENTS FOR DRIVERS.
   Drivers of animal-drawn vehicles shall comply with the following.
   (A)   Drivers must have a working knowledge and general experience involving
livestock and driving carriages or animal-drawn vehicles.
   (B)   Drivers must be 18 years of age or older.
(2004 Code, § 113.12) (Res. passed 5-3-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.13 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   (A)   No driver shall operate an animal-drawn vehicle while under the
influence of alcohol, controlled substances, or prescription drugs that may
impair the driver.
   (B)   Passengers who are visibly under the influence of alcohol or
controlled substances shall not be permitted to ride.
   (C)   No person shall consume alcohol or controlled substances while
operating or riding in an animal- drawn vehicle.
(2004 Code, § 113.13) (Res. passed 5-3-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.14 INSURANCE COVERAGE.
   Businesses operating animal-drawn vehicles shall maintain insurance coverage
for the protection of drivers, passengers and other users of the public
roadways in an amount not less than $250,000. Proof of insurance shall be
provided to the Town Clerk annually.
(2004 Code, § 113.14) (Res. passed 5-3-1999)
CHAPTER 113: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Registration
Statutory reference:
   Regulation of solicitations and itinerant merchants authorized, see G.S. §
160A-178
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. Any person who transports goods from place to place and sells or
offers for sale the goods, or who, without traveling from place to place, sells
or offers for sale any goods from any vehicle or device; provided that, any
person who separates the acts of sale and delivery for the purpose of evading
the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a PEDDLER.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels from place to place taking or offering to
take orders for the sale of goods for future delivery or for personal services
to be performed in the future, whether or not samples are displayed or money is
collected in advance, and any person who uses or occupies any building or
premises for the sole purpose of taking or offering to take orders for the sale
of goods for future delivery or for personal services to be performed in the
future, whether or not samples are displayed or money is collected in advance.
   TRANSIENT VENDOR. Any person who engages in a temporary business of selling
and delivering goods and who, for this purpose, uses or occupies any building
or premises; provided that, no person shall be relieved from complying with the
provisions of this chapter merely by conducting a transient business in
association with any permanently established merchant.
(2004 Code, § 115.01)
§ 113.02 REGISTRATION.
   Each and every person doing business in the town as a peddler, solicitor, or
transient vendor shall file with the Clerk, on a form to be provided for the
purpose, a statement setting forth the following information:
   (A)   Name and address of individual filing the statement;
   (B)   Name and address of principal or employer if individual is an agent or
employee;
   (C)   Credentials showing relationship of agent or employee;
   (D)   Description of individual filing statement including height, weight,
sex, age, color, and distinguishing characteristics, if any;
   (E)   The goods to be sold or offered for sale, or the type of services to
be rendered;
   (F)   The period of time during which the business will be carried on in the
town; and
   (G)   Description of automobile or other vehicle to be used in the business,
including the make, model, body style, color and license number.
(2004 Code, § 115.02) (Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Weapons
   
130.02   Injuring town property
   
130.03   Damaging police property
   
130.04   Littering
   
130.05   Offenses against the public peace
   
130.06   Unnecessary noise
   
130.07   Disturbing public meetings
   
130.08   Abandoned refrigerators
   
130.09   Indecent exposure
   
130.10   Impersonating town officers
   
130.11   Obstruction of public ways prohibited
   
130.12   Begging and panhandling
§ 130.01 WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall shoot or discharge, within the corporate limits of the
town, any firearms, guns, rifles, pistols, air rifles, spring guns or
compressed air rifle or pistol, or other similar device or weapon which impels
or discharges with force any bullet, shot or pellet of any kind; provided,
however, that, this section shall not apply to any law enforcement officer of
any governmental unit, or representative of any governmental agency or body,
charged with the duties of protecting life or property, or enforcing laws and
regulations while engaged in the performance of his or her official duty. It is
further provided that this section shall not apply in defending one’s self or
property, or the safety and property of others; and, provided further that,
this section shall not apply to a firing range operated or supervised by an
individual, club or organization for educational or sporting purposes, if the
firing range shall have been first inspected and approved by the Police
Department.
   (B)   The Chief of Police, or any member of the Police Department, is hereby
authorized to seize, hold and confiscate, subject to order of the court, any
such firearm, weapon, air rifle or similar device mentioned in division (A)
above, which shall be shot, or discharged within the town in violation of this
section.
(2004 Code, § 130.01) (Ord. 105, passed 10-19-1970) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.02 INJURING TOWN PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful to injure, damage, deface, trespass upon, break or
injure any property belonging to the town.
(2004 Code, § 130.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.03 DAMAGING POLICE PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully take, damage or in any way
interfere or tamper with Police Department vehicles and equipment or any other
property belonging to or used by the Police Department.
(2004 Code, § 130.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.04 LITTERING.
   (A)   Littering prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or
deposit on any street or sidewalk, or at any place along the banks of the
Tuckaseigee River within the town limits, or on any private property, except
with written permission of the owner or occupant of the private property, any
trash, refuse, garbage, building material, cans, bottles, broken glass, paper
or any type of litter.
   (B)   Littering from vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person while a
driver or a passenger in a vehicle to throw or deposit litter on any street or
other public place within the town, or at any place along the banks of the
Tuckaseigee River within the town limits, or on private property.
   (C)   Maintenance of public areas. Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or
other person in charge of any commercial establishment or premises which
maintains any paved or unpaved areas for the use of the public, either for
parking or as access areas and incident to the carrying on of the principal
business of any commercial establishment or premises and which parking or
access areas abut or lie within ten feet of any public street or other public
way, shall keep and maintain the areas clean and free from trash, litter,
rubbish and any materials liable to be blown, deposited or cast on the street
or other public way.
   (D)   Receptacles.
      (1)   Suitable receptacles may be provided in parking or access areas
within the meaning of division (C) above.
      (2)   The receptacles shall be plainly marked and constructed to prevent
scattering of any trash, litter, rubbish or other materials deposited therein.
   (E)   Property bordering running streams to be kept clean. All persons
owning property on either side of any running stream shall keep said stream
free from any obstruction whatsoever, and any owner allowing any obstruction to
remain, or any person throwing or placing any obstruction into running streams
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(2004 Code, § 130.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.05 OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE.
   It is intended by this section to prohibit the commission of, and to provide
punishment pursuant to §
10.99 of this code, for the following specific acts:
   (A)   Disturbing the peace;
   (B)   Resisting arrest and resisting any officer of the town in the lawful
performance of his or her duties;
   (C)   Assembling for purposes of gambling;
   (D)   Committing a breach of the peace;
   (E)   Violent or boisterous conduct calculated to disturb the peace and
quiet of other persons;
   (F)   Making unusual or unnecessary noises calculated to disturb the peace
and good order;
   (G)   Committing riotous acts;
   (H)   Maliciously interfering with pedestrians or traffic; and
   (I)   Indecent acts in the presence of others.
(2004 Code, § 130.05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.06 UNNECESSARY NOISE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to create, or assist in creating,
permit, continue or permit the continuance of any unreasonably loud, disturbing
and unnecessary noise in the town. Noise of such character, intensity and
duration as to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual is
prohibited.
   (B)   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing
and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but the enumeration shall
not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
      (1)   The sounding of any horn or signal device or any device on any
automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a
danger signal if another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or
if in motion only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and
deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any such
signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of such
device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
      (2)   The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle, other than police,
fire or other emergency vehicle;
      (3)   The use or operation of any piano, manual or automatic, phonograph,
radio, loudspeaker or any other instrument, or sound amplifying devices so
loudly as to disturb persons in the vicinity thereof, or in such a manner as
renders the same a public nuisance, however, on application to the Mayor,
permits may be granted to responsible organizations to produce programs in
music, speeches or general entertainment;
      (4)   The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long
continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the
vicinity;
      (5)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of
repair or so loaded in such manner as to create loud or unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling or other noise;
      (6)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler,
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of
danger;
      (7)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, except through a
muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises
therefrom;
      (8)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air unless
the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced;
      (9)   The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or
repair of any building in a residential or business district other than between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in the case of urgent
necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the
Building Inspector, which permit may be renewed for a period of three days or
less while the emergency continues;
      (10)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
school, institution of learning or court while the same are in session, or
within 150 feet of any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the working
of such institution, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets
indicating that the same is a school, court or hospital street;
      (11)   The creation of any excessive noise on Sundays on any street
adjacent to any church; provided, conspicuous signs are displayed in such
streets adjacent to churches indicating that the same is a church street;
      (12)   The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with
loading or unloading of any vehicle, or the opening and destruction of bales,
boxes, crates and containers;
      (13)   The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or
premises which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof;
      (14)   The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers and vendors
which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood; or anyone shouting
within the corporate limits so as to disturb the peace and quiet of the
neighborhood;
      (15)   The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance,
show, sale or display of merchandise;
      (16)   The use of any mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or
other moving vehicles for advertising purposes or other purposes, except where
specific license is received from the Board of Aldermen; and
      (17)   The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or filling
station in any residential district, so as to cause loud or offensive noises to
be emitted therefrom between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(2004 Code, § 130.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate noises, see G.S. § 160A-184
§ 130.07 DISTURBING PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   It shall be unlawful to behave in a boisterous or indecent manner or to
create any disturbance at or near any public entertainment or meeting.
(2004 Code, § 130.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.08 ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, keep, leave or maintain
in any location accessible to children any abandoned, unused or discarded
iceboxes, refrigerators or other containers having an air- tight door and being
equipped with a lock, clasp or snaplock or other device securing the doors
which, when so secured, may not be released or opened from the inside of such
iceboxes, refrigerators or other containers.
   (B)   However, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any icebox,
refrigerator or other container from which the door-securing device has been
removed or rendered inoperative, nor shall the provisions hereof apply to any
such icebox, refrigerator or other container which has been so secured by
locking or chaining or otherwise as to prevent the opening thereof, or if
opened, the closing thereof.
(2004 Code, § 130.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.09 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully expose his or her person or
private parts in the presence of one or more persons, or to take part in any
immoral show, exhibition or performance where indecent, immoral or lewd dances
or plays are conducted.
(2004 Code, § 130.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.10 IMPERSONATING TOWN OFFICERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to wear a badge or emblem purporting to
signify his or her authority to otherwise purport to act as an officer of the
town, unless he or she has been duly given such right by the proper town
authorities.
(2004 Code, § 130.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.11 OBSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC WAYS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to obstruct the streets,
sidewalks, crossings or any other public way within the town limits.
(2004 Code, § 130.12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.12 BEGGING AND PANHANDLING.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      BEG, SOLICIT or PANHANDLE. Use of the spoken, written or printed word or
other acts as are conducted in the furtherance of the purpose of immediately
collecting contributions for the use of one’s self or others. As used in this
section, the word SOLICIT, and its forms, includes BEGGING and PANHANDLING.
      SIGNALED INTERSECTIONS. The intersections of all streets within the town,
which are controlled by a lighted traffic-control device or devices.
   (B)   Prohibited acts.
      (1)   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to beg, solicit of
panhandle upon a public street at any signaled intersection within the town:
            1.   After dark, which shall mean one-half hour after sunset until
one-half hour before sunrise;
            2.   Without wearing a safety vest with reflective coloration;
            3.   Without wearing an identification tag reflecting the
identification of the beneficiary of the solicited funds;
            4.   Without being over the age of 18 years; and/or
            5.   Without having secured from the Chief of Police of the town,
or his or her designee, a solicitation permit. Such permit must include the
name, address and telephone number of the organization or person to be
benefitted by the solicited funds and verification that said organization or
person is a tax exempt organization or person.
         (b)   Further, there shall be only one solicitor in any one lane of
travel at any one time at any such signaled intersection.
      (2)   Additional restrictions applicable to high traffic zones: the
signaled intersections at the intersections of Main Street and Everett Street,
Main Street and Veteran’s Boulevard and Highway 19 West (Main Street) and Slope
Street within the town, and that portion of said intersecting streets lying
within 100 yards of said intersections are high traffic zones.
      (3)   In addition to the restrictions set forth in division (B)(1) above,
it shall be unlawful for any person to beg, solicit or panhandle within any
high traffic zone.
(Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE
      
152.   MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
      
153.   SIGNS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
Adoption of Regulatory Codes by Reference
   
150.01   Purpose
   
150.02   Application of Swain County Building Code Ordinance
   
150.03   Maximum structure height
ADOPTION OF REGULATORY CODES BY REFERENCE
§ 150.01 PURPOSE.
   In order to meet its duties and responsibilities for building code
enforcement, the Town Council hereby enacts this chapter to promote the public
health, safety and welfare of all persons who live, work, visit and do business
in the town.
(Ord. 7-7-25, passed 7-8-2025; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
§ 150.02 APPLICATION OF SWAIN COUNTY BUILDING CODE ORDINANCE.
   As authorized by G.S. Chapter 153A, Article 6, and Chapter 160D, Article 11,
the Swain County Building Code applies within the corporate limits of the town.
(Ord. 7-7-25, passed 7-8-2025; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
§ 150.03 MAXIMUM STRUCTURE HEIGHT.
   The maximum height for any structure erected within the corporate limits of
the town shall not exceed 55 feet above ground level. This chapter does not
apply to structures erected prior to the effective date of this chapter.
Editor’s note:
   This section was approved March 1, 2021
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE
Section
   
151.01   Purpose
   
151.02   Application of Swain County Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance
§ 151.01 PURPOSE.
   In order to meet its obligation to adopt, implement and enforce a Flood
Damage Prevention Ordinance (FDPO) that meets or exceeds the minimum standards
of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) standards and to protect the
property and residents of the town, the Town Council hereby enacts this chapter
to promote the public health, safety and welfare of all persons who live, work,
visit and do business in the town.
(Ord. 7-7-252, passed 7-8-2025; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
§ 151.02 APPLICATION OF SWAIN COUNTY FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE.
   By town resolution dated July ____, 2025, and as authorized by G.S. Chapter
153A, Article 6, the County Code of Ordinances, the Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance, applies within the corporate limits of the town fully and without
exception.
(Ord. 7-7-252, passed 7-8-2025; Ord. 9-2-2025-1, passed 10-20-2025)
CHAPTER 152: MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Statutory authorization
   
152.02   Statement of purpose
   
152.03   Jurisdiction
   
152.04   Exceptions to applicability
   
152.05   Definitions
Design Standards
   
152.20   Manufactured home park classifications
   
152.21   Class I manufactured home parks
   
152.22   Class II manufactured home parks
   
152.23   Class III manufactured home parks
   
152.24   Buffer strip screen defined
   
152.25   General provisions
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.40   Ordinance Administrator
   
152.41   Required approval
   
152.42   Application for manufactured home park construction permit
   
152.43   Application for manufactured home park occupancy permit
   
152.44   Administrative review, variances and appeals
   
152.45   Notice of non-compliance
 
   
152.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The legislature of the state has, in G.S. § 160A-174, delegated the
responsibility to local governments of promoting the public health, safety and
general welfare.
(2004 Code, § 152.01) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
§ 152.02 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the proper and orderly
development of manufactured home parks in the town. Manufactured homes are an
important housing alternative to conventional single- family structures. The
placement of manufactured homes in parks or clustered groups is a means of
providing this housing in an attractive and affordable setting. These
regulations are designed to ensure that manufactured home parks promote the
health, safety and welfare of their residents and do not create negative
impacts on adjoining properties.
(2004 Code, § 152.02) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
§ 152.03 JURISDICTION.
   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all areas of the town.
(2004 Code, § 152.03) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
§ 152.04 EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   It is not intended that these regulations interfere with any easement,
covenant or other agreement between the parties. However, if these regulations
impose greater restrictions or higher standards for the use of a building or
land, then these regulations shall control.
   (B)   Manufactured home parks existing at the time of the original adoption
of this chapter, 11-4-1996, with spaces completed, ready for occupancy and/or
occupied are exempt from the terms of this chapter. However, the manufactured
home parks shall not be allowed to expand or increase in any manner unless the
manufactured home parks meet the requirements of this chapter. Upon expansion
it is the intent of this chapter that the entire manufactured home park, not
just the expanded portion, shall be subject to the terms of this chapter.
Furthermore, the classification within which the manufactured home park falls
will be determined by the number of spaces/sites within the park, not just the
expanded portion. Additionally, in the event that one or more manufactured
homes in any such park existing as of 11-4-1996 is removed from the park or is
destroyed by fire or other casualty, such home may not be replaced unless the
park meets the requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   The issuance of a manufactured home park permit or occupancy permit
does not constitute or imply the acceptance, dedication or maintenance of any
street or other ground easement, utility line or other facility by the town.
(2004 Code, § 152.04) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
§ 152.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A detached manufactured housing unit built on a chassis,
with a body exceeding eight feet in width and a body length of at least 32
feet; that said residential dwelling unit shall be designed for transportation
after fabrication on its own wheels or flatbeds, or other trailers, and
arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling unit complete and
ready for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, including, but not limited to, location on jacks or other temporary
or permanent foundations, and connection to utilities. Single-section, multi-
section and modular housing units shall be considered as MANUFACTURED HOMES;
however, recreation vehicles and campers shall not be considered a MANUFACTURED
HOME.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Any plot of ground, regardless of its size or the
number of contiguous tracts within which it may have been subdivided, upon
which three or more manufactured homes, manufactured home sites or combination
thereof, are located and available for rent or lease for dwelling or sleeping
purpose.
(2004 Code, § 152.05) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 152.20 MANUFACTURED HOME PARK CLASSIFICATIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, three manufactured home park
classifications have been established as follows:
   (A)   Class I. Parks with at least three manufactured homes, but less that
ten;
   (B)   Class II. Parks with at least ten manufactured homes, but less than
25; and
   (C)   Class III. Parks with 25 or more manufactured homes.
(2004 Code, § 152.20) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
§ 152.21 CLASS I MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS.
   Class I manufactured home parks shall comply with the following design
standards.
   (A)   Roads and drainage. Interior roads shall be constructed with drainage
systems that prevent water from standing or pooling in the road or its shoulder
or with minimum construction standards for secondary roads, as adopted by the
state’s Division of Highways.
   (B)   Utilities.
      (1)   An accessible, adequate, safe and potable supply of water shall be
provided in accordance with the standards of the Water Supply Branch of the
state’s Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources and/or the
county’s Health Department.
      (2)   An adequate and safe sewage disposal facility shall be provided in
accordance with the standards of the Division of Environmental Management of
the state’s Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources and/or the
county’s Health Department.
   (C)   Lots, unit sites, buffers and setbacks.
      (1)   Each manufactured home shall have an identification number at least
four inches high and placed in a conspicuous location that is clearly visible
from the access road.
      (2)   Any portion of a proposed manufactured home park that is within 200
feet from an existing residence and visible from the residence (other than that
of the park owner) shall be screened from view with a buffer strip along the
property line facing the residence. The buffer requirement may be satisfied by
existing natural vegetation meeting the intent of this chapter; provided that,
the natural vegetation is owned by the manufactured home park owner. If the
said existing residence is elevated above the proposed park to the extent that
a mature natural or planted tree buffer would not screen the residence, the
Ordinance Administrator may waive this requirement.
      (3)   At least two automobile parking spaces shall be provided for each
manufactured home site. Additions to individual manufactured homes or other
improvements to property shall not interfere with minimum parking requirements.
No portion of the required spaces shall be within a street right-of-way or in
any other designated setback area.
      (4)   Manufactured home setbacks:
         (a)   Setbacks from boundary lines: 15 feet, except when adjacent
property is owned by the same person or entity owning the manufactured home
park;
         (b)   Front and rear of each manufactured home: at least 30 feet
setback between units;
         (c)   The ends of each manufactured home: at least 30 feet between
other manufactured homes; and
         (d)   Unenclosed porches and decks may protrude into the setback
requirements a maximum of eight feet wide and maximum length of one half the
length of the wall of the mobile home. This does not limit the maximum length
or width of porches or decks that do not protrude into the setback
requirements.
      (5)   The elevation of the first habitable floor of all structures in the
100-year floodplain shall be above the base flood elevation in accordance with
Ch. 151 of this code of ordinances.
      (6)   The surface area adjacent to the foundation shall be provided with
adequate drainage and shall be graded so as to drain surface water away from
foundation walls in accordance with the regulations of manufactured/mobile
homes.
      (7)   Each manufactured home, upon being installed on a manufactured home
foundation, shall have stabilizing devices made up of a combination of ties,
anchoring equipment and ground anchors in accordance with regulations for
manufactured/mobile homes and Ch. 151 of this code of ordinances.
      (8)   Manufactured homes shall be underpinned within 90 days of
installation or within 90 days of expansion of a manufactured home park that
causes said park to come within the terms of this chapter.
      (9)   If a manufactured home burns and is uninhabitable, the unit and all
associated debris shall be removed from the premises within 90 days after the
fire.
(2004 Code, § 152.21) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
§ 152.22 CLASS II MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS.
   Class II manufactured home parks shall comply with the requirements for
Class I manufactured home parks, plus the following design standards: interior
roads shall be constructed with an all-weather surface that is at least 12 feet
wide and with at least a four-foot shoulder on each side of the road that is
free of any obstruction and can allow easy passage of emergency vehicles.
(2004 Code, § 152.22) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
§ 152.23 CLASS III MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS.
   Class III manufactured home parks shall comply with the requirements for
Class I and Class II manufactured home parks, plus the following design
standards.
   (A)   Interior roads shall be constructed with the following additional
standards.
      (1)   Permanent dead end streets or cul-de-sac streets shall have a bulb
or other suitable means for vehicles to turn around at the closed end. Bulbs
shall have a diameter of at least 40 feet.
      (2)   All roads or portions thereof with a slope of 15% or greater shall
be paved with asphalt or concrete.
   (B)   All parks shall either have at least 30 feet of frontage on a state
maintained road or provide access to the park through adjoining properties,
consistent with the terms of this chapter, under a joint maintenance agreement
recorded with the county’s Register of Deeds.
(2004 Code, § 152.23) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
§ 152.24 BUFFER STRIP SCREEN DEFINED.
   (A)   (1)   Buffer strip screens shall be free of all encroachments by
buildings, parking areas or impervious coverage and may incorporate trees,
shrubs, walls, fences, beams and/or other natural or created topographic
features.
      (2)   However, the Ordinance Administrator may require the use of trees
when neighboring residences are elevated due to topography.
   (B)   Shrubs and/or trees may be used as natural screening; provided that,
when trees are used, only varieties which bear limbs and foliage down to within
one foot of ground level shall be allowed.
   (C)   Trees installed as a planted screen shall be evergreen and of a
variety which are a minimum height of three feet when planted and which can be
expected to reach a height of at least six feet within four years of planting.
   (D)   Shrubs shall be a minimum of three feet at planting and expected to
reach six feet within four years.
   (E)   Walls or fences shall be opaque and shall be a minimum of six feet in
height as measured from the ground up along the adjoining property line.
   (F)   Grasses and/or landscaped berms or other topographic features may be
used as screening provided that such screening reaches a height of at least six
feet within three years of its establishment. All soil slopes shall be
stabilized and vegetated.
(2004 Code, § 152.24) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
§ 152.25 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   (1)   All manufactured home parks shall post a permanent and clearly
visible identification sign at each park entrance.
      (2)   Signs shall be constructed of materials that will not rapidly
deteriorate, fade, fall apart or in any way become a hazard to the public
health, safety and general welfare.
   (B)   (1)   The owner/operator of a manufactured home park that rents spaces
and/or homes is responsible for the maintenance of the park and the enforcement
of all restrictions, setbacks and parking requirements.
      (2)   The manufactured home park owner/operator shall record an
enforceable operation and maintenance agreement with the county’s Register of
Deeds office.
(2004 Code, § 152.25) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.40 ORDINANCE ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Mayor shall assign the responsibility of administering and enforcing
this chapter to the appropriate personnel of the county, who shall be referred
to as the Ordinance Administrator.
(2004 Code, § 152.40) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
§ 152.41 REQUIRED APPROVAL.
   Manufactured home parks shall not be established, altered or expanded until
a construction permit has been issued by the Ordinance Administrator and said
improvements shall not be occupied until an occupancy permit has been issued.
(2004 Code, § 152.41) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
§ 152.42 APPLICATION FOR MANUFACTURED HOME PARK CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   (A)   Application for a manufactured home park construction permit shall be
available at the office of the Ordinance Administrator during normal business
hours. In addition to information requested on this form, the Ordinance
Administrator may request additional information to insure a thorough and
complete review of the application.
   (B)   The Ordinance Administrator shall dispose of the completed application
within five business days of its receipt as noted by the initials and date of
the Ordinance Administrator on the application form. However, a request for
additional information shall suspend this time requirement until the requested
information has been accepted by the Ordinance Administrator as complete.
   (C)   The Ordinance Administrator shall either approve or deny the
application as presented. If approved, the Ordinance Administrator shall issue
a manufactured home park construction permit without delay. If denied, the
Ordinance Administrator shall issue a letter to the applicant stating that the
application has been denied and referencing the reasons for this decision. The
Administrator shall also explain the specific corrections or steps that need to
be taken by the applicant in order for a construction permit to be issued.
   (D)   Upon the issuance of a construction permit, the permittee may make the
specified improvements. Any deviation from the approved plans shall require
approval from the Ordinance Administrator.
   (E)   Manufactured home park construction permits shall be valid for two
years.
(2004 Code, § 152.42) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
§ 152.43 APPLICATION FOR MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OCCUPANCY PERMIT.
   (A)   Upon the completion of all improvements authorized under the
manufactured home park construction permit, the applicant shall call the
Ordinance Administrator and request an inspection.
   (B)   (1)   The Ordinance Administrator shall inspect the improvements
within two business days of the request and shall be prepared to issue an
occupancy permit on-site at the time of the inspection if all improvements have
been made in accordance with the approved plans.
      (2)   If the Ordinance Administrator finds that the improvements are not
consistent with the approved plans and the terms of this chapter, the
Administrator shall also explain the specific corrections or steps that need to
be taken by the applicant in order for this occupancy permit to be issued. The
Administrator shall inspect as outlined in this section.
   (C)   Manufactured home park occupancy permits shall be valid until such
time that the park no longer meets the definition of a manufactured home park,
plus 90 days.
(2004 Code, § 152.43) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
§ 152.44 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW, VARIANCES AND APPEALS.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Aldermen shall hear and decide appeals from any
decisions or determinations made by the Ordinance Administrator. Appeals shall
be submitted in writing to the Ordinance Administrator within 30 days of the
decision or determination and shall be heard by the Board in a timely fashion.
      (2)   Appeals may be made by the owner/operator of the park, the
occupants of the park and/or the owner of any residence within 200 feet of the
park.
   (B)   The Board of Aldermen shall have the power to authorize variances from
the terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where,
owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of this chapter will result
in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this
chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured and substantial
justice done.
      (1)   A request for variance shall be made in writing and shall fully
detail the proposal together with any pertinent information which the applicant
feels would be helpful in considering the request.
      (2)   A request for variance shall be heard by the Board within 45 days
of its receipt by the Ordinance Administrator.
      (3)   Where a request for variance concerns the buffer requirements from
adjoining residential property, the Ordinance Administrator shall send a copy
of the proposed request and a notice specifying the time, date and location of
the hearing to the effected property owners within 30 days of the hearing date.
      (4)   Where a request for variance concerns the expansion and/or
redevelopment of an existing manufactured home park, the Ordinance
Administrator shall send a copy of the proposed request and a notice specifying
the time, date and location of the hearing to the occupants of the park within
30 days of the hearing date.
      (5)   A variance shall be issued if the Board finds all of the following:
         (a)   Such waiver and/or modification will be in harmony with the
purpose and intent of this chapter and will not be injurious to the surrounding
area or to the general public;
         (b)   There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to
the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or
topography that are not applicable to other lands or structures;
         (c)   The special circumstances are not the result of the action of
the applicant; and
         (d)   In granting of the waiver and/or modification, the public safety
and welfare have been assured and substantial justice has been done.
   (C)   Appeals from the Board of Aldermen shall be filed with the county’s
Superior Court within 30 days from the date of the decision.
(2004 Code, § 152.44) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
§ 152.45 NOTICE OF NON-COMPLIANCE.
   If the Ordinance Administrator finds that a manufactured home park is not in
compliance with the terms of this chapter, the Administrator shall issue a
letter to the owner/operator of the park describing the violation and listing
all corrections that need to be made to bring the park into compliance.
Corrections shall be made within 30 days of mailing of the letter. If the
corrections have not been made within the specified time period, the Ordinance
Administrator shall issue a notice of non-compliance which shall remain in
effect until the park is in compliance with the terms of this chapter. A notice
of non-compliance shall prevent the issuance of any permit by the town to the
manufactured home park owner/operator and thus prevent the park’s expansion
and/or redevelopment.
(2004 Code, § 152.45) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with G.S. §
14-4. The maximum fine for each offense shall not exceed $500. Each day that
the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   If the Board of Aldermen finds that any person has violated the
provisions of this chapter, it may, in addition to all other remedies available
either in law or in equity, institute a civil penalty in the amount of $50 per
violation; act or proceed to restrain, correct or abate the violation; prevent
occupancy of buildings, structures or land; or prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business or use in or about the premises. Each day that the violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(2004 Code, § 152.99) (Ord. passed 9-18-2000)
CHAPTER 153: SIGNS
Section
   
153.01   Title
   
153.02   Purpose
   
153.03   Applicability
   
153.04   Non-conforming signs; amortization
   
153.05   Administrator; flexibility
   
153.06   Definitions
   
153.07   Permits required
   
153.08   Signs exempt from chapter
   
153.09   Signs prohibited
   
153.10   Regulated signs allowed without a permit
   
153.11   Regulated signs requiring a permit
   
153.12   Sign area; computation
   
153.13   Sign height; computation
   
153.14   Design, construction and maintenance
   
153.15   Violations; notices
   
153.16   Amendments
   
153.17   Abrogation
 
   
153.99   Penalty
§ 153.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Sign Ordinance of the
Town of Bryson City, North Carolina”.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013)
§ 153.02 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety
and welfare through a comprehensive system of reasonable, effective and
consistent sign standards and requirements. Consistent with this objective, the
Board of Aldermen finds that the town is a traditional mountain community that
depends largely upon a tourism-based economy. Tourists, in large part, are
attracted to the history, natural environment, scenic beauty and aesthetic
character of the community.
   (B)   A proliferation of signs in the town would result in visual blight and
unattractiveness and would convey an image that is inconsistent. In order to
preserve the quality, character and economic vitality of the community, these
sign regulations are intended to:
      (1)   Create a balance between the need to advertise, identify and
communicate and the desire to maintain a safe, healthful and attractive
community environment;
      (2)   Enhance the general welfare of the community by protecting property
values and preserving the natural environment, the unique character and the
aesthetic integrity of the community. The preservation of the town’s appearance
and natural beauty from excessive and obtrusive signs is a matter of critical
importance to the town because of its reliance on tourism;
      (3)   Permit signs that are compatible with their surroundings and that
are consistent with the scenic beauty and aesthetic quality of the community;
      (4)   Improve pedestrian and traffic safety through the proper placement
of signs;
      (5)   Protect the public from the dangers of unsafe signs and require
that signs be constructed, installed and maintained in a safe and satisfactory
manner; and
      (6)   Lessen the confusion, visual clutter and sight impairment that can
be caused by the proliferation, improper placement, excessive illumination and
disproportionate sizes of signs when such signs are not properly controlled or
regulated.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013)
§ 153.03 APPLICABILITY.
   No sign shall be erected, constructed, placed, painted, enlarged, moved,
used, illuminated, maintained or substantially altered in the town, except in
conformance with the standards, procedures and other requirements of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013) Penalty, see §
153.99
§ 153.04 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS; AMORTIZATION.
   (A)   (1)   Subject to the remaining restrictions of this section, non-
conforming signs that were otherwise lawful before the effective date of this
chapter, or any amendments to this chapter, may be continued until they are
required to be removed under division (B) below. Where the term “message” is
used in the following divisions, it shall not apply to the changeable copy on
the message board portion of any sign.
      (2)   Existing signs that do not conform to the provisions of this
chapter shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, structurally altered,
redesigned, replaced or modified as to the message or identification thereon,
nor may illumination be added to any non-conforming sign.
      (3)   The non-conforming use of existing signs shall cease when the
message or display contained thereon becomes unreadable, obsolete or no longer
functional. A non-conforming sign may be continued so long as it is kept in
good repair and maintained in safe condition.
      (4)   A non-conforming sign may not be moved or replaced, except to bring
the sign into complete conformity with this chapter.
      (5)   The message of a non-conforming sign other than an outdoor
advertising sign may not be changed unless the sign is brought into compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. The message of a non-conforming outdoor
advertising sign may be changed, subject to the other provisions of this
chapter.
      (6)   If a non-conforming sign is severely damaged or destroyed, it may
not thereafter be repaired, reconstructed or replaced, except in conformity
with all of the provisions of this chapter, and the remnants of the former sign
structure shall be cleared from the land. For the purposes of this division (A)
(6), a non-conforming sign is “severely damaged or destroyed” if the estimated
cost of repairing the sign to its former stature is greater than 50% of the
value of the sign so damaged.
      (7)   Subject to the other provisions in this section, non-conforming
signs may be repaired and renovated so long as the cost of the work does not
exceed 50% of the value of the sign within any 12-month period, as determined
by the Administrator, in conjunction with the sign owner.
      (8)   If a non-conforming sign, other than a outdoor advertising sign,
advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodation, attraction or other
enterprise or activity that is no longer operating or being offered or
conducted, that sign shall be considered abandoned and shall be removed within
30 days after such abandonment by the sign owner, owner of the property where
the sign is located, or other party having control over such sign. A sign that
advertises a business, enterprise or other activity that is closed for the off-
season, not to exceed 180 consecutive days, shall not be considered an
abandoned sign.
      (9)   If a non-conforming outdoor advertising sign remains blank for a
continuous period of 180 days, that outdoor advertising sign shall be deemed
abandoned and shall, within 30 days after abandonment, be altered to comply
with this chapter or be removed by the sign owner, owner of the property where
the sign is located or other person having control over such sign. For purposes
of this division (A)(9), a sign is “blank” if:
         (a)   It advertises a business, service, commodity, accommodation,
attraction or other enterprise or activity that is no longer operating, being
offered or being conducted;
         (b)   The advertising message it displays becomes illegible in whole
or substantial part; or
         (c)   The advertising copy paid for by a party other than the sign
owner or promoting an interest other than the rental of the sign has been
removed.
   (B)   (1)   Subject to this section, a non-conforming sign that exceeds the
height or size limitations by more than 40%, or that is non-conforming in some
other way, shall, within five years after the effective date of this chapter,
be removed or altered to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   If the non-conformity consists of too many signs on a single lot or
building, or excessive sign area, the person responsible for the violation may
determine which sign or signs need to be altered or removed to bring the
property or development into conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   (a)   Within six months after the effective date of this chapter,
the Administrator shall make every reasonable effort to identify all the non-
conforming signs within the town’s city limits. He or she shall then contact
the person responsible for each such sign (as well as the owner of the property
where the non-conforming sign is located, if different from the former) and
inform such person:
            1.   The sign is non-conforming;
            2.   How it is non-conforming;
            3.   What must be done to correct it and by what date; and
            4.   The consequences of failure to make the necessary corrections.
         (b)   The Administrator shall keep complete records of all
correspondence, communications and other actions taken with respect to such
non-conforming signs.
      (4)   Off-premises signs that are protected from enforced removal by G.S.
§ 136-131.1 shall not be subject to the provisions of this section unless and
until just compensation is provided in accordance with the cited statute.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013)
§ 153.05 ADMINISTRATOR; FLEXIBILITY.
   (A)   The Board of Aldermen shall designate who is to serve as Administrator
(such as the Town Manager, Town Public Works Director, Town Planner and the
like).
   (B)   (1)   The Board of Aldermen recognizes that, because of the wide range
of locations, buildings and properties to which this chapter must apply, it is
neither possible, nor prudent, to establish inflexible requirements related to
sign placement.
      (2)   Therefore, the Administrator may authorize deviations from the
presumptive requirements for the sign location on a building or the sign
setback from a property line whenever the Administrator finds that such
deviations are necessary because of the particular circumstances associated
with that building or property. Whenever the Administrator allows or requires a
deviation from the presumptive requirements related to sign placement, that
deviation shall be noted on the face of the sign permit along with the reasons
for allowing or requiring the deviation.
      (3)   No deviation shall be approved or allowed that would violate the
provisions of §
153.09 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013)
§ 153.06 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DOWNTOWN DISTRICT. See attached map.
   SIGN. Any display of letters, words, numbers, figures, devices, emblems,
pictures, logos or any other means whereby the same are made visible for the
purpose of making anything known; whether such display be made on, or attached
to, or as a part of a structure, surface or any other object whether natural or
human-made.
   SIGN, AREA. The area of a sign shall be considered to be that of the
smallest rectilinear figure (but which shall have a continuous perimeter of not
more than eight straight lines) which encompasses all lettering, wording,
design or symbols, together with any background difference on which the sign is
located, if such background is designed as an integral part of and related to
the sign. Any cut-outs or extensions shall be included in the area of a sign,
but supports and bracing which are not intended as part of the sign shall be
excluded. In the case of a multi-faced sign, the AREA OF THE SIGN shall be
considered to include all faces visible from one direction.
   SIGN, CUSTOMARY HOME OCCUPATION. A sign designed to advertise a small
business carried out within an individual’s residence.
   SIGN, DIRECTLY ILLUMINATED. A sign designed to give forth artificial light
directly (or through transparent or translucent material) from a light source
within or attached to such sign.
   SIGN, EXEMPT. Any sign which is specifically listed as exempt from this
chapter. Said listed EXEMPT SIGNS are not regulated by the terms of this
chapter and shall not require a permit.
   SIGN, FREESTANDING. A sign that is not attached to or supported by any
building. Such signs shall include ground signs and signs mounted on poles or
other supports.
   SIGN, FREESTANDING SHOPPING CENTER. A freestanding sign advertising two or
more commercial establishments on a property that shares the same access and
parking. Each business is permitted signage on the sign display described
herein.
   SIGN, HANGING. A sign attached to and suspended at right angles (unless on a
corner) to the building and extending down over a sidewalk or walkway.
   SIGN, HEIGHT. The height of a sign shall not exceed the maximum height set
forth in this chapter. The HEIGHT OF A SIGN shall be measured from the existing
adjacent street grade to the uppermost point of the sign or sign structure,
whichever is higher.
   SIGN, INDIRECTLY ILLUMINATED. A sign designed to have illumination from a
detached light source, shielded so that no direct rays from that light source
are visible elsewhere than on the lot where said illumination occurs. If such
shielding is inoperative, such sign shall be deemed to be a directly
illuminated sign.
   SIGN, NON-COMMERCIAL. Any sign which is not by definition an off-premises
outdoor advertising sign, or off-premises directional sign, an on-premises
advertising sign or an on-premises directional or information sign, and which
sign displays a substantive message, statement or expression that is protected
by the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. NON-COMMERCIAL SIGNS shall not
contain any reference to a business or product.
   SIGN, NON-CONFORMING. Signs that are erected and in place prior to the
adoption of this chapter and which do not conform to the provisions of this
chapter and which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter are declared
non-conforming signs. A sign that is erected and that is in place and which
conforms to the provisions of the sign ordinance at the time it is erected, but
which does not conform to an amendment of this chapter enacted subsequent to
the erection of said sign is declared a NON-CONFORMING SIGN.
   SIGN, NON-ILLUMINATED. A sign which has neither direct nor indirect
illumination.
   SIGN, OFF-PREMISES DIRECTIONAL. Any off-premises sign indicating the
location of or directions to a business, office or other activity. The sign
shall not include any information or message except the name of the business or
activity or symbols or logos of the business, and must have directions or
symbols indicating directions and/or distances. If a sign exceeds the maximum
area allowed for this type of sign, it shall be constructed as an outdoor
advertising sign.
   SIGN, ON-PREMISES ADVERTISING. Any sign advertising or identifying a
product, service, business or activity sold, located or conducted on the
premises where the sign is located.
   SIGN, ON-PREMISES DIRECTIONAL AND INFORMATIONAL. On-premises signs which
provide directions or information for persons on the premises including, but
not limited to, entrance and exit signs, parking information and handicapped
access.
   SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING. A standard structural poster panel or painted
freestanding sign which is rented for purposes of conveying commercial
information, knowledge or ideas to the public about a subject unrelated to the
premises upon which it is located.
   SIGN, POLITICAL. A sign attracting attention to political candidates or
political issues, and including any lawful non-commercial message that does not
direct attention to a business operated for profit or to a commodity or service
for sale, and complies with all other requirements of this chapter.
   SIGN, PROHIBITED. Any sign, or element of a sign, which is specifically
listed as prohibited, shall not be permitted within the jurisdiction of this
chapter.
   SIGN, ROOF. A sign placed on a building roof or projecting more than 12
inches above the top of a building wall, as defined by this chapter. Mansard or
porch roofs shall be considered “wall space” for the purpose of this chapter.
   SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD. A freestanding temporary sign, with no moving parts or
lights when erected, displayed outside a business, during business hours, to
advertise the business, hours of operation, an event, a promotion and the like
(excluding real estate signage). It is not intended as permanent business
signage.
   SIGN, SNIPE. A type of commercial sign, typically small in size and often
located in the public right-of-way, which is not permitted or authorized under
any provision of this chapter. These signs are often tacked, nailed, pasted,
glazed or otherwise affixed to a tree, pole, stake, fence, traffic-control
device and other objects, as well as posted in the ground. SNIPE SIGNS are not
meant to include freestanding real estate or political signs.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY. A sign which is not permanently installed in the ground or
affixed to any structure or building and which is erected for a specific period
of time related to a certain event or occurrence as allowed in this chapter,
including banners, construction, political, real estate, yard sale and special
event signs.
   SIGN, WALL. A sign placed flat against or projecting no more than 12 inches
from a building wall, as defined by this chapter. Signage displayed on an
awning will be considered WALL SIGNAGE for the purpose of this chapter.
   WALL, BUILDING. An exterior bearing or non-bearing vertical structure
encompassing the area between the final grade elevation and the eaves of a
building. Also includes the vertical supporting structure of a porch.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013)
§ 153.07 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   All signs maintained, erected, placed, posted, attached, painted or
otherwise made visible from an adjacent property or right-of-way, except as
otherwise prohibited, exempted or not requiring a permit by this chapter,
require a sign permit to be issued in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and any other procedures as may be established by the Administrator
under the direction of the Board of Aldermen. Any sign that is erected or
maintained without a required permit shall be in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013)
§ 153.08 SIGNS EXEMPT FROM CHAPTER.
   The following signs are exempt within the jurisdiction of this chapter in
the town:
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to signs placed by the
state’s Department of Transportation or signs required by other town
ordinances;
   (B)   Further, informational, directional or required public instruction
signs are likewise exempt; provided, such signs shall not exceed 50 square feet
in area on any one side exposed to public view;
   (C)   Political signs, as defined herein;
   (D)   Trade names and graphics which are located on newspaper, soft drink
and similar vending devices;
   (E)   Manufacturers’ signs displaying brand names or emblems located on
gasoline pumps at service stations;
   (F)   Flags or insignia of any governmental or non-profit organization when
not displayed as an advertising device or merchandise;
   (G)   Decorations associated with a national or religious holiday;
   (H)   Warning or danger signs;
   (I)   Commemorative tablets, markers or monuments erected by or with the
permission of the town’s Board of Aldermen;
   (J)   Signs on vehicles indicating the name of a business, when the vehicle
is not intended to be used for a stationary display of signs;
   (K)   “For Sale” signs on private vehicles;
   (L)   Residential nameplate signs whether located on or off-premises; and
   (M)   Signs required by law, statute or ordinance.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013)
§ 153.09 SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   The following signs are prohibited within the jurisdiction of this chapter
in the town:
   (A)   Any non-governmental signs which resemble a public safety warning or
traffic sign;
   (B)   Signs, whether temporary or permanent, within any street or highway
right-of-way, with the exception of those signs approved by the government with
road maintenance responsibility;
   (C)   Any sign which obstructs ingress or egress, creates an unsafe
distraction for motorists or obstructs the view of motorists entering a public
road or highway;
   (D)   Signs which incorporate any flashing or blinking lights or scrolling
messages or signs with moving parts or parts which simulate movement, except
for time and temperature, changing not less then five seconds and “open” signs
inside of a window;
   (E)   Any moving sign or device to attract attention, all or any part of
which moves by any means, including fluttering, rotating or otherwise moving
devices set in motion by the atmosphere, or by mechanical means, such as
pennants, flags, propellers, discs or balloons, whether or not any said device
has a written message; however, this provision shall not prohibit traditional
barber poles located at barber shops;
   (F)   Snipe signs, as defined herein;
   (G)   Roof signs, as defined herein;
   (H)   Signs which are erected or maintained upon trees or painted or drawn
upon rocks or other natural features; and
   (I)   Off-premises signs located on utility poles owned by utility
companies.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013)
§ 153.10 REGULATED SIGNS ALLOWED WITHOUT A PERMIT.
   The following signs are permitted without a sign permit; provided, they
conform to the requirements of this chapter.
   (A)   Temporary regulated signs allowed without a permit.
      (1)   Temporary on-premises or off-premises signs for church and other
community non-profit functions, except to the extent that such signage shall
not be displayed more than 30 days prior to the event and removed with 48 hours
after the event.
      (2)   On-premises yard sale signs and off-premises yard sale directional
signs, except to the extent that all yard sale signs shall be placed no more
than 48 hours prior to the sale and removed within 48 hours after the sale and
only with the permission of the landowner where any sign is placed. Any such
sale held on a regular basis, constitutes a business and would require a
permanent sign permit.
      (3)   One on-premises sign advertising the rent, sale or lease of a
commercial or residential property; provided, such signage does not exceed 32
square feet for commercial or 16 square feet for residential properties.
      (4)   On-premises real estate signs and off-premises real estate
directional signs, except to the extent that each sign is removed within 48
hours of the sale or lease and only with the permission of the landowner where
any off-premises signs are placed.
      (5)   “Open” signs, limited to one sign per business entrance and shall
not exceed four square feet. Types of displays may be wall, freestanding,
hanging or displayed within a window. Such signage shall not include any of the
prohibited displays described within §
153.09 of this chapter.
      (6)   Commercial signage displayed on the inside of the windows are
allowed; provided, only 25% of the inside of the window is covered.
      (7)   One construction identification sign used prior to and during
construction to identify the name of a new project and/or contractor or
developer. Such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet. Additional signage for
each subcontractor is permitted; provided, each sign does not exceed four
square feet.
   (B)   Permanent regulated signs allowed without a permit; permanent on-
premises signs.
      (1)   Small professional or announcement signs for customary home
occupations, non-illuminated and not exceeding four square feet. Such signs
must be displayed on the property of the customary home occupation or located
at the intersection of the nearest street that provides access to the
residence.
      (2)   Private commercial informational signs, such as entrance and exits
signs, parking, loading zone, traffic flow, handicap and other similar signs;
provided, such signs do not exceed two square feet.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013)
§ 153.11 REGULATED SIGNS REQUIRING A PERMIT.
   The following signs are permitted subject to issuance of a sign permit by
the Administrator and provided they conform to the requirements of this
chapter.
   (A)   Temporary regulated signs requiring a permit.
      (1)   One on-premises temporary banner sign advertising the initial
opening of a business establishment or promoting special sales or events are
permitted; provided, such signs shall not exceed 24 square feet and are
displayed for a maximum of 30 days, not to exceed four sign displays per year.
      (2)   One sandwich board sign may be allowed per business, per street
frontage, as follows.
         (a)   Location. Signs may be placed on a sidewalk directly in front of
the associated establishment. The sign shall be placed on that part of the
sidewalk closest to the associated use. The sign must be placed so as not to
interfere with or obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic: however in any
event, a minimum of five feet of passage must be maintained on the sidewalk.
Signs may not be anchored to the sidewalk, or attached or chained to poles,
newspaper vending boxes or other structures or appurtenances.
         (b)   Size. No sandwich board sign shall exceed 28 inches in width or
48 inches in height.
         (c)   Appearance. The sign must be constructed of materials that
present a finished appearance (e.g., rough-cut plywood is not acceptable). The
sign frame shall be painted or stained wood or anodized aluminum or metal.
Stenciled or spray painted signs are prohibited. Windblown devices, including
balloons, may not be attached or otherwise made part of the sign. The sign
lettering should be professionally painted or applied; hand brushed or paint
stenciled letters is not acceptable, however, chalkboard or dry erase signs
shall be allowed.
         (d)   Lighting and display hours. Signs may not be illuminated. The
sign shall be removed at the end of the business day and may only be displayed
during regular business hours. Sandwich boards must be weighted down or removed
during inclement weather or gusting winds.
         (e)   Grandfathering. These sandwich board provisions will take effect
immediately upon adoption of this chapter. All sandwich boards must comply at
that time. No “grandfathering” is permitted.
         (f)   Liability. Any person erecting a sandwich board sign shall
indemnify and hold harmless the town and its officers, agents and employees
from any claim arising out of the presence of the sign on the public property
or rights-of-way.
         (g)   Right to move/remove. Town staff may move/remove sandwich boards
for municipal or safety purposes or non-compliance and give to the owner (i.e.,
traffic issues, maintenance and the like).
   (B)   Permanent regulated signs requiring a permit.
      (1)   Off-premises directional signs.
         (a)   Off-premises directional signs shall not exceed 16 square feet
in area per sign face, one sign face per directional flow of traffic and a
maximum height of six feet.
         (b)   Not more than two off-premises directional signs shall contain
directions to the same location from each of two different directions.
      (2)   Outdoor advertising signs. Outdoor advertising signs will be
allowed only in accordance with the following regulations.
         (a)   Size. The maximum size of an outdoor advertising sign shall be
150 square feet per sign face, one sign face per directional flow of traffic
per sign structure.
         (b)   Height. The maximum height of an outdoor advertising sign shall
be 25 feet.
         (c)   Setback. An outdoor advertising sign shall be setback ten feet
from any road, street or highway right-of-way, if no right-of-way exists, the
sign shall be setback 20 feet from the nearest edge of the road, street or
highway.
         (d)   Spacing from other outdoor advertising signs. No outdoor
advertising sign shall be located closer than 2,000 linear feet from any other
outdoor advertising sign as measured from either side of the same road, street
or highway.
         (e)   Spacing from other structures or land uses.
            1.   No outdoor advertising sign shall be located within a 1,000-
foot radius of a structure used for residence, a church or place of worship, or
within a 1,000-foot radius of any property used for a school, public park or
cemetery.
            2.   Additionally, outdoor signs shall not be located within a 500-
foot radius of the intersection of two or more roads, streets or highways or
from any bridge 50 feet in length or greater.
         (f)   Spacing from on-premises signs. No outdoor advertising sign
shall be located closer than 100 linear feet from any on-premises sign.
         (g)   New outdoor advertising signs. No new outdoor advertising signs
within the Downtown District are to be permitted after the effective date.
      (3)   On-premises signs. On-premises signs will be allowed only in
accordance with the following regulations: where permitted by the terms of this
chapter, on-premises signs shall comply with the following dimensional
requirements:
 
Wall                         Freestanding                         Window
               Max. Size                  Max. Size  Max. Height  Max. Size (%
Max. # Signs   (s.f.)        Max. # Signs (s.f.)     (ft.)        of window
                                                                  area)
4 per business 60 (combined) 1            32         15           25
 
Hanging                                   Freestanding Shopping Center
Max. # Signs   Max. Size     Min. Height  Max. # Signs Max. Size  Max. Height
               (s.f.)        (ft.)                     (s.f.)     (ft.)
1 per business 60 (combined) 7 ft. above               100        15
entrance                     sidewalk
 
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013)
§ 153.12 SIGN AREA; COMPUTATION.
   (A)   (1)   The surface area of a sign shall include the entire display
area, including any border or accessory area designed to attract attention and
shall be calculated in inches or feet as the width multiplied by the height.
      (2)   The sign area shall not include any supporting framework, bracing,
decorative fencing or wall that otherwise meets the zoning and building
regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself.
   (B)   (1)   With respect to a two-sided, multi-sided, or three-dimensional
sign, the sign surface area shall be computed by including the total of all
sides designed to attract attention or communicate information that can be seen
at any one time by a person from one vantage point.
      (2)   Without otherwise limiting the generality of the preceding
statement: when two identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both
faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign
faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than 36 inches
apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013)
§ 153.13 SIGN HEIGHT; COMPUTATION.
   The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance between the average
grade of the land beneath the sign and the top of the highest attached
component of the sign.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013)
§ 153.14 DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Any sign permitted under this chapter must comply with applicable
requirements of the state’s Building Code, National Electric Code and other
applicable federal, state and local codes.
   (B)   Every sign and its support, frames, guys, anchors and electrical
equipment shall be securely fastened and placed to withstand adverse weather
conditions.
   (C)   All signs, except those protected by glass or other transparent cover,
shall be constructed of material that are permanent in nature and that will not
rapidly deteriorate, fade, fall apart or in any way become a hazard to the
public health, safety and general welfare.
   (D)   All signs shall be kept free from defective or missing parts or
peeling paint. The Administrator shall posses the authority to order the
painting, repair or alteration of a sign, at the owner’s expense, if such sign
constitutes a hazard to the public health, safety or general welfare by reason
of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation or obsolescence. Notice of such repair
shall be given to the owner by personal service or registered mail, return
receipt requested.
   (E)   No person other than persons authorized by the town shall damage,
trim, destroy or removed trees, shrubs or other vegetation located within the
public right-of-way of any street or road for the purpose of increasing or
enhancing the visibility of a sign; nor shall such work be performed on
property that is not under the ownership or control of the person performing or
responsible for such work, unless done pursuant to the express authorization of
the person owning the property where such trees or shrubs are located.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013)
§ 153.15 VIOLATIONS; NOTICES.
   (A)   Violations. The following actions or inactions shall constitute a
violation of this chapter:
      (1)   Any failure to comply with an applicable requirement, prohibition,
standard or limitation imposed by this chapter;
      (2)   Any failure to comply with a term or condition of any permit or
authorization granted pursuant to this chapter;
      (3)   Any failure to comply with a rule or order adopted or issued
pursuant to this chapter; and
      (4)   Each and every day that a violation of any provision of this
chapter continues shall constitute a separate and distinct violation.
   (B)   Notices of violations. For notices of violation under this chapter,
the following provisions shall apply.
      (1)   Contents.
         (a)   Upon discovering a violation of a provision of this chapter, the
Administrator shall draft and serve upon the offender a written “notice of
violation” stating the following, where relevant to the violation:
            1.   The sign is in violation of this chapter;
            2.   A description of the violation, with reasonable clarity;
            3.   A reference to the section of this chapter that the offender
violated;
            4.   The measures necessary to remedy the violation and bring the
subject property into compliance with this chapter;
            5.   A reasonable time period within which the offender must
correct the violation; and
            6.   A warning that failure to correct the violation within the
time period will result in the assessment of a civil penalty described within
the town’s fee schedule.
         (b)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the issuance of a notice
of violation that immediately imposes a penalty for a violation when pertaining
to a repeat offender of this chapter.
      (2)   Service of notice of violation. The Administrator shall serve the
offender with a copy of the notice of violation in any manner as provided for
service of process in the state’s Rules of Civil Procedure (Rule 4); provided,
however, that, refusal to accept the notice of violation, or failure to notify
the Administrator of a change of address shall not relieve the offender’s
obligation to pay the stated penalty.
      (3)   Filing of notices of violation. All notices of violation shall be
filed in the office of the Administrator, with the date of the filing clearly
and indelibly stamped or written on the notice at the time of filing.
      (4)   Appeals of notices of violation. An appeal of a notice of violation
may be taken to the Board of Aldermen.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013)
§ 153.16 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Aldermen may from time to time amend the terms of
this chapter, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been
proposed by or shall have been submitted to the Planning Board for review and
recommendation.
      (2)   The Planning Board shall have 30 days from the time the proposed
amendment is submitted to it within which to submit its report.
      (3)   If the Planning Board fails to submit a report within the specified
time, it shall be deemed to have recommended approval of the amendment.
   (B)   No amendment shall be adopted by the governing body until it has held
a public hearing on the amendment. Notice of the hearing shall be published in
a newspaper of general circulation in the town area at least once a week for
two successive calendar weeks prior to the hearing. The initial notice shall
appear not more than 25, nor less than ten, days prior to the hearing date. In
computing the ten- to 25- day period, the date of publication is not to be
counted, but the date of the hearing is.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013)
§ 153.17 ABROGATION.
   (A)   It is not intended that this chapter repeal, abrogate, annul, impair
or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant
to law.
   (B)   However, where this chapter imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this chapter shall govern.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013)
§ 153.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Citations. If an offender fails to take all corrective actions
required by a notice of violation, within the time period described, the town
shall send a citation for the amount described within the fee schedule of the
town.
   (B)   Form of citations. Citations shall contain the following:
      (1)   A reference to the notice(s) of violation involved;
      (2)   The amount of the penalty as set forth in the fee schedule
maintained in the town office by the Town Clerk;
      (3)   The violator must pay the penalty within 30 days of the service of
the citation; and
      (4)   Failure to pay the penalty stated therein shall subject the
offender to the payment of reasonable attorney’s fees, not to exceed 15% of the
outstanding balance, including the principal amount of the penalty and interest
accruing thereon.
   (C)   Service of citations. Service of citations may be made by the
Administrator in any manner allowed for service of process under Rule 4 of the
state’s Rules of Civil Procedure.
   (D)   Civil action to collect penalties. The town may institute proceedings
to collect unpaid civil penalties, at any time after the date required for
payment as set forth in the citation. Such proceeding shall be in the form of
an action to collect a debt.
(Ord. passed 9-3-2013)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   CONTRACTS
      
II.   FRANCHISES
      
III.   VARIANCES
      
IV.   ANNEXATIONS
TABLE I: CONTRACTS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed  Description
                        Adopting service contract between the North Carolina
-        9-12-1988      League of Municipalities, American Legal Publishing
                        Corporation and the town for the purpose of codifying
                        the town ordinances
                       
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed  Description
-        4-2-2001       Granting a gas franchise to Public Service Company of
                        North Carolina, Inc., for a period of 30 years
                       
 
TABLE III: VARIANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
        6-6-1994    -
                     Granting to Edith Hall a variance from the mobile home
-        9-14-1998   park ordinance to locate a mobile home on her property
                     within 16 feet of an existing mobile home located on
                     adjoining property and within 14 feet of her property line
                    
 
TABLE IV: ANNEXATIONS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        12-3-2007   Petition for annexation of a satellite area filed by
                     Morgan Crisp, Inc.
-        5-4-2009    Petition for annexation filed by Raymond R. Connors and
                     Dorothy J. Connors
-        5-7-2012    Petition for annexation filed by Larry B. Spence, Sr., and
                     Carol E. Spence
-        11-1-2021   Petition for the annexation by Black Hill Properties, LLC
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to 2004 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
G.S. Cites Code Section
G.S. Cites              Code Section
                        33.10; 51.13;
                        53.99;
14-4                    91.99;
                        92.99;
                        152.99
14-4(a)                 10.99
14-4(b)                 70.99
14-288.1                33.06
14-288.7                33.06
14-288.8(C)(5)          33.06
14-288.18               33.01
14-288.20A              33.99
14-409.39(2)            33.06
15A-1340.23             10.99;
                        33.99
Ch. 18B                 111.01
Ch. 18B, Art. 7         111.04
18B-101                 111.03
18B-200 et seq.         111.04
18B-700 et seq.         111.04
18B-701                 111.04
18B-1001                111.04
18B-1004                111.04
20-4.01(25)             70.01
20-141(b)               71.02
20-162                  90.11
105-349                 31.04
105-350                 31.04
136-131.1               153.04
136-141 et seq.         90.03
136-143                 90.03
143.215.6A              92.07;
                        92.99
143B-943                31.06
143B-945                31.06
Ch. 153A, Art. 6        151.02
Ch. 159, Art. 3, Part 1 34.01
159-25                  31.02
159-28                  34.01
Ch. 160A, Art. 14       32.05
160A-11                 31.06
160A-12                 31.06
160A-69                 30.02
160A-70                 30.03
160A-71                 30.04
160A-72                 31.02
160A-74                 30.04
160A-75                 30.04
160A-146                30.01
160A-147                31.01
160A-148                31.01
160A-171                31.02
160A-173                31.03
160A-174                53.47;
                        152.01
160A-175                10.99;
                        53.99
160A-175(e)             10.99
160A-178                Ch. 113
160A-184                130.06
160A-285                32.36
160A-286                32.36
160A-289                32.37
160A-303(b)(1)          90.01
160A-304                31.06
160A-361                32.20
160A-363                32.24
160D-1119(d)            92.15
160D-1121               92.15
160D-1124               92.15
160D-1125               92.15
166A                    33.01
                        
 
REFERENCES TO 2004 CODE
2004 Code 2026 Code
2004 Code 2026 Code
30.01     30.01
30.02     30.02
30.03     30.03
30.04     30.04
31.01     31.02
31.02     31.03
31.03     31.04
31.04     31.05
32.01     32.01
32.02     32.02
32.03     32.03
32.04     32.04
32.05     32.05
32.20     32.20
32.21     32.21
32.22     32.22
32.23     32.23
32.24     32.24
32.40     32.35
32.42     32.36
32.43     32.37
33.01     33.01
33.02     33.02
33.03     33.03
33.04     33.04
33.05     33.05
33.07     33.07
33.08     33.08
33.09     33.09
33.10     33.10
33.99     33.10
34.01     34.01
50.01     50.01
50.15     50.15
50.16     50.16
50.17     50.17
50.18     50.18
50.19     50.19
50.20     50.20
51.01     51.01
51.02     51.02
51.03     51.03
51.04     51.04
51.05     51.05
51.06     51.06
51.07     51.07
51.08     51.08
51.09     51.09
51.10     51.10
52.01     52.01
52.02     52.02
52.03     52.03
52.04     52.04
52.15     52.15
52.16     52.16
52.17     52.17
52.18     52.18
52.19     52.19
52.20     52.20
52.21     52.21
52.22     52.22
52.23     52.23
52.24     52.24
52.25     52.25
52.26     52.26
52.27     52.27
52.40     52.40
52.41     52.41
52.42     52.42
52.43     52.43
52.44     52.44
52.45     52.45
52.46     52.46
52.47     52.47
52.48     52.48
52.49     52.49
52.50     52.50
52.51     52.51
52.52     52.52
52.53     52.53
52.54     52.54
52.55     52.55
52.56     52.56
52.57     52.57
52.58     52.58
52.99     52.99
53.01     53.01
53.02     53.02
53.03     53.03
53.04     53.05
53.05     53.06
53.06     53.07
53.10     53.09
53.11     53.10
53.12     53.11
53.13     53.13
53.14     53.14
53.15     53.15
53.16     53.16
53.17     53.17
53.19     53.18
53.20     53.19
53.21     53.20
53.22     53.21
53.23     53.22
53.24     53.23
53.25     53.24
53.26     53.25
53.27     53.26
53.28     53.27
53.40     53.40
53.41     53.41
53.42     53.42
53.43     53.43
53.44     53.44
53.45     53.45
53.46     53.46
53.47     53.47
53.99     53.99
70.01     70.01
70.02     70.02
70.03     70.03
70.04     70.04
70.05     70.05
70.06     70.06
70.07     70.07
70.20     70.20
70.21     70.21
70.22     70.22
70.99     70.99
71.05     71.01
71.16     71.02
72.06     71.15
72.25     71.16
72.26     71.17
72.27     71.18
72.28     71.19
72.32     71.20
72.55     71.21
93.01     93.01
93.02     93.02
93.03     93.03
94.01     94.01
94.02     94.02
94.03     94.03
94.15     94.15
94.16     94.16
94.17     94.17
94.18     94.18
94.19     94.19
94.20     94.20
94.22     94.21
94.23     94.22
94.35     94.35
94.36     94.36
94.37     94.37
94.38     94.38
94.39     94.39
94.40     94.40
94.41     94.41
94.42     94.42
95.01     95.01
95.02     95.02
95.15     95.15
95.16     95.16
95.17     95.17
95.18     95.18
95.19     95.19
95.20     95.20
95.21     95.21
95.35     95.35
95.36     95.36
95.99     95.99
110.16    110.01
112.01    111.01
112.02    111.02
112.03    111.03
112.04    111.04
113.01    112.01
113.02    112.02
113.03    112.03
113.04    112.04
113.05    112.05
113.06    112.06
113.07    112.07
113.08    112.08
113.09    112.09
113.10    112.10
113.11    112.11
113.12    112.12
113.13    112.13
113.14    112.14
130.01    130.01
130.02    130.02
130.03    130.03
130.04    130.04
130.05    130.05
130.06    130.06
130.07    130.07
130.08    130.08
130.09    130.09
130.10    130.10
130.12    130.11
152.01    152.01
152.02    152.02
152.03    152.03
152.04    152.04
152.05    152.05
152.20    152.20
152.21    152.21
152.22    152.22
152.23    152.23
152.24    152.24
152.25    152.25
152.40    152.40
152.41    152.41
152.42    152.42
152.43    152.43
152.44    152.44
152.45    152.45
152.99    152.99
          
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        5-3-1999    112.01—
                     112.14
-        7-12-1999   71.17
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.   Date Passed Code Section
                       52.20;
-          - -         52.28;
                       52.99
                       54.01—
-          - -         54.11;
                       54.99
-          - -         90.01—
                       90.08
-          - -         110.01
-          - -         115.02
-          - -         130.12
-          - -         111.04
-          5-5-1950    94.02
102, -     8-2-1965    53.23
                       52.01—
                       52.03;
101        7-1-1969    52.15—
                       52.19;
                       52.21—
                       52.27
-          8-29-1969   50.15—
                       50.20
105        10-19-1970  130.01
105        - -1980     111.03
                       52.40—
1-500      1-7-1985    52.58;
                       52.99
-          6-4-1987    51.01;
                       51.09
-          8-3-1987    94.03
                       53.40—
-          11-9-1987   53.48;
                       53.99
                       70.01—
2          4-11-1988   70.06;
                       71.15—
                       71.19
-          9-12-1988   TSO Table I
-          6-6-1994    TSO Table III
                       33.01—
-          12-6-1994   33.05;
                       33.07—
                       33.10
-          11-4-1996   52.04;
                       53.25
-          7-7-1997    50.01;
                       51.10
-          9-14-1998   TSO Table III
-          4-3-2000    32.20—
                       32.24
                       95.01;
                       95.02;
                       95.15—
-          6-12-2000   95.21;
                       95.35;
                       95.36;
                       95.99
                       152.01—
                       152.05;
                       152.20—
-          9-18-2000   152.25;
                       152.40—
                       152.45;
                       152.99
-          4-2-2001    TSO Table II
-          12-3-2007   TSO Table IV
-          5-4-2009    TSO Table IV
-          10-4-2010   32.05
-          5-7-2012    TSO Table IV
                       153.01—
-          9-3-2013    153.17;
                       153.99
-          2-5-2018    111.04
-          2-5-2018    112.06
-          11-1-2021   TSO Table IV
-          12-6-2021   32.21
-          3-1-2025    32.21
7-7-25     7-8-2025    150.01;
                       150.02
7-7-252    7-8-2025    151.01;
                       151.02
                       10.99;
                       30.04;
                       31.01;
                       31.02;
                       32.05;
                       32.35;
                       33.01;
                       33.02;
                       33.06;
                       33.08;
                       33.99;
                       34.01;
                       51.10;
                       52.20;
                       52.25;
                       52.41;
                       52.42;
                       52.44;
9-2-2025-1 10-20-2025  52.45;
                       52.51;
                       52.55;
                       52.99;
                       53.02;
                       53.12—
                       53.14;
                       53.16;
                       53.20;
                       53.26;
                       53.48;
                       53.99;
                       54.01;
                       70.99;
                       90.07;
                       150.01;
                       150.02;
                       151.01;
                       151.02
9-2-2025-2 10-20-2025  91.99
                      
 
 
