CASWELL BEACH, NORTH CAROLINA
CODIFIED ORDINANCES
2026 S-24 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ord., passed 1-8-26
State legislation current through 2024 North Carolina Legislative Service, #2
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
TOWN OFFICIALS
 
George F. Kassler, Mayor
Martyn Clarke, Commissioner and Mayor Pro Tem
Melissa Alford, Commissioner
Ken Hudson, Commissioner
Marty Dollinger, Commissioner
Kathleen Berry, Commissioner
 
   CHARTER TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section
   Article I. Incorporation and Corporate Powers
   
1.1   Incorporation and general powers
   
1.2   Exercise of powers
   
1.3   Enumerated powers not exclusive
   Article II. Corporate Boundaries
   
2.1   Corporate boundaries
   Article III. Mayor and Board of Commissioners
   
3.1   Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore
   
3.2   Composition of the Board of Commissioners
   
3.3   Terms; qualifications; vacancies
   
3.4   Compensation of Mayor and Commissioners
   
3.5   Organization of Board; oaths of office
   
3.6   Meetings of Board
   
3.7   Quorum; votes
   
3.8   Ordinances and resolutions
   Article IV. Election Procedure
   
4.1   Regular municipal elections
   
4.2   Voting
   
4.3   Regulation of election
   Article V. Town Attorney
   
5.1   Appointment; qualifications; term; compensation
   
5.2   Duties of Town Attorney
   Article VI. Administrative Officers and Employees
   
6.1   Town Clerk
   
6.2   Town Tax Collector
   
6.3   Town Finance Officer
   
6.4   Consolidation of functions
   
6.5   Other employees
   Article VII. Finance
   
7.1   Custody of town money
   
7.2   Purchases and contracts
   
7.3   Taxation
   Article VIII. Claims Against the Town
   
8.1   Tort claims
ARTICLE I. INCORPORATION AND CORPORATE POWERS
SECTION 1.1. INCORPORATION AND GENERAL POWERS.
   The inhabitants of the area described in Section
2.1 of this Charter shall be and constitute a body politic and corporate under
the name of the "Town of Caswell Beach," and shall be vested with all property
which may be acquired by the Town, and all rights herein delegated to it; shall
have perpetual succession; may have a common seal and alter and renew the same
at pleasure; may sue and be sued; may contract; may acquire and hold all such
property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold or in any
manner conveyed or dedicated to it, or otherwise acquired by it, and may from
time to time hold or invest, sell, or dispose of the same; and shall have and
may exercise in conformity with this Charter all municipal powers, functions,
rights, privileges, and immunities of every name and nature.
SECTION 1.2. EXERCISE OF POWERS.
   All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the Town, its
officers, agencies, or employees, shall be carried into execution as provided
by this Charter, or, if this Charter makes no provision, as provided by
ordinance or resolution of the Board of Commissioners and as provided by the
general laws of North Carolina pertaining to municipal corporations.
SECTION 1.3. ENUMERATED POWERS NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The enumeration of particular powers by this Charter shall not be held or
deemed to be exclusive but, in addition to the powers enumerated herein or
implied hereby, or those appropriate to the exercise of such powers, the Town
of Caswell Beach shall have and may exercise all powers which are granted to
municipal corporations by the general laws of North Carolina and all powers
which, under the Constitution of North Carolina, it would be competent for this
Charter specifically to enumerate.
ARTICLE II. CORPORATE BOUNDARIES
SECTION 2.1. CORPORATE BOUNDARIES.
   The corporate boundaries of the Town of Caswell Beach shall be as follows
until changed in accordance with law:
   Bounded on the South by the Atlantic Ocean, on the West by the Town of
Yaupon Beach, on the north and northwest by the Intracoastal waterway and the
Cape Fear River and on the east by the North Carolina Baptist Assembly which
Baptist Assembly encompasses the lands condemned by the United States of
America under Order of Declaration of Taking entered December 20, 1941, in that
certain cause in the District Court of the United States for the Eastern
District of North Carolina, Wilmington Division, Civil Docket Number 129, said
eastern boundary being that part of the sea wall which bears north 14 degrees
38 minutes east and the extension of said line north 13 degrees 38 minutes east
to the river and south 14 degrees 38 minutes west to the Atlantic Ocean.
Excepting nevertheless from said lands the following tract: BEGINNING at a
point in the westerly boundary line of tract to be described, said point
bearing north 76 degrees 50 minutes west and distance 386 feet and 550 feet
respectively from a bronze plate in the concrete roof of Bageley Primary and
from a drill hole in the concrete roof of a concrete house of Caswell Primary,
said primaries being part of the artillery fire control system of Fort Caswell,
said point of beginning also bearing north 52 degrees 18 minutes 40 seconds
west and distance 371 and 79/100 feet from the station a coast and geodetic
survey known as R and marked by a bronze plate in a concrete monument; thence
north 20 degrees 10 minutes east a distance of 2200 feet, more or less, to the
Elizabeth River; thence in an easterly direction along said Elizabeth River a
distance of 1300 feet, more or less, to a point; thence south 33 degrees 20
minutes west a distance of 3020 feet, more or less, to the shoreline of the
Atlantic Ocean; thence in a westerly direction along said shoreline a distance
of 600 feet, more or less, to a point; thence north 20 degrees 10 minutes east
a distance of 570 feet, more or less, to the point of beginning, containing in
all 57.2 acres, more or less. Bearings in this description are assumed to refer
to the magnetic meridian (1924). Said land being known as the Oak Island Coast
Guard Station.
   Effective September 1, 2004, the following land was annexed to the Town
boundaries:
   TRACT ONE
   Beginning at an iron rod in the northern right-of-way of N. C. Highway 133,
the southeast corner of Lot 15, Block 3, Section "B" of Caswell Beach as
recorded at Map Book 1, Page 123 of the Brunswick County Registry, having N.C.
1927 grid coordinates of N: 53314.49 E: 2292711.08 and being located South 74
degrees 50 minutes 39 seconds West 135.55 feet from USC&G monument "catwalk" on
the Oak Island Lighthouse and further being in the western line of properties
belonging to the U.S. Coast Guard; thence with said western line and the
eastern line of the aforementioned Lot 15, North 19 degrees 30 minutes 56
seconds East 81.89 feet to an iron rod, the beginning corner of Parcel "A";
thence with parcel "A" South 75 degrees 23 minutes 28 seconds East 185.17 feet
to an iron rod, a corner of parcel "A"; thence, South 14 degrees 36 minutes 32
seconds West 81.59 feet to an iron rod in the northern right-of-way of N. C.
Highway 133, a corner of Parcel "A"; thence with the northern right-of-way of
said Highway 133, North 75 degrees 23 minutes 28 seconds West 192.17 feet to
the Point of Beginning. Being part of lands belonging to the U.S. Coast Guard
described as the Oak Island Life Boat Station, District 5, C. G. Dated 1-17-39,
under title "A" Property Report of the Brunswick County Registry containing
0.35 acres more or less and being all of Parcel "B".
   TRACT TWO
   Beginning at an iron pipe in the southern right-of-way of N.C. Highway 133,
the northeast corner of Lot 1, Block 3, Section B, of Caswell Beach, as
recorded at Map Book 1, Page 123, of the Brunswick County Registry, said point
being further located in the western line of lands belonging to the U.S. Coast
Guard, and being South 19 degrees 31 minutes 25 seconds West 61.71 feet from a
concrete monument, the southwest corner of Parcel "B", having N. C. 1927 grid
coordinates of N: 53314.49 E: 2292711.08, South 74 degrees 50 minutes 39
seconds West 135.55 feet from US C&G Monument "Catwalk" on the Oak Island
Lighthouse; thence from the beginning, with said U.S. Coast Guard's western
line and eastern line of said Lot 1 South 19 degrees 26 minutes 52 seconds West
136.61 feet to a concrete monument in said line; thence continuing, South 19
degrees 59 minutes 32 seconds East 233.35 feet to a point where said western
line of U.S. Coast Guard lands intersects with the mean high water mark of the
Atlantic Ocean; thence with said high water mark South 74 degrees 44 minutes 02
seconds East 564.31 feet to a point in the eastern line of the aforementioned
U.S. Coast Guard lands; thence with said eastern line North 37 degrees 29
minutes 55 seconds East 266.43 feet to an iron pipe, the southwest corner of
Lot 9, Block 2, Section "B" of Caswell Beach as recorded at Map Book 1, Page
123 of the Brunswick County Registry; thence with the eastern line of the U.S.
Coast Guard's lands and the western line of said Lot 9 North 37 degrees 29
minutes 55 seconds East 142.70 feet to an iron rod in the southern right-of-way
of N. C. Highway 133, the northwest corner of Lot 9; thence with the southern
right-of-way of N. C. Highway 133, North 75 degrees 33 minutes 24 seconds East
690.0 feet to the Point of Beginning; being part of lands belonging to the U.S.
Coast Guard described as the Oak Island Life Boat Station, district 5. C.G.,
dated 7-17-39, under Title "A" Property Report Of the Brunswick County
Registry, containing 5.36 acres more or less and being all of parcel "C".
ARTICLE III. MAYOR AND BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
SECTION 3.1. MAYOR AND MAYOR PRO TEMPORE.
   The mayor shall be elected by and from the qualified voters of the Town
voting at large in the manner provided in Article IV. The mayor shall be the
official head of the Town government and shall preside at all meetings of the
Board of Commissioners. When there is an equal division upon any question, or
in the appointment of officers, by the Board, the mayor shall determine the
matter by his vote, and shall vote in no other case. The mayor shall exercise
such powers and perform such duties as are or may be conferred upon him by the
ordinances of the Town. The Board of Commissioners shall choose one of its
number to act as mayor pro tempore, and he shall perform the duties of the
mayor in the mayor's absence or disability. The mayor pro tempore as such shall
have no fixed term of office, but shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure
of the remaining members of the Board.
SECTION 3.2. COMPOSITION OF THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
   The Board of Commissioners shall consist of five members to be elected by
and from the qualified voters of the Town voting at large in the manner
provided by Article IV.
(Amended 11- -94)
SECTION 3.3. TERMS; QUALIFICATIONS; VACANCIES.
   (a)   Except for the initial terms of office hereinbefore specified, the
mayor and the members of the Board of Commissioners shall serve for terms of
four years beginning the day and hour of the organizational meeting following
their election, said meeting to be held as provided in G.S. 160A-68; provided,
they shall serve until their successors are elected and qualify.
   (b)   No person shall be eligible to be a candidate or be elected as mayor
or as a member of the Board of Commissioners, or to serve in such capacity,
unless he is a resident and a qualified voter of the Town.
   (c)   If any elected mayor or commissioner shall refuse to qualify, or if
there shall be any vacancy in the office of mayor or commissioner after
election and qualification, the remaining members of the Board shall by
majority vote appoint some qualified person to serve for the unexpired term.
Any mayor or commissioner so appointed shall have the same authority and powers
as if regularly elected.
SECTION 3.4. COMPENSATION OF MAYOR AND COMMISSIONERS.
   The Mayor and Board of Commissioners may establish and from time to time
change the salaries of its members.
(Amended 7- -96)
SECTION 3.5. ORGANIZATION OF BOARD; OATHS OF OFFICE.
   The Board of Commissioners shall meet on the first regularly scheduled
meeting in December after each election and shall organize and take the oath of
office.
(Amended 1- -97)
SECTION 3.6. MEETINGS OF BOARD.
   The Board of Commissioners shall fix suitable times for its regular
meetings, which shall be as often as once monthly. Special meetings may be held
on the call of the mayor or a majority of the commissioners, and those not
joining in the call shall be notified in writing. Any business may be
transacted at a special meeting that might be transacted at a regular meeting.
Cross-reference:
   Special meetings, see
§ 30.31
SECTION 3.7. QUORUM; VOTES.
   (a)   A majority of the members elected to the Board of Commissioners shall
constitute a quorum for the conduct of business, but a less number may adjourn
from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members in such manner as
may be prescribed by ordinance.
   (b)   The affirmative vote of a majority of the members of the Board of
Commissioners shall be necessary to adopt any ordinance, or any resolution or
motion having the effect of an ordinance. All other matters to be voted upon
shall be decided by a majority vote of the members present and voting.
SECTION 3.8. ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   The adoption, amendment, repeal, pleading, or proving of ordinances shall be
in accordance with the applicable provisions of the general laws of North
Carolina not inconsistent with this Charter. The ayes and noes shall be taken
upon all ordinances and resolutions and entered upon the minutes of the Board.
The enacting clause of all ordinances shall be: "Be it ordained by the Board of
Commissioners of the Town of Caswell Beach." All ordinances and resolutions
shall take effect upon adoption unless otherwise provided therein, or unless
some provision of the General Statutes provides otherwise.
ARTICLE IV. ELECTION PROCEDURE
SECTION 4.1 REGULAR MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS.
   Following the initial election hereinbefore provided for, regular municipal
elections shall be nonpartisan and decided by simple plurality, and shall be
held on the Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered
year, beginning in 1977. In the regular 1977 election and quadrennially
thereafter, there shall be elected by the qualified voters of the Town voting
at large two commissioners to serve for terms of four years, or until their
successors are elected and qualify. In the regular 1995 election and
quadrennially thereafter, there shall be elected by the qualified voters of the
Town voting at large a mayor and three commissioners to serve for a term of
four years, or until their successors are elected and qualify.
(Amended 11- -94)
SECTION 4.2. VOTING.
   In the regular 1977 election and quadrennially thereafter, each voter shall
be entitled to vote for two candidates for commissioner, and the two candidates
for commissioner who receive the largest numbers of votes cast for commissioner
shall be declared elected. In the regular 1995 election and quadrennially
thereafter, each voter shall be entitled to vote for one candidate for mayor
and for three candidates for commissioner, and the candidate for mayor who
receives the largest number of votes cast for mayor shall be declared elected
and the three candidates who receive the largest number of votes cast for
commissioner shall be declared elected. In case of a tie between opposing
candidates, the election officials shall determine the result by lot.
(Amended 11- -94)
SECTION 4.3. REGULATION OF ELECTION.
   All municipal elections shall be conducted by the County Board of Elections
in accordance with Articles 23 and 24 of Chapter 163, of the General Statutes
of North Carolina, except as otherwise herein provided.
ARTICLE V. TOWN ATTORNEY
SECTION 5.1. APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS; TERM; COMPENSATION.
   The Board of Commissioners shall appoint a Town Attorney who shall be an
attorney-at-law licensed to engage in the practice of law in North Carolina and
who need not be a resident of the Town during his tenure. The Town Attorney
shall serve at the pleasure of the Board of Commissioners and shall receive
such compensation as the Board shall determine.
SECTION 5.2. DUTIES OF TOWN ATTORNEY.
   It shall be the duty of the Town Attorney to prosecute and defend suits for
and against the Town; to advise the mayor, Board of Commissioners, and other
Town officials with respect to the affairs of the Town; to draw all legal
documents relating to the affairs of the Town; to draw proposed ordinances when
requested to do so; to inspect and pass upon all agreements, contracts,
franchises and other instruments with which the Town may be concerned; and to
perform such other duties as may be required of him by virtue of his position
as Town Attorney.
ARTICLE VI. ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION 6.1. TOWN CLERK.
   The Board of Commissioners shall appoint a Town Clerk to keep a journal of
the proceedings of the Board and to maintain in a safe place all records and
documents pertaining to the affairs of the Town, and to perform such other
duties as may be required by law or as the Board may direct.
SECTION 6.2. TOWN TAX COLLECTOR.
   The Board of Commissioners may appoint a Tax Collector to collect all taxes,
licenses, fees and other monies belonging to the Town, subject to the
provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the Town, and he shall
diligently comply with and enforce all the general laws of North Carolina
relating to the collection, sale, and foreclosure of taxes by municipalities.
SECTION 6.3. TOWN FINANCE OFFICER.
   The Board of Commissioners may appoint from its regular members a Town
Finance Officer to perform the duties of the finance officer as required by the
Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act.
SECTION 6.4. CONSOLIDATION OF FUNCTIONS.
   The Board of Commissioners may, in its discretion, consolidate the functions
of any two or more of the positions of Town Clerk, Town Tax Collector, and Town
Finance Officer, or may assign the functions of any one or more of these
positions to the holder or holders of any other of these positions. The Board
may also, in its discretion, designate a single employee to perform all or any
part of the functions of any of the named positions, in lieu of appointing
several persons to perform the same.
SECTION 6.5. OTHER EMPLOYEES.
   The Board of Commissioners may create and fill by appointment such other
positions as it deems advisable to insure the efficient administration of the
Town's affairs, and may, in its discretion, appoint a person to supervise all
Town departments and may delegate to such person the power of appointment and
removal of department heads and employees, other than the Town Attorney.
ARTICLE VII. FINANCE
SECTION 7.1. CUSTODY OF TOWN MONEY.
   All monies received by the Town for or in connection with the business of
the Town government shall be paid promptly into the Town depository. Such
institution shall be designated by the Board of Commissioners in accordance
with such regulations and subject to such requirements as to security for
deposits and interest thereon as may be established by the General Statutes of
North Carolina. All interest on monies belonging to the Town shall accrue to
the benefit of the Town. All monies belonging to the Town shall be disbursed
only in accordance with the provisions of the Local Government Budget and
Fiscal Control Act.
SECTION 7.2. PURCHASES AND CONTRACTS.
   Purchases of apparatus, supplies, materials, and equipment, and contracts
for construction or repair work shall be made in accordance with the General
Statutes of North Carolina relating thereto.
SECTION 7.3. TAXATION.
   The territory within the corporate limits, and its citizens and property,
shall be subject to municipal taxes levied by the Town for the fiscal year
1975-1976, and subsequent years. The Town may obtain from Brunswick County and
the County shall provide upon request, a record of property within the
corporate limits which was listed for taxation as of January 1, 1975.
ARTICLE VIII. CLAIMS AGAINST THE TOWN
SECTION 8.1. TORT CLAIMS.
   All claims or demands against the Town arising in tort shall be presented to
the Board of Commissioners in writing, signed by the claimant or his attorney
or agent, within 90 days after such claim or demand is due or the cause of
action accrues. No suit or action shall be brought on such a claim or demand
within 30 days or after the expiration of 12 months from the time such claim or
demand is presented. Unless the said claim or demand is so presented within 90
days, and unless suit is brought within 12 months thereafter, any action
thereon shall be barred.
 
   TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10. GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   The provisions embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated the “Code of Ordinances, Town of Caswell
Beach, North Carolina” and may be so cited.
('75 Code, § 1-4-1)
Statutory reference:
   Pleading and proof of city ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-79
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I, compatible with future legislation, shall apply
to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Terms. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
   COUNTY. Brunswick County, North Carolina.
   GENDER. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
neuter genders.
   JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a JOINT AUTHORITY to three or more persons
or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such
persons or officers.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   NUMBER. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural
includes the singular number.
   OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they
shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in
this city.
   OWNER. The word OWNER applied to any property, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the
whole or a part of such property.
   PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. Includes every species of property except real property,
as herein defined.
   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
   PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
   REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street, between the curb line and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of North Carolina.
   STREET. Includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge, and the approaches thereto within the
town, and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between abutting
property lines.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
   TENANT or OCCUPANT. Applied to a building or land shall include any person
who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or
with others.
   TIME. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as
the past and present.
   TIME, COMPUTATION OF. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; and if the last day
is Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that shall be excluded.
   TOWN. The Town of Caswell Beach, North Carolina.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The Town Council of Caswell Beach, North Carolina.
   WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words
YEAR OF OUR LORD.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the powers,
duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any
transfer of functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this municipality for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the legislative body shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (G.S. §§ 139-1, et seq.) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed
1-1-85).
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.
Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
      Statutory reference:
         For provisions concerning the inspection of public records, see G.S.
§§ 139-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the previous code of
ordinances of the town published in 1975 and subsequently amended, the 1975
code section number shall be indicated in the history by “('75 Code, §
      ).”
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Civil penalties shall be imposed as set forth hereinafter to
address all violations contained within the Code of Ordinances, save and except
for those violations contained in
§§ 130.01 and
130.02, the violations being criminal violations imposed by state law.
      (2)   Each day a provision of the code or an ordinance is violated is a
separate offense. There shall be a civil fine imposed of $25 for each
violation, which fine will accrue daily, starting on the day the violation
first occurs and continuing through the day the violation ceases.
      (3)   When a citation is mailed to the offender, payment of the citation
shall be due and payable ten days following the mailing of same at the Post
Office by the Clerk. The fines are payable at the Town Hall during regular
business hours.
      (4)   Service of a civil citation is completed on the day it is
personally delivered, or three days after it is mailed, to the following: An
offender who is an individual or owner of a sole proprietorship, any general
partner of a partnership that is the offender, or is the registered agent, or
manager or other person in a supervisory capacity at the local place of
business of an offender who is a corporation. The three day period for mailed
service shall begin the day it is placed in the United States mail, in a
properly stamped and addressed envelope, addressed to the appropriate person
named above at the offender’s first known address. Personal service may be made
by any police officer, town manager or building inspector.
      (5)   Recovery of overdue civil penalties shall be by a civil action
against the offender in the nature of debt.
      (6)   Civil citation for all violations of code provisions and ordinances
regulating building, housing, environmental matters, mobile homes, zoning and
subdivisions shall be issued by the Building Inspector. All other civil
citations may be issued by any police officer or town manager.
   (B)   The penalty provisions for all ordinances and regulations contained in
the Code of Ordinances for the town shall be modified to comply with the
provisions of this section, save and except for those violations contained in
§§
130.01 and
130.02, said violations being criminal violations imposed by state law.
(Res. passed 10-18-00; Am. Res. passed 9-6-01; Am. Res. passed 6-9-05)
   TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.     BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
      
31.     OTHER TOWN OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.     DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
      
33.     STATE OF EMERGENCY PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 30: BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Board of Commissioners; powers and duties
Mayor
   
30.15   Mayor; duties
   
30.16   Mayor pro tem
Meetings
   
30.30   Regular meetings; time and place
   
30.31   Special meetings
   
30.32   Adjourned meetings
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   Membership. The Board of Commissioners of the town shall consist of a
Mayor and Board of Commissioners of five members. The Board of Commissioners
shall be charged with the general government and administration of the affairs
of the town.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The powers and duties of the Board of Commissioners
shall be as set out in the General Statutes of the state, the Town Charter and
the ordinances of the town.
('75 Code, §§ 1-1-1 and 1-1-2)
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-146
MAYOR
§ 30.15 MAYOR; DUTIES.
   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the town and, as such,
shall perform the following duties:
   (A)   Keep informed of the town's business;
   (B)   Preside over the meetings of the Board of Commissioners and shall have
the right to vote in cases where a tie exists;
   (C)   Sign all contracts, ordinances, resolutions, franchises, and all other
documents as authorized by the Board, and countersign and pre-audit all checks,
drafts, purchase orders, and other documents obligating the town fund;
   (D)   Appoint the members to serve on all committees, boards, or task forces
that are established within the town;
   (E)   Make recommendations to the Board concerning the affairs of the town,
as deemed necessary;
   (F)   Represent the town at ceremonies and other official occasions; and
   (G)   Perform other duties as authorized by the General Statutes, the Town
Charter and this code.
('75 Code, § 1-1-3) (Am. Res. passed 5-10-12; Am. Ord. 2014-009-O, passed 11-
13-14; Am. Ord. 2015-003-O, passed 11-12-15)
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-69
Cross-reference:
   Provisions concerning the mayor, see Charter Article III
§ 30.16 MAYOR PRO TEM.
   At the first meeting after their election, the Board of Commissioners shall
select one of their number to act as Mayor Pro Tem. The Mayor Pro Tem shall
have no fixed term of office but, as such, shall perform all the duties of the
Mayor in the Mayor's absence or disability.
('75 Code, § 1-1-4) (Am. Ord. 2014-009-O, passed 11-13-14; Am. Ord. 2015-003-O,
passed 11-12-15)
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-70
MEETINGS
§ 30.30 REGULAR MEETINGS; TIME AND PLACE.
   The regular meetings shall be held on the second Thursday of each month at
5:00 p.m. at the Town Hall, unless otherwise designated by the Board.
('75 Code, § 1-1-11)
Statutory reference:
   Quorum, see G.S. § 160A-74
   Voting, see G.S. § 160A-75
§ 30.31 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings shall be held according to the procedures set out in G.S. §
160A-71, which provides that the Mayor, or in his or her absence, the Mayor Pro
Tem, or any three Commissioners may at any time call a special meeting by
signing a written notice stating the time and place of the meeting and the
subject(s) to be considered. Although as few as six hours notice may be given,
it is generally accepted that the Open Meetings Law, G.S. §§ 143-318 et seq.,
which requires public notice of at least 48 hours, will apply.
('75 Code, § 1-1-12)
§ 30.32 ADJOURNED MEETINGS.
   Any meeting of the Board may be continued or adjourned from day to day, or
for more than one day.
('75 Code, § 1-1-13)
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions, see G.S. § 143-318.12(b)(1)
CHAPTER 31: OTHER TOWN OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Authority of Board to appoint officers and employees
City Officers
   
31.15   Town Clerk
   
31.16   Town Attorney
   
31.17   Tax Collector
   
31.18   Finance Officer
   
31.19   Town Manager
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 AUTHORITY OF BOARD TO APPOINT OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Such other officers and employees as are deemed necessary may be appointed
by the Board at the first meeting after each election. All officers and
employees shall serve at the pleasure of the Board and receive such
compensation as from time to time may be prescribed by the Board.
('75 Code, § 1-2-5)
CITY OFFICERS
§ 31.15 TOWN CLERK.
   The Board shall appoint a Town Clerk. It shall be the duty of the Clerk to:
   (A)   Act as Secretary to the Board;
   (B)   Keep a true record of all the proceedings of the Board;
   (C)   Keep the original of all ordinances in a book especially provided for
that purpose;
   (D)   Act as custodian for all the books, papers, records and journals of
the Board;
   (E)   Perform other duties as may be required by law or by the Board;
   (F)   Perform the duties of the Tax Collector.
('75 Code, § 1-2-1) (Am. Res. passed 2-11-10)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of Clerk specified, see G.S. § 160A-171
   Authority to designate Deputy Clerk, see G.S. § 160A-172
§ 31.16 TOWN ATTORNEY.
   The Board shall appoint a Town Attorney whose duties shall be to:
   (A)   Prosecute or defend any and all suits or actions at law or equity to
which the town may be a part, or in which it may be interested, or which may be
brought against, or by, any officer of the town, or in the capacity of the
person as an officer of the town;
   (B)   See to the full enforcement of all judgments or decrees rendered or
entered in favor of the town;
   (C)   See to the completion of all special assessment proceedings and
condemnation proceedings;
   (D)   Draft or review any contract, lease or other document or instrument to
which the town may be a party, and approve all ordinances and resolutions of
the Board as to forum;
   (E)   At the request of the Board, draft ordinances covering any subjects
within the power of the town;
   (F)   Attend meetings of the Board upon request; and
   (G)   Perform any other duties required by him by G.S. § 160A-173 and other
laws and ordinances.
('75 Code, § 1-2-2)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of Attorney, see § 160A-173
§ 31.17 TAX COLLECTOR.
   The Board shall provide for the appointment of a Tax Collector, whose duties
shall be to:
   (A)   Collect all taxes and assessments due to the town;
   (B)   Make an accounting to the Town Finance Officer at the end of each
month;
   (C)   Pay over to the Town Finance Officer such money as is collected for
the account of each separate fund according to the tax levy;
   (D)   Deliver a list of all unpaid taxes with the reason therefor as
ascertainable to the Board of Commissioners;
   (E)   Supply the Mayor and the Board with any information as they may
require relative to the performance of his duties;
   (F)   Make periodic reports to the Board listing therein all funds
collected;
   (G)   Perform other duties required by law, or as the Board may direct.
('75 Code, § 1-2-3)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of Tax Collector, see G.S. §§ 105-349 and 105-350
§ 31.18 FINANCE OFFICER.
   The Board shall provide for the appointment of a Finance Officer, whose
duties shall be to:
   (A)   Supervise the keeping of the books and accounts of the town;
   (B)   Receive and disburse all monies to the town as required under state
law;
   (C)   Countersign and pre-audit all checks, drafts, contracts, purchase
orders, or other documents obligating town funds;
   (D)   Report to the Board concerning the finances of the town, as they may
require;
   (E)   Maintain all records of the bonded debt of the town and maintain
sinking funds;
   (F)   Supervise the investment of idle funds;
   (G)   Assist Administrator/Budget Officer in the task of projecting,
developing, working with the annual budget process and maintenance of adopted
budget; and
   (H)   Perform other duties assigned by the General Statutes, the Town
Charter, or by the Board.
('75 Code, § 1-2-4) (Am. Res. passed 2-11-10)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of Finance Officer, see G.S. § 159-25
   Fiscal control generally, see G.S. §§ 159-7 et seq.
§ 31.19 TOWN MANAGER.
   The Board shall provide for the appointment of a Town Manager, whose duties
shall be to:
   (A)   Carry out directives of the Mayor and Board of Commissioners as agreed
upon during Town Council meetings;
   (B)   Consult with governing body members, legal staff and state officials;
   (C)   Act as agent of the Board in developing, interpreting and implementing
public policy;
   (D)   Plan, organize, direct and coordinate the town's planning functions,
including current and long-range planning;
   (E)   Serve as Budget Officer for annual and capital budgets;
   (F)   Plan, organize, direct and participate in the overall management
functions of the town;
   (G)   Plan, supervise, coordinate and evaluate the work of staff to include
all departments; and
   (H)   Perform other duties assigned by the General Statutes, the Town
Charter, or by the Board.
(Ord. passed 4-26-02; Am. Res. passed 2-11-10; Am. Ord. 2013-07-O, passed 3-14-
13)
CHAPTER 32: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Planning Board
   
32.01   Membership and vacancies
   
32.02   Organization
   
32.03   Powers and duties
Cross-reference:
   Planned development, see §§ 153.065 through 153.069
PLANNING BOARD
§ 32.01 MEMBERSHIP AND VACANCIES.
   (A)   The Planning Board shall consist of five members; two of the initial
members shall be appointed by the Commissioners for a term of one year, two for
two years, and one for three years. Their successors shall be appointed for
terms of two years. Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expiration of
terms shall be filled as they occur for the period of the unexpired term.
Alternate members shall be allowed, provided they meet the same criteria as
regular members.
   (B)   Members shall be eligible for reappointment. One member of the Board
of Commissioners may serve as an ex-officio advisory member.
('75 Code, § 1-7-1) (Ord. passed 2-7-83; Ord. passed 1-5-26)
§ 32.02 ORGANIZATION.
   The Mayor shall appoint a Chairman for a one-year term. Within 30 days after
appointment the Planning Board shall meet and create and fill such offices as
it may determine are necessary. The term of the Chairman and other officers
shall be one year, with eligibility for re-election and/or reappointment. The
Planning Board shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and shall
keep a record of its members' attendance and of its resolutions, discussions,
findings and recommendations, which it shall record and shall be a public
record. The Planning Board shall hold at least one meeting monthly and all of
its meetings shall be open to the public.
('75 Code, § 1-7-2) (Ord. passed 2-7-83)
§ 32.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Planning Board, in general:
      (1)   To make studies of the city and surrounding area;
      (2)   To determine objectives to be sought in the development of the
study area;
      (3)   To prepare and adopt plans for achieving these objectives;
      (4)   To develop and recommend policies, ordinances, administrative
procedures and other means for carrying out plans in a coordinated and
efficient manner;
      (5)   To advise the Board of Commissioners concerning the use and
amendment of means for carrying out plans;
      (6)   To exercise any function in the administration and enforcement of
various means for carrying out plans that the Board of Commissioners may
direct;
      (7)   To perform any other related duties that the Board of Commissioners
may direct.
   (B)   The Planning Board may conduct such public hearings as may be required
to gather information necessary for the drafting, establishment and maintenance
of a comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, subdivision regulation, or other
studies the Planning Board or Board of Commissioners deems necessary.
   (C)   The Planning Board shall have power to promote public interest in and
an understanding of its recommendations, and to that end it may publish and
distribute copies of its recommendations and may employ such other means of
publicity and education as it may determine.
   (D)   The Planning Board shall have all the powers and authority granted by
G.S. Chapter 160A.
('75 Code, § 1-7-3) (Ord. passed 2-7-83; Am. Ord. 2014-001-O, passed 4-10-14)
CHAPTER 33: STATE OF EMERGENCY REGULATIONS
Section
   
33.01   State of emergency; general provisions
§ 33.01 STATE OF EMERGENCY; GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times
of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe, or similar public
emergency for any reason, municipal public safety authorities or law
enforcement are unable to maintain public order or afford adequate protection
for lives or property.
   (B)   If an existing or threatened state of emergency endangering the lives,
safety, health and welfare of the people within the town or threatens damage to
or destruction of property, the Mayor may issue a public proclamation for so
long as necessary to preserve order, declaring to all persons the existence of
such a state of emergency, and, in order to more effectively protect the lives
and property of people within the town, may place in effect any or all of the
restrictions authorized in this section.
   (C)   The Mayor may limit by the proclamation the application of all or any
part of such restrictions to any area of the town and to specific hours of the
day or night. He may exempt from all or any part of such restrictions law
enforcement officers, firefighters and other public employees, doctors, nurses,
employees of hospitals and other medical facilities; on-duty personnel, whether
state or federal; on-duty employees of public utilities, public transportation
companies, newspapers, magazines, radio broadcasting, and television
broadcasting corporations operated for profit; and such other classes of
persons as may be essential to the preservation of public order and immediately
necessary to serve the safety, health and welfare needs of the people within
the town.
   (D)   The Mayor shall proclaim the end of such state of emergency, or all or
any part of the restrictions imposed, as soon as circumstances warrant.
   (E)   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the Mayor may
impose by proclamation any or all of the following restrictions:
      (1)   Prohibit or regulate the sale or transfer of any explosives,
firearms, ammunition or dangerous weapons of any kind;
      (2)   Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine or
intoxicating beverages of any kind, and their possession or their consumption
off of one's own premises;
      (3)   Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil or
participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways or upon any
public property;
      (4)   Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha or any
other explosive or inflammable fluids or substances;
      (5)   Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street, alley or
roadway or upon any other public property, except by those in search of medical
assistance, food or any commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-
being of themselves, their families or some member thereof;
      (6)   Prohibit or regulate the operation of offices, business
establishments and other places to or from which people may travel or at which
they may congregate; and
      (7)   Prohibit any other activities or conditions the control of which
may be reasonably necessary to maintain order and protect lives or property
during the state of emergency.
   (F)   Any proclamation may be extended, altered or repealed particular
during the continued or threatened existence of a state of emergency by the
issuance of a subsequent proclamation. The provisions of the proclamation
including restrictions as to time or area may be extended or rescinded in
accordance with G.S. 14-288.16.
   (G)   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, it shall be
unlawful for any person to violate any provision of any restriction imposed by
any proclamation authorized by this chapter.
      (1)   Violation of a declaration declared pursuant to this chapter shall
be a Class 2 misdemeanor. In addition, the town may impose a fine for violation
of an emergency declaration.
      (2)   The maximum fine for violation of this section exceeds $50 and is
$500 for each day or incident that a violation of this chapter occurs.
(Ord. passed 5-1-20)
   TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.     WATER
      
51.     SOLID WASTE
      
52.     SEWERS
CHAPTER 50: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Application for service
   
50.03   Interruption of service; notice
   
50.04   Discontinuance of service
   
50.05   Change in occupancy
   
50.06   Unmetered water usage
   
50.07   Modifications to the ordinance
   
50.08   Fire hydrants
   
50.09   Lawn and fire sprinkler systems and swimming pools
Service Installation
   
50.20   Installation
   
50.21   Access to premises; easement
   
50.22   Unusual construction
Rates, Charges and Billing
   
50.30   Rate schedule/installation fee
   
50.31   Reserved
   
50.32   Billing/collections
   
50.33   Meter readings
   
50.34   Consumer responsibility
   
50.35   Complaints/adjustments
Cross-Connections
   
50.45   Definitions
   
50.46   Intent
   
50.47   Purpose
   
50.48   Responsibilities
   
50.49   Water system
   
50.50   Right of entry
   
50.51   Installation of assemblies
   
50.52   Testing and repair of assemblies
   
50.53   Facilities requiring protection
   
50.54   Connections with unapproved sources of supply
   
50.55   Fire protection systems
   
50.56   Enforcement
   
50.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESS FEES. The charge to consumers each billing period necessary to pay
for the services the system provides. Consumers pay an access fee regardless of
the amount of water consumed. The fee is determined from time to time by the
Board of Commissioners and shall be kept on file in the office of the Town
Clerk.
      (1)   The water system is operated and maintained through a combination
of administrative and non-administrative costs. Administrative efforts include
applications processing, scheduling, meter reading, billing, collecting,
accounts reconciliation, and delinquency follow-up. Non-administrative efforts
include operations and maintenance (testing, flushing, preventive and
corrective maintenance through yearly calibration of two-inch and six-inch
meters, replacement of broken meters, town waterlines, hydrants, valves, system
analysis and planning for future capital modifications)
      (2)   Under normal circumstance, the access fees will be reviewed
annually, and if required, changed during the annual budget process.
   BULK CONSUMERS. PEC (formerly CP & L), US Coast Guard, NC Baptist Assembly,
and any other entity so designated by the town may subscribe to water service.
   CONSUMERS. Individual and bulk consumers comprise those property owners that
are customers of the Caswell Beach water system who receive water service for
human consumption and fire protection from the town’s supply and who are billed
for that service. Billings include the consumption and access fees.
   CONSUMPTION RATE.  
      (1)   Consumption rates must offset costs of water purchases from the
county, system losses, and future expenses. All consumers shall pay a rate for
water consumption. This rate shall be determined from time to time by the Board
of Commissioners and shall be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
      (2)   Under normal circumstance, the consumption rates will be reviewed
annually, and if required, changed during the annual budget process.
   INDIVIDUAL CONSUMERS. Owners of all residential dwellings within the town’s
jurisdiction are required subscribers to the Caswell Beach water system. These
consumers, some of whom are members of community associations, are:
      Arboretum residents and Association
      Caswell Beach Road residents
      Caswell Dunes residents and Association
      Oak Island Beach Villas and Association
      Ocean Greens Condominium residents and Association
      Ocean Greens Homeowners residents and Association
(Ord. passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord. passed 10-8-98; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-99; Am. Ord.
passed 7-1-00; Am. Ord. passed 10-1-00; Am. Ord. passed 9-6-01; Am. Res. passed
4-14-11)
§ 50.02 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   (A)   Consumers will submit an application for service to the Town Hall.
   (B)   The town may reject any application for service not available under a
standard rate or which involves excessive service cost, or which may adversely
affect service to other customers or for other good and sufficient reasons.
   (C)   The town may reject application for service when applicant is
delinquent for previous water service at any location. Additionally, the town
shall not be required to provide service to anyone at a location that is on
record as delinquent in past billing.
(Ord. passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord. passed 9-6-01; Am. Res. passed 4-14-11)
§ 50.03 INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE; NOTICE.
   Under normal conditions such as scheduled or other recurring hydrant
flushing procedures, the town will issue a public notice regarding the
anticipated interruption of service.
(Ord. passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord. passed 9-6-01; Am. Res. passed 4-14-11)
§ 50.04 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   (A)   For non-payment it is the policy of the town to discontinue service to
consumers only after notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on a
disputed bill. The town application form for water service, a copy of which
shall be provided to each customer who applies, shall contain information
regarding the method by which billing is questioned. The application form and
the bill, furnished to the consumer at the address provided, shall contain the
Town Hall mailing address, physical address and telephone number for billing
questions, all in clearly visible and easily readable provisions to that
effect:
      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth
on the bill;
      (2)   A penalty is added for late payment in accordance with the town fee
schedule;
      (3)   That if the bill is not paid within 30 days of the mailing of the
bill, service discontinuation action may be taken; and
      (4)   The cost of reconnection of service after disconnection is a fee
established on the fee schedule kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
   (B)   Any consumers disputing the correctness of their bill shall have a
right to a hearing at which time the consumer may be represented in person or
by counsel or any other person of their choosing, and may present orally or in
writing, the complaint and contentions to the commissioner in charge of
billing. Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. That the Town
Manager shall be authorized to rescind a disconnect order and make final
determination as to consumer’s complaint. A claim shall be presented before the
bill has become delinquent.
   (C)   For tampering with a meter, along with prosecution in accordance with
§
50.99 of this chapter, the affected consumer shall pay an amount equal to the
cost of repair, replacement and/or recalibration of the meter and may be
refused further service.
   (D)   For any of the following reasons, the town may discontinue service:
      (1)   Strike, riot, fire, flood, accident, or other unavoidable cause.
      (2)   To prevent fraud or abuse.
      (3)   Consumer’s willful disregard of town’s water ordinance.
      (4)   Emergency repairs.
      (5)   Insufficiency of supplies beyond the town’s control.
      (6)   Legal processes.
      (7)   By direction of public authorities.
(Ord. passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord. passed 9-6-01; Am. Res. passed 4-14-11)
§ 50.05 CHANGE IN OCCUPANCY.
   Three working days notice is required for scheduling termination meter
readings. The consumer of record remains liable for system charges up to the
time of official termination reading.
(Ord. passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord. passed 9-6-01)
§ 50.06 UNMETERED WATER USAGE.
   No one may consume unmetered water from the town's system.
(Ord. passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord. passed 9-6-01)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.07 MODIFICATIONS TO THE ORDINANCE.
   The Town Board of Commissioners alone reserves the right to modify this
chapter at a regular or special meeting.
(Ord. passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord. passed 9-6-01)
§ 50.08 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   Use of water from a fire hydrant without first securing authorization from
the town (authorization to be in writing from the Town Manager or Public Works
Officer) shall result in a fine being imposed against the violator in an amount
not to exceed $1,000, together with reimbursement for the cost of water
consumed. A violation of this section shall not constitute a misdemeanor
pursuant to G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. passed 9-6-01; Am. Res. passed 1-10-02; Am. Res. passed 4-14-11)
§ 50.09 LAWN AND FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS AND SWIMMING POOLS.
   (A)   In accordance with the current North Caroline Standard Plumbing Code,
all lawn sprinklers and irrigation piping systems, fire sprinklers and swimming
pools shall be equipped with an approved backflow preventer to protect against
contamination of the potable water system.
   (B)   All lawn sprinkler systems without chemical injection or booster pumps
and fire sprinkler systems without booster pump facilities or chemical
additives are required to have a double check valve assembly (DCVA) located in
a place where it is readily accessible for regular testing, maintenance and
inspection.
   (C)   All lawn sprinkler systems with chemical injection or booster pump,
fire sprinkler systems with booster pump facilities or chemical additives, and
all swimming pools must use a Reduced Pressure Zone (RPZ) preferably installed
above ground readily accessible for regular testing, maintenance and
inspection.
(Ord. passed 12-12-02)
SERVICE INSTALLATION
§ 50.20 INSTALLATION.
   (A)   Town Responsibilities:
      (1)   The town shall run a service line from its distribution line to the
property line where the distribution line runs immediately adjacent and
parallel to the property to be served, and charge an installation fee in
accordance with the fee schedule kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
The meter will be installed at a mutually agreeable location, clear of
obstructions and accessible for reading.
      (2)   At its discretion, the town shall replace water meters at town
expense to insure correct metering of water usage and to avoid improperly
functioning or leaking meters. Hookup of the meter from the distribution line
to the meter shall be the responsibility of the town.
      (3)   All premises using the town’s water supply must be equipped with an
adequate water meter furnished by the town, but paid for by the consumer. In
the case of new construction, before any premises are occupied a water meter
shall be installed therein as herein required or application made for such
water service. The town, by and through its Town Manager, has the authority to
require the installation of meters in a location that will be easy to access
and, in the case of a multi-unit structure, shall have the authority to
determine if a meter is necessary for each unit or if the multi-unit structure
can be served by one meter. In the case of structures that are currently being
occupied, the Town Manager shall have the authority to require the installation
of meters in a location that will be easy to access and, in the case of a
multi-unit structure, shall have the authority to determine if a meter is
necessary for each unit or if the multi-unit structure can be served by one
meter. The town shall arrange to install meters on premises that are not
currently metered either individually by unit or by multi-unit structure and
the consumer shall be billed for the cost of the meter installation, said bill
to be included within and becoming a part of their water bill.
      (4)   The town reserves the right to refuse service unless consumer’s
lines are installed in such a manner as to prevent cross-connection or
backflow. Upon request of the consumer or upon recommendation of the Building
Inspector, the town may inspect consumer’s dwelling-side system hook-up for
adequacy. A plumbing inspection fee will be collected.
      (5)   When two or more meters are to be installed on the same premises
for different consumers, they shall be closely grouped and clearly identified
as to which consumer each applies. Installation fees are charged for each
individual meter.
      (6)   The town shall be responsible for the cost of repair of town-owned
waterlines up to individual resident’s meter or where two inch or six inch
meters are in use, to the cut off valve and/or meter closest to the outside of
the building to which the water is supplied.
   (B)   Town liability:  
      (1)   The town shall not be liable for damage of any kind resulting from
water or use of water on consumer’s premises. The town shall not be responsible
for any damage done or resulting from any defect in the piping, fixtures, or
appliances on consumer’s premises. The town shall not be responsible for
negligence of third persons or forces beyond the control of the town resulting
in interruption of service.
      (2)   The town shall not be liable to consumers for the quantity or
quality of water furnished by the county, or for any damage that may result to
the consumers from shutting off water main or service, for all purposes
whatsoever, even in cases where no notice is given, and all contracts
agreements or permits for the use of water purchased by the town from the
county, are made expressly subject to the provisions of this section.
   (C)   Consumer responsibilities:
      (1)   Consumer’s piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained
in a safe and efficient manner in accordance with town’s ordinances and in full
compliance with sanitary regulations of State Board of Health and the North
Carolina Standard Plumbing Code.
      (2)   Consumer shall guarantee proper protection of town’s property
placed on consumer’s premises and permit access to it only by town
representatives.
      (3)   On all new construction, and replacements of water meters on
improved property, consumer shall furnish and maintain a private cutoff valve
on the consumer’s side of the water meter. The town provides curb stops
accessible only by special tool on the opposite side of the meter (normally
part of the installed meter). Water may be cut off at the town’s side of the
meter only by town officials, town staff, qualified county maintenance workers
or plumbers licensed to work in the town. Throughout the year, an owner or
rental agent may request the town turn the water off or on at a specific meter
or cut-off valve. A fee will be assessed for each water turn off/on which is
payable at town hall at the time of the request. For disregard of or violation
of this section, the water may be turned off by the town.
      (4)   If replacement in accordance with division (A)(2) above is
required, connection of a replacement water meter to the house waterline shall
be the financial responsibility of the property owners who according to the
current State Plumbing Code may perform their own hookup of the waterline to
the meter or may pay a licensed plumber to connect the line to the meter. The
Town Building Inspector will check final work but will waive plumbing
inspection fee by consumer. No certification of occupancy on new construction
or certificate of completion will be issues until inspection is satisfactory.
      (5)   Replacement of the meter box due to damage by a property owner,
renter, or worker employed by the owner will be performed by the town and
billed to the property owner at a fee established on the fee schedule kept on
file in the office of the Town Clerk.
   (D)   Consumer Liability: Should a consumer be the cause of any loss or
damage to the town’s water system property, or accident/injury to persons
performing water system operations or maintenance on consumer’s property, they
shall be fully liable and will be considered for action under §
50.04.
(Ord. passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord. passed 9-6-01; Am. Ord. passed 12-12-02; Am. Res.
passed 3-1-04; Am. Res. passed 4-14-11)
§ 50.21 ACCESS TO PREMISES; EASEMENT.
   (A)   Duly authorized agents of the town shall have access to consumer's
premises during reasonable hours for the purpose of installing and removing
property, inspecting piping, reading or testing valves or meters and any other
purpose related to water service.
   (B)   Each consumer shall grant or convey or cause to be granted or
conveyed, to the town, a perpetual easement and right-of-way across any
property owned or controlled by consumer when necessary for the town to carry
out its water service functions.
(Ord. passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord. passed 9-6-01)
§ 50.22 UNUSUAL CONSTRUCTION.
   Owners of property desiring any unusual construction, alterations or
attachments, connected with the water supply, must submit plans and
specifications to the Town Building Inspector and water system maintenance
contractor for inspection and approval or disapproval as to whether the same
are permissible and the terms and conditions under which the same will be
allowed.
(Ord. passed 9-6-01)
RATES, CHARGES AND BILLING
§ 50.30 RATE SCHEDULE/INSTALLATION FEE.
   (A)   Access fee and consumption rates: See Definitions (§
50.01).
   (B)   All other water-related fees will be indicated on the fee schedule to
be kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk.
(Ord. passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord. passed 10-8-98; Am. Ord. passed 9-6-01; Am. Res.
passed 4-14-11)
§ 50.31 RESERVED.
§ 50.32 BILLING/COLLECTIONS.
   (A)   Bills are rendered monthly and shall be due and payable 20 days after
the mailing date (the due date). A 10% late charge is added after the due date.
Consumers may have their service discontinued if bills are not paid within 30
days of mailing, subject to the provisions of §
50.04. Service will be resumed only after all outstanding bills, charges, and
fees have been paid. After 30 days of discontinued service, the town may remove
the meter. The cost for reinstallation/reconnect will be installation cost plus
10% of all unpaid charges, and fees.
   (B)   When a customer’s check is returned to the town by his bank for any
reason, the customer shall be notified by mail at the address provided to the
town for billing that the check was not honored and that his service will be
disconnected unless he contacts city hall to make arrangements to pay to bill
within one week (five working days) from mailing of notification. A fee will be
charged to the maximum allowed by law for all returned checks.
   (C)   If there are payments made in a delinquent manner for which the Town
Manager determines there to be a reasonable explanation and the outstanding
bill is paid in a timely fashion based upon the facts and circumstances
surrounding the delay, the Town Manager shall have the authority to waive late
fees on a case by case basis.
(Ord. passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord. passed 9-6-01; Am. Res. passed 4-14-11; Am. Res.
passed 9-13-12)
§ 50.33 METER READINGS.
   Meters are read by town personnel as closely as possible at the end of each
service period. The property owner may request the meter be calibrated for
accuracy at a charge as set out in the fee schedule on file in the Town Clerk’s
Office. The fee is refundable if the meter is found to be faulty. Improperly
functioning or leaking meters will be repaired or replaced at no expense to the
consumer.
(Ord. passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord. passed 9-6-01; Am. Ord. passed 12-12-02; Am. Res.
passed 4-14-11)
§ 50.34 CONSUMER RESPONSIBILITY.
   Any consumer who applies for water service shall be responsible for all
service charges. If the property is sold, the seller shall notify the town of
the name and address of the buyer. Otherwise the consumer of record will
continue to be billed. Failure on the part of the consumer to receive bills or
notices shall not prevent such bills from becoming delinquent nor relieve the
consumer from payment.
(Ord. passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord. passed 9-6-01; Am. Res. passed 4-14-11)
§ 50.35 COMPLAINTS/ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   If a consumer believes a bill to be in error, claim shall be made at
Town Hall to the water commissioner before the bill becomes delinquent in
accordance with §
50.04. Such claim, if made after the bill is delinquent, shall not prevent
discontinuance of service as provided above. The consumer may pay the bill
under protest and not prejudice their claim.
   (B)   Should a consumer suffer unanticipated water loss and subsequent high
consumption charge due to no fault of the town, the consumer may apply for
relief to the town. In order to be eligible for relief, the consumer must
produce evidence that a repair has been made correcting the water loss
situation. The consumer’s loss will be reduced by no more than the excess to
the town’s cost of water for all water above the consumer’s normal consumption.
No adjustment will be made to any other charge for service. Consumer must
nonetheless pay the original bill as computed, on time and in accord with §
50.32. The adjustment process will be handled as an administrative function of
the town with periodic reports of activity to the Town Manager.
(Ord. passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord. passed 9-6-01; Am. Ord. passed 2-10-05; Am. Res.
passed 4-14-11)
CROSS-CONNECTIONS
§ 50.45 DEFINITIONS.
   AIR-GAP SEPARATION. A physical separation between the free flowing discharge
end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or nonpressure receiving
vessel. An approved AIR-GAP SEPARATION shall be at least double the diameter of
the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the receiving
vessel, in no case less than one inch (2.54 cm).
   APPROVED. As used in reference to a water supply, a water supply that has
been approved by the North Carolina Department of Environment, Health, and
Natural Resources, or as used in reference to air-gap separation, a pressure
vacuum breaker, a double check valve assembly, a double check detector
assembly, a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, a reduced
pressure principle detector assembly, or other backflow prevention assemblies
or methods; or an approval by the Brunswick County or the town’s Water
Department.
   BACKFLOW. The undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and
other liquids, gases, or other substances into the distribution pipes of the
consumer or public potable water system from any source or sources.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY - APPROVED. An assembly used for containment
and/or isolation purposes that has been investigated and approved by Brunswick
County and has been shown to meet the design and performance standards of the
American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE), the American Water Works
Association (AWWA), or the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and
Hydraulic Research of the University of Southern California. To be approved, an
assembly must be readily accessible for inline testing and maintenance, and
shall successfully complete a one-year field evaluation within the Brunswick
County water system. The type of assembly used should be based on the degree of
hazard either existing or potential. The following are approved methods for
backflow prevention:
      (1)   Double check detector assembly (fire system);
      (2)   Air gap;
      (3)   Reduced pressure principle assembly (RPZ);
      (4)   Double check valve assembly (DCVA);
      (5)   Reduced pressure principle-detector assembly (fire system);
      (6)   Pressure vacuum breaker (PVB).
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY - UNAPPROVED. An assembly that has been
investigated by Brunswick County and has been determined to be unacceptable for
installation within the town's water system.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TESTER - CERTIFIED. A person who has proven his
competency to the satisfaction of the Water Department. Each person who is
certified to make competent tests, or to repair, overhaul, and make reports on
backflow prevention assemblies shall be  knowledgeable of applicable laws,
rules, and regulations, and have qualifications acceptable to the Department,
and must hold a certificate of completion from an approved training program in
the testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE - APPROVED. A device used for isolation purposes
that has been shown to meet the design and performance standards of the
American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE) and the American Water Works
Association (AWWA).
   BACK-PRESSURE BACKFLOW. Any elevation in the consumer water system, by pump,
elevation of piping, or steam and/or air pressure, above the supply pressure at
the point of delivery which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the
normal direction of flow.
   BACK-SIPHONAGE BACKFLOW. A reversal of the normal direction of flow in the
pipeline due to a negative pressure (vacuum) being created in the supply line
with the backflow source subject to atmospheric pressure.
   CHECK VALVE - APPROVED. A check valve that is drip-tight in the normal
direction of flow when the inlet pressure is at least one psi and the outlet
pressure is zero. The check valve shall permit no leakage in a direction
reverse to the normal flow. The closure element (for example, clapper, poppet,
or other design) shall be internally loaded to promote rapid and positive
closure. An approved check valve is only one component of an approved backflow
prevention assembly (for example, pressure vacuum breaker, double check valve
assembly, double check detector assembly, reduced pressure principle assembly,
or reduced pressure detector assembly).
   CONSUMER/CUSTOMER. Any person, firm, or corporation using or receiving water
from the town's water system. In the absence of other parties or the failure of
other parties to accept the responsibilities herein set forth, the owner of
record shall be ultimately responsible.
   CONSUMER’S POTABLE WATER SYSTEM. That portion of the privately owned potable
water system lying between the point of delivery and point of use and/or
isolation protection. This system will include all pipes, conduits, tanks,
receptacles, fixtures, equipment, and appurtenances used to produce, convey,
store, or use potable water.
   CONSUMER’S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system commencing at the point of
delivery and continuing throughout the consumer's plumbing system, located on
the consumer's premises, whether supplied by a public potable water or an
auxiliary water supply.
   CONTAINMENT. Preventing the impairment of the public potable water supply by
installing an approved backflow prevention assembly at the service connection.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water which creates a
potential or actual hazard to the public health through the introduction of
hazardous or toxic substances or through the spread of disease by sewage,
industrial fluids, or waste.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any unprotected actual or potential connection or
structural arrangement between a public or a consumer's water system and any
other source or system through which it is possible to introduce any
contamination or pollution, other than the intended potable water with which
the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable
sections, swivel or change-over devices, and other temporary or permanent
devices through which or because of which “backflow” can or may occur are
considered to be cross-connections.
   CROSS-CONNECTION - CONTROLLED. A connection between a potable water system
and a non-potable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly
properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the
protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.
   DEPARTMENT. The Town of Caswell Beach Water Department.
   DOUBLE CHECK DETECTOR ASSEMBLY. A specially designed assembly composed of a
line-size approved double check valve assembly with a specific bypass water
meter and a meter-sized approved double check valve assembly. The meter shall
register (in U.S. gallons) accurately for only very low rates of flow and shall
show a registration for all rates of flow. This assembly shall only be used to
protect against a non-health hazard (for example, pollutant).
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of two independently
acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing shutoff valves
attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located test
cocks. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a non-health hazard
(for example, pollutant).
   DUAL CHECK VALVE. A self-closing device designed to permit flow in one
direction and close if there is a reversal of flow. A dual check valve is not
an in-line testable device and is only allowed for residential use in three
inch and one inch meter assemblies, excluding irrigation systems.
   HAZARD, DEGREE OF. This term is derived from the evaluation of conditions
within a system which can be classified as either a “pollutional” (non-health)
or a “contamination” (health) hazard.
   HAZARD, HEALTH. An actual or potential threat of contamination of a
physical, hazardous or toxic nature to the public or consumer's potable water
system to such a degree or intensity that there would be a danger to health.
   HAZARD, NON-HEALTH. An actual or potential threat to the quality of the
public or the consumer's potable water system. A NON-HEATH HAZARD is one that,
if introduced into the public water supply system, could be a nuisance to water
customers, but would not adversely affect human health.
   HAZARD, POLLUTIONAL. An actual or potential threat to the quality or the
potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would
not constitute a health or a system hazard, as defined. The maximum degree or
intensity of pollution to which the potable water system could be degraded
under this definition would cause a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable
or could cause minor damage to the system or its appurtenances.
   HEALTH AGENCY. The North Carolina State Department of Environment and
Natural Resources.
   ISOLATION. The act of confining a localized hazard within a consumer's water
system by installing approved backflow prevention assemblies. Disclaimer: The
Department may make recommendations, upon facility inspection, as to the usages
of isolation devices/assemblies, but does not assume or have responsibility
whatsoever for installations.
   POINT OF DELIVERY. Generally at the property line of the customer, adjacent
to the public or private street where the county or town's Water Department's
mains are located, or at a point on the customer's property where the meter is
located. The customer shall be responsible for all water piping and control
devices located on the customer's side of the point of delivery.
   POLLUTION. An impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does
not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and
unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such waters for domestic use.
   POTABLE WATER. Water from any source that has been investigated by the State
Department of Environment and Natural Resources and which has been approved for
human consumption.
   PUBLIC POTABLE WATER SYSTEM. Any publicly or privately owned water system
operated as a public utility, under a current State Department of Environment
and Natural Resources permit, to supply water for public consumption or use.
This system will include all sources, facilities, and appurtenances between the
source and the point of delivery such as valves, pumps, pipes, conduits, tanks,
receptacles, fixtures, equipment, and appurtenances used to produce, convey,
treat, or store a potable water for public consumption or use.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY. An assembly
containing within its structure a minimum of two independently acting, approved
check valves, together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically
independent, pressure differential relief valve located between the check
valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The first check valve
reduces the supply pressure a predetermined amount so that during normal flow
and at cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the checks is less than
the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the pressure
differential relief valve, by discharge to atmosphere, shall operate to
maintain the pressure between the checks less than the supply pressure. The
unit shall include tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the
assembly and each assembly shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
The assembly is designed to protect against a health hazard (for example,
contaminant).
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE DETECTOR ASSEMBLY. A specially designed assembly
composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention
assembly with a specific bypass water meter and a meter-sized approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. The meter shall register, in
U.S. gallons, accurately for only very low rates of flow and shall show a
registration for all rates of flow. This assembly shall be used to protect
against a health hazard (for example, contaminant).
   SERVICE CONNECTIONS. The terminal end of a service connection from the
public potable water system, for example, where the Department loses
jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to
the consumer's water system.
   TOWN. The Town of Caswell Beach, North Carolina.
   VACUUM BREAKIER - ATMOSPHERIC TYPE. Also known as the “non-pressure type
vacuum breaker,” this term means a device containing a float-check, a check
seat, and an air inlet port. The flow of water into the body causes the float
to close the air inlet port. When the flow of water stops, the float falls and
forms a check valve against backsiphonage and at the same time opens the air
inlet port to allow air to enter and satisfy the vacuum. A shutoff valve
immediately upstream may be an integral part of the device. An atmospheric
vacuum breaker is designed to protect against a nonhealth hazard, isolation
protection only, under a backsiphonage condition only.
   VACUUM BREAKER - PRESSURE TYPE. An assembly containing an independently
operating internally loaded check valve and an independently operating loaded
air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. The assembly
is to be equipped with properly located test cocks and tightly closing shutoff
valves attached at each end of the assembly. This assembly is designed to
protect against a health hazard (for example, contaminant) under a
backsiphonage condition only.
   WATER PURVEYOR. The owner or operator of a public potable water system,
providing an approved water supply to the public. Brunswick County is the water
purveyor for the Town of Caswell Beach. The Town of Caswell Beach is the water
purveyor to its customers.
   WATER SUPPLY - APPROVED. Any public potable water supply which has been
investigated and approved by the State Department of Environment and Natural
Resources. The system must be operating under a valid health permit. In
determining what constitutes an approved water supply, the State Department of
Environment and Natural Resources has reserved the final judgment as to its
safety and potability.
   WATER SUPPLY - AUXILIARY. Any water supply on or available to the premises
other than Brunswick County's approved public potable water supply. These
auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water
supply or any natural source such as a well, spring, river, stream, and the
like, “used water”, or industrial fluids. These waters may be polluted,
contaminated, or objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over
which the water purveyor does not have sanitary control.
   WATER SUPPLY - UNAPPROVED. A water supply which has not been approved for
human consumption by the State Department of Environment and Natural Resources.
   WATER - USED. Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public water
system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of
delivery and is no longer under the control of the water purveyor.
(Res. passed 11-20-03)
§ 50.46 INTENT.
   (A)   The intention of this policy to define the authority of the town Water
Department, hereinafter referred to as the Department, as the water purveyor,
in the elimination of all hazards, both actual and potential to potable water
within the town's public water supply system.
   (B)   This subchapter will comply with the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act
(SDWA) (P.L. 93-523), the North Carolina Administrative Code (NCAC) (Title 10,
Chapter 10, Subchapter 10-D, paragraph, 1006), and the North Carolina Building
Code (Volume II) as they pertain to cross-connections with the public water
supply system and will apply the principle that the degree of protection should
be commensurate with the degree of the hazard or potential hazard to the public
water supply system.
(Res. passed 11-20-03)
§ 50.47 PURPOSE.
   The specific purposes of this subchapter are as follows:
   (A)   To protect the public potable water supply of the town against actual
or potential contamination (for example, cross-connections, backflow,
backsiphonage) by isolating within the consumer's water system contaminants or
pollutants that could, under adverse conditions, backflow through uncontrolled
cross-connections into the public water system.
   (B)   To eliminate or control existing cross-connections, actual or
potential, (backflow, backsiphonage or any other source of water or process
water used for any purpose whatsoever) which may jeopardize the potability of
the town's public water supply system.
   (C)   Establish and maintain a continuing inspection program of cross-
connection and inspection which will systematically and effectively prevent the
contamination or pollution, either actual or potential, of all potable water
systems connected to the town's public water supply system.
   (D)   Control cross-connections (for example, backflow and backsiphonage)
through cooperation between the town and the town's customers (consumers).
Responsibilities and duties of each will be set forth in this policy and their
applicable regulations.
(Res. passed 11-20-03)
§ 50.48 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Health agency. The State Department of Environment and Natural
Resources has the responsibility for promulgating and enforcing laws, rules,
regulations, and policies to be followed in carrying out an effective cross-
connection control program. The State Department of Environment and Natural
Resources also has the primary responsibility of insuring that Brunswick County
operates the public potable water system free of actual or potential sanitary
hazards, including unprotected cross-connections. The State Department of
Environment and Natural Resources has the further responsibility of insuring
that Brunswick County provides an approved water supply at the service to the
town's public water system and, further, that it requires the installation,
testing, and maintenance of an approved backflow prevention assembly on the
service connection when required.
   (B)   Water purveyor. Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter,
Brunswick County has the responsibility to ensure a safe water supply begins at
the source and includes all of the public water distribution system, including
the service connection, and ends at the point of delivery to the town's water
system. In addition, the Department shall exercise reasonable vigilance to
insure that the consumer has taken the proper steps to protect the public
potable water system. To insure that the proper precautions are taken, the
town's Water Commissioner or his duly appointed representative, is required to
determine the degree of hazard or potential hazard to the public potable water
system and to determine the degree of protection required; and to ensure proper
containment protection through an on-going inspection program. When it is
determined that a backflow prevention assembly is required for the protection
of the public system, the Department shall require the consumer, at the
consumer's expense, to install an approved backflow prevention assembly at each
service connection, to test immediately upon installation and thereafter at a
frequency as determined by the Department, to properly repair and maintain the
assembly or assemblies and to keep adequate records of each test and subsequent
maintenance and repair, including materials and/or replacement part. Failure,
refusal, or inability on the part of the consumer to install, have tested, and
maintain the assembly(s), shall constitute grounds for enforcement (for
example, stipulated penalties, disconnection of water service, and the like)
until the requirements have been satisfactorily met. Enforcement of this policy
shall be administered by the Water Commissioner or an authorized representative
of the town.
   (C)   Plumbing inspection.  
      (1)   The town's Building Inspector as part of the permitting process has
the responsibility to not only review building plans and inspect plumbing as it
is installed, but, he or she has the explicit responsibility of preventing
cross-connections from being designed and built into the plumbing system within
his jurisdiction.
      (2)   Where the review of building plans suggests or detects the
potential for cross-connections being made an integral part of the plumbing
system, the Building Inspector has the responsibility, under the State Building
Code, for requiring that such cross-connection be either eliminated or provided
with backflow prevention equipment approved by the State Building Code. The
Building Inspector's responsibility begins at the point of delivery, downstream
of the first installed backflow prevention assembly, and continues throughout
the entire length of the consumer's water system. The Building Inspector should
inquire about the intended use of water at any point where it is suspected that
a cross-connection might be made or where one is actually called for by the
plans. When such is discovered it shall be mandatory that a suitable, approved
backflow prevention assembly approved by the State Building Code be required by
the plans and be properly installed.
      (3)   The primary protection assembly for containment purposes only shall
have approval from the town, Brunswick County, the State Building Code, and the
State Department of Environment and Natural Resources.
   (D)   Consumer/customer.  
      (1)   The consumer has the primary responsibility of preventing
pollutants and contaminants from entering his potable water system or the
public potable water system. The consumer's responsibility starts at the point
of delivery from the public potable water system and includes all of his or her
water system.
      (2)   The consumer, at his or her own expense, shall install, operate,
test, and maintain approved backflow prevention assemblies as directed by the
Department. The consumer shall maintain accurate records of tests and repairs
made to backflow prevention assemblies and shall maintain records for a minimum
period of three years. The records shall be on forms approved by the Department
and shall include the list of materials or replacement parts used.
      (3)   Following any repair, overhaul, repiping or relocation of an
assembly, the consumer shall have it tested to insure that it is in good
operating condition and will prevent backflow. Tests, maintenance, and repairs
of backflow prevention assemblies shall be made by a certified backflow
prevention assembly tester.
   (E)   Certified backflow prevention assembly testers. When employed by the
consumer to test, repair, overhaul, or maintain backflow prevention assemblies,
a backflow prevention assembly tester will have the following responsibilities:
      (1)   The tester will be responsible for making competent inspections and
for repairing or overhauling backflow prevention assemblies and making reports
of such repair to the consumer and responsible authorities on forms approved by
the Department.
      (2)   The tester shall include the list of materials or replacement parts
used.
      (3)   The tester shall be equipped with and be competent to use all the
necessary tools, gauges, manometers and other equipment necessary to properly
test, repair, and maintain backflow prevention assemblies.
      (4)   It will be the tester's responsibility to insure that original
manufactured parts are used in the repair of or replacement of parts in a
backflow prevention assembly.
      (5)   It will be the tester's further responsibility not to change the
design, material or operational characteristics of an assembly during repair or
maintenance without prior approval of the Department.
      (6)   A certified tester shall perform the work and be responsible for
the competency and accuracy of all tests and reports.
      (7)   A certified tester shall provide a copy of all test and repair
reports to the consumer and to the Department's staff responsible for cross-
connection control within ten business days of any completed test or repair
work.
      (8)   A certified tester shall maintain such records for a minimum period
of three years. All certified backflow prevention assembly testers must obtain
and employ backflow prevention assembly test equipment that has been evaluated
and/or approved by the Department. All test equipment shall be registered with
Brunswick County Water Department. All test equipment shall be checked for
accuracy annually, at a minimum, calibrated, if necessary, and certified to the
Department as to the calibration, employing an accuracy/calibration method
acceptable to the Department.
      (9)   All certified backflow prevention assembly testers must become
recertified every two years through an approved backflow prevention
certification program.
(Res. passed 11-20-03)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.49 WATER SYSTEM.
   The water system shall be considered as made up of three parts: Brunswick
County's (water purveyor) system, the town's (water purveyor) system and the
consumer's system.
   (A)   Brunswick County's system. The county is permitted as a treatment and
supply system by the State of North Carolina since the county does treat water
from a natural source (for example, wells, spring, stream, river, pond, lake,
and the like). The county sells some portion of its water to the Town of
Caswell Beach. The county's system shall consist of treatment facilities,
pumping, storage, and distribution including all those facilities of the water
system under the complete control of the county, up to the point where the
town's system begins (service connection).
   (B)   Town's system. The town purchases all its potable water from Brunswick
County. The town tests the water as required by the State Department of
Environment and Natural Resources but does not treat the water it receivers
from the county system.
   (C)   Consumer's system. The consumer's system shall include those parts of
the facilities beyond the termination of the town's distribution system
(service connection) that are utilized in conveying potable water to points of
use.
(Res. passed 11-20-03)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.50 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   Authorized representatives from the Department and Brunswick County
Water Department shall have the right to enter, upon presentation of proper
credentials and identification, any building, structure, or premises during
normal business hours, or at any time during the event of an emergency, to
perform any duty imposed by this subchapter. Those duties may include sampling
and testing of water, or inspections and observations of all piping systems
connected to the public water supply. Where a user has security measures in
force that would require proper identification and clearance before entry into
their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with the security
guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, Department
personnel will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of
performing their specific responsibilities. Refusal to allow entry for these
purposes may result in discontinuance of water service.
   (B)   On request, the consumer shall furnish to the Department any pertinent
information regarding the water supply system on such property where cross-
connections and backflow are deemed possible.
   (C)   The consumer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable
times to authorized representatives from the county or town to determine
whether unprotected cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards,
including violations of this policy, exist. Refusal to allow entry for these
purposes shall result in enforcement action (disconnection of water services,
stipulated penalties, and the like). When a condition becomes know, the
consumer, his or her agent, occupant, or tenant shall be notified in writing to
disconnect the unprotected cross-connection(s) within a time period established
in this policy. The degree of protection required and the period of time
required for conformance shall be commensurate with the actual or potential
degree of hazard to the public potable water supply system.
      (1)   Cross-connection with private wells or other unapproved auxiliary
water supplies require immediate disconnection of unapproved sources.
      (2)   Cross-connection requiring correction through:
         (a)   Elimination;
         (b)   Air gap separation;
         (c)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RPZ) or
double check valve assembly (DCVA) for sized three-fourths inch through two
inch require 30 day maximum conformance period.
      (3)   Cross-connection requiring correction through reduced pressure
principle backflow prevention assembly (RPZ) or double check valve assembly
(DCVA) for sizes greater than two inch require 120 day maximum conformance
period.
      (4)   Upon completion of the above requirement, the consumer shall be
required to submit, in writing, notification of compliance to the Department.
      (5)   If, in the judgment of the Department, an imminent health hazard
exists, water service to the building or premises where a cross-connection
exists may be terminated unless an air gap is immediately provided, or the
cross-connection is immediately eliminated.
      (6)   Based upon recommendation from the Department, the consumer is
responsible for installing sufficient internal isolation backflow prevention
assemblies and/or methods (for example, air gap, pressure vacuum breakers,
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly, double check valve
assembly).
      (7)   No person shall fill special use tanks or tankers containing
pesticides, fertilizers, other toxic chemicals or their residues from the
public water system except at a location equipped with an air gap or an
approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly properly
installed on the public water supply.
(Res. passed 11-20-03)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.51 INSTALLATION OF ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance
with manufacturer's installation instructions, on each consumer's water system
at or near the property line, but in all cases, before the first branch line
leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist:
      (1)   In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply that is
not, or may not, be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is
not acceptable as an additional source by the State of North Carolina, the
public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by
installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line
commensurate with the degree of hazard.
      (2)   In the case of premises on which any industrial fluid or any other
objectionable substance is handled in such a manner as to create an actual or
potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be
protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow
prevention assembly in the service line commensurate with the degree of hazard.
This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from
the water purveyor's system that have been subject to deterioration in quality.
      (3)   In the case of premises having internal cross-connections that can
not be permanently corrected or protected against or intricate plumbing and
piping arrangements or where entry to all portions of the premises is not
readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or
impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exits, the
public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by
installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line
commensurate with the degree of hazard.
   (B)   All new construction plans and specifications, when required by the
State Building Code and the State Department of Environment and Natural
Resources, shall be made available to the town's Building Inspector for review
and approval, and to determine the degree of hazard.
   (C)   Ownership, testing, and maintenance of the assembly shall be the
responsibility of the consumer. All reduced pressure principle assemblies and
double check valve assemblies shall be installed above ground in a protective
enclosure. Reduced pressure principle assemblies must be installed in a
horizontal position and in a location in which no portion of the assembly can
become submerged in any substance under any circumstances. Double check valve
assemblies may be installed in a vertical position with prior approval from the
Department provided the flow of water is in an upward direction. Pit and/or
below grade installations are prohibited.
   (D)   The installation of a backflow prevention assembly which is not
approved must be replaced with an approved backflow prevention assembly.
   (E)   The installer is responsible to make sure a backflow prevention
assembly is working properly upon installation and is required to furnish the
following information to the Department within 15 days after a reduced pressure
principle backflow preventer (double check valve assembly (DCVA), pressure
vacuum breaker (PVB), double check detector assembly (DCDA), or reduced
pressure principle detector assembly (RPDA) is installed:
      (1)   Service address where assembly is located.
      (2)   Owner and address, if different from service address.
      (3)   Description of assembly's location.
      (4)   Date of installation.
      (5)   Installer, include name, plumbing company represented, plumber's
license number, and project permit number.
      (6)   Type of assembly, size of assembly.
      (7)   Manufacturer, model number, serial number.
      (8)   Test results/report.
   (F)   The consumer shall, upon notification, install the appropriate
containment assembly not to exceed the following time frame:
      (1)   Health hazard: 60 days.
      (2)   Non-health hazard: 90 days.
   (G)   Following installation, all reduced pressure principle backflow
preventers (RP), double check valve assemblies (DCVA), pressure vacuum breakers
(PVB), double check detector assemblies (DCDA), or reduced pressure principle
detector assemblies (RPDA) are required to be tested by a certified backflow
prevention assembly tester within ten days.
(Res. passed 11-20-03)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.52 TESTING AND REPAIR OF ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   Testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be made by a certified
backflow prevention assembly tester at the customer's expense. The tests are to
be conducted upon installation and annually thereafter or at a frequency
established by the Department's regulations. A record of all testing and
repairs is to be retained by the customer. Copies of the records must be
provided to the Department within ten business days after the completion of any
testing and/or repair work.
   (B)   Any time that repairs to backflow prevention assemblies are deemed
necessary, whether through annual or required testing or routine inspection by
the owner or by Department, these repairs must be completed within a specified
time in accordance with the degree of hazard. In no case shall this time period
exceed:
      (1)   Health hazard facilities: 14 days.
      (2)   Non-health hazard facilities: 21 days.
   (C)   All backflow prevention assemblies with test cocks are required to be
tested annually or at frequency established by the Department's regulations.
Testing requires a water shutdown usually lasting 5 to 20 minutes. For
facilities that require an uninterrupted supply of water, and when it is not
possible to provide water service from two separate meters, provisions shall be
made for a parallel installation of backflow prevention assemblies.
   (D)   All certified backflow prevention assembly testers must obtain and
employ backflow prevention assembly test equipment which has been evaluated
and/or approved by Brunswick County. All test equipment shall be registered
with the Department. All test equipment shall be checked for accuracy annually,
at a minimum, calibrated, if necessary, and certified to the Department as to
such accuracy/calibration, employing a calibration method acceptable to the
town's Water Department.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any customer or certified tester to submit
any record to the Department which is false or incomplete in any material
respect. It shall be unlawful for any customer or certified tester to fail to
submit to the Department any record which is required by this subchapter. The
violations may result in any of the enforcement actions outlined in
§§ 50.56 and
50.99.
(Res. passed 11-20-03)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.53 FACILITIES REQUIRING PROTECTION.
   (A)   Approved backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed on the
service line to any premises that the Department has identified as having a
potential for backflow.
   (B)   The following types of facilities or services have been identified by
the Department as having a potential for backflow of nonpotable water into the
public water supply system. Therefore, an approved backflow prevention assembly
will be required on all such services according to the degree of hazard
present. Other types of facilities or services not listed below may also be
required to install approved backflow prevention assemblies if determined
necessary by the Department. As a minimum requirement, all commercial services
will be required to install a double check valve assembly, unless otherwise
listed in this subsection.
      (1)   Auxiliary water systems:
         (a)   Approved public/private water supply: DCVA.
         (b)   Unapproved public/private water supply: AG.
         (c)   Used water and industrial fluids: RP.
      (2)   Buildings, including hotels, apartment houses, public and private
buildings, or other structures having unprotected cross-connections.
         (a)   Under five stories, no health hazard: DCVA.
         (b)   Under five stories, health hazard: RP.
         (c)   Over five stories, all: RP.
      (3)   Fire systems:
         (a)   No health hazard: DCDA or PVB.
         (b)   Health hazard (booster pumps, foam, antifreeze solution, and the
like): RP.
      (4)   Systems two and one-half inches to ten inches or larger:
         (a)   No health hazard: DCDA.
         (b)   Health hazard (booster pumps, foam, antifreeze solution, and the
like): RPDA.
      (5)   Lawn irrigation systems (split taps):
         (a)   No health hazard: DCVA or PVB.
         (b)   Health hazard (booster pumps, chemical systems): RP.
      (6)   Restaurants:
         (a)   No health hazard: DCVA.
         (b)   Health hazard: RP.
      (7)   Sewage and storm drain facilities: RP.
      (8)   Swimming pools: RP.
      (9)   Waterfront facilities and industries: RP.
   (C)   All assemblies and installations shall be subject to inspection and
approval by the Brunswick County and the Department.
(Res. passed 11-20-03)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.54 CONNECTIONS WITH UNAPPROVED SOURCES OF SUPPLY.
   (A)   No person shall connect or cause to be connected any supply of water
not approved by the State Department of Environment and Natural resources to
the water system supplied by the Department. Any connections allowed by the
Department must be in conformance with the backflow prevention requirements of
this subchapter.
   (B)   In the event of contamination or pollution of a public or consumer
potable water system, the consumer shall notify the Department commission
immediately in order that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome and
eliminate the contamination or pollution.
(Res. passed 11-20-03)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.55 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   All connections for fire protection systems connected with the town's
water system, two inches and smaller, shall be protected with an approved
double check valve assembly as a minimum requirement. All fire systems using
toxic additives or booster pumps shall be protected by an approved reduced
pressure principle assembly at the main service connection.
   (B)   All connections for fire protection systems connected with the town's
water system greater than two inches, shall be protected with an approved
double check detector assembly as a minimum requirement. All fire protection
systems using toxic or hazardous additives or booster pumps shall be protected
by an approved reduced pressure principle detector assembly at the main service
connection.
   (C)   All existing backflow prevention assemblies two and one-half inches
and larger installed on fire protection systems that were initially approved by
the town shall be allowed to remain on the premises, as long as they are being
properly maintained, tested and repaired as required by this subchapter. If,
however, the existing assembly must be replaced once it can no longer be
repaired, or in the event of proven water theft through an unmetered source,
the consumer shall be required to install an approved double check detector
assembly or reduced pressure principle detector assembly as required by
§ 50.51.
(Res. passed 11-20-03)
Penalty, see § 50.99
§ 50.56 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The owner, manager, supervisor, or person in charge of any
installation found not to be in compliance with the provisions of this
subchapter shall be notified in writing with regard to the corrective action to
be taken. The time for compliance shall be in accordance with
§ 50.52.
   (B)   The owner, manager, supervisor, or person in charge of any
installation which remains in noncompliance after the time prescribed in the
initial notification, as outlined in
§ 50.52, shall be considered in violation of this subchapter, and may be issued
a civil citation by the Water Department. The citation shall specify the nature
of the violation and the provision of this subchapter violated, and further
notify the offender that the civil penalty for the violation is as set forth in
§ 50.99 of this chapter and is to be paid to the Water Department at the office
of the Water Department, 1100 Caswell Beach Rd., Caswell Beach, North Carolina,
within 30 days. If the penalty prescribed in
§ 50.99 is not paid within the time allowed, the Water Department may initiate
a civil action in the nature of a debt and recover the sums set forth in
§ 50.99 of this chapter, plus the cost of the action.
   (C)   If, in the judgment of the Water Department, any owner, manager,
supervisor, or person in charge of any installation found to be in
noncompliance with the provisions of this subchapter neglects his
responsibility to correct any violation, the neglect may result in
discontinuance of water service until compliance is achieved.
   (D)   Failure of a customer or certified tester to submit any record
required by this subchapter, or the submission of falsified reports/records may
result in a civil penalty of up to $1,000 per violation. If a certified
backflow prevention assembly tester submits falsified records to the Water
Department, the Water Commission shall take the necessary actions to revoke
certification to test backflow prevention assemblies within the potable water
system for a time period not to exceed one year. The tester will then be
required to complete an approved certification course to acquire a new
certification. Falsification made to records/reports after becoming recertified
shall result in the permanent revocation of backflow testing certification, in
addition to a civil penalty as provided for in this chapter.
   (E)   Enforcement of this program shall be administered by the Code
Enforcement Officer in conjunction with the Water Commissioner of the Water
Department or their authorized representative.
   (F)   Requests for extension of time shall be made in writing to the Water
Commissioner of the Water Department or his authorized representative. All
other appeals shall be made in accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   Adjudicatory hearings. A customer assessed a civil penalty under
this subchapter shall have the right to an adjudicatory hearing before a
hearing officer designated by the manager of the Public Works Commission upon
making written demand, identifying the specific issues to be contended, to the
manager of the Public Works Commission within 30 days following notice of final
decision to assess a civil penalty. Unless the demand is made within the time
specified in this section, the decision on the civil penalty assessment shall
be final and binding.
      (2)   Appeal hearings. Any decision of the Department made as a result of
an adjudicatory hearing held under this section may be appealed by any party to
the Board of Commissioners upon filing a written demand within ten days of
receipt of notice of the decision. Hearings held under this section shall be
conducted in accordance with the town's hearing procedures. Failure to make
written demand within the time specified in this subsection shall bar further
appeal. The Board of Commissioners shall make a decision on the appeal within
90 days of the date the appeal was filed and shall transmit a written copy of
its decision by registered or certified mail.

      (3)   Official record. When a final decision is issued under this
section, the Board of Commissioners shall prepare an official record of the
case that includes:
         (a)   All notices, motions, and other like pleadings;
         (b)   A copy of all documentary evidence introduced;
         (c)   A certified transcript of all testimony taken, if testimony is
transcribed. If testimony is taken and not transcribed, then a narrative
summary of any testimony taken;
         (d)   A copy of the final decision of Board of Commissioners.
      (4)   Judicial review. Any customer against whom a final decision of the
Board of Commissioners is entered, pursuant to the hearing procedure under this
section, may appeal the order or decision by filing a written petition for
judicial review within 30 days after receipt of notice by certified mail of the
order or decision to the general court of justice of the county or of the
county where the order or decision is effective, along with a copy to the Board
of Commissioners. Within 30 days after receipt of the copy of the petition of
judicial review, the Board of Commissioners shall transmit to the reviewing
court the original or a certified copy of the official record, as outlined in
this section.
(Res. passed 11-20-03)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not specifically provided, shall be fined in accordance with
§ 10.99, and every day the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (B)   Violation of
§ 50.06 shall be a misdemeanor as provided by G.S. § 14-4, punishable upon
conviction by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30
days, together with restitution to the town for water consumed or services
provided. Damages to the town's water system caused by violation of
§ 50.06 shall be the responsibility of the violator and the costs of repairs or
replacement of equipment paid by the violator to the town.
(Ord. passed 4-9-98; Am. Ord. passed 9-6-01)
   (C)   Any offender who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in
§ 50.56(A) shall be subject to a civil penalty of up to $1,000 per violation.
Each day in which a violation of any provision of
§§ 50.45 through
50.56 shall occur or continue shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Res. passed 11-20-03)
Cross-reference:
   Enforcement and other civil penalties, see
§ 50.56
CHAPTER 51: SOLID WASTE
Section
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Container requirements
   
51.03   Collection arrangements
   
51.04   Use of approved containers
   
51.05   Interference with containers prohibited
   
51.06   Building material scraps, tree trimmings/yard waste and bulk trash
pickup
   
51.07   Twice yearly tree trimming/yard waste clean-up
   
51.08   Burning and burying refuse prohibited
   
51.09   Hazardous waste and other banned material
   
51.10   Emergency storm debris removal
Cross-reference:
   Open burning prohibited, see
§ 93.16
   Weeds, grass and refuse, see
§§ 95.15 and
95.20
   Littering prohibited,
§ 131.15
   Maintenance of public areas; receptacles, see
§ 131.16
   Transportation of garbage and refuse, see
§ 131.17
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING MATERIALS SCRAP. Scrap building material from the construction,
reconstruction, remodeling or repair of a building, walkway, driveway, sign and
other structure, including but not limited to, excavated earth, tree stumps,
rocks, gravel, bricks, plaster, concrete, lumber or any other similar material
used in construction or the containers or wrappings therefor.
   BULK TRASH. Large items such as brown and white goods.
   GARBAGE.  All putrescible waste, including animal and vegetable matter,
animal offal and carcasses and recognizable industrial by-products, but
excluding sewage and human waste.
   RECYCLABLES. Newspaper, magazines, junk mail, mixed paper, plastics #1
through # 7, aluminum and steel cans, glass containers and flattened cardboard
boxes.
   REFUSE. All nonputrescible waste.
   SOLID WASTE. Garbage, refuse, building materials, tree trimmings, bulk trash
and recyclables, including solid waste materials resulting from homes,
businesses, industrial, commercial and agricultural operations, and from
community activities.
   TREE TRIMMINGS/YARD WASTE. Tree limbs, leaves, shrubbery, trimmings and
cuttings and all other trimmings, from the natural growth of trees, shrubbery,
weeds, plants or grass.
(‘75 Code, § 3-14-1) (Am. Res. passed 6-14-01; Am. Res. passed 11-8-12)
§ 51.02 CONTAINER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The county shall provide to every residence or premise where solid
waste does or may exist one 90-96 gallon rollout container that is compatible
for use with the town's contracted mechanical solid waste collection and
disposal equipment. All other solid waste containers for this purpose within
the town are hereby prohibited and shall be removed from use as a solid waste
container by the owner and/or the owner's agent.
   (B)   Solid waste shall not be allowed to collect outside the authorized
container. Property owners requiring more than one 90-96 gallon container to
meet this regulation shall arrange directly with the county contractor to
provide additional containers. Containers shall be kept in a reasonably clean
manner.
(Am. Res. passed 6-14-01; Am. Res. passed 11-8-12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.03 COLLECTION ARRANGEMENTS.
   (A)   The county provides weekly curbside solid waste collection for all
residences within the town. The town may opt to contract with a waste hauler
for an additional pickup of the 90-96 gallon containers in selected areas of
the town.
   (B)   Rollout containers shall be placed adjacent to the street for
collection and shall be removed from the collection position to their permanent
location at the residence under the following conditions:
      (1)   Rollout container for collection no earlier than 11:00 a.m. the day
before collection;
      (2)   Rollback containers after collection no later than 11:00 a.m. the
day after collection.
   (C)   The town may provide to residents on Caswell Beach Road, on a
voluntary basis, rollback of the containers from the road to the residence for
a fee to be charged and paid in advance of the service. Rollback will occur in
accordance with this chapter. The fee schedule will be kept on file at the Town
Hall. Applications for rollback service shall be made to the town prior to the
start of service.
   (D)   The town's recycling contractor shall provide to each residence a
recycling container for placement of all recyclable materials. Containers shall
be placed curbside bi-weekly or as stated in the published recycle collection
schedule as kept in the office of the Town Clerk and posted on the town
website.
   (E)   Collection by the town shall not be made from vacant lots nor shall
any large rocks, tree trunks, tree stumps, or tree limbs, or other heavy
objects be collected. No waste materials or lot clearings shall be collected
from houses or other structures under construction or recently completed. The
town may, from time to time, collect lead and limb debris. This section shall
not apply to the leaf and limb pick-up.
(‘75 Code, § 3-14-7) (Am. Res. passed 6-14-01; Am. Res. passed 2-14- 02; Am.
Res. passed 4-11-02; Am. Res. passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 51.04 USE OF APPROVED CONTAINERS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any
solid waste of any kind on any public or private property except in approved
containers.
   (B)   Tree trimming, building materials and bulk trash shall not be placed
in the rollout containers. The county waste contractor will not pickup these
items.
(‘75 Code, § 3-14-2) (Am. Res. passed 6-14-01; Am. Res. passed 11-8-12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.05 INTERFERENCE WITH CONTAINERS PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, displace or otherwise
interfere with solid waste containers or their contents except by the owners or
upon permission or at the request of the owner.
(‘75 Code, § 3-14-6) (Am. Res. passed 6-14-01; Am. Res. passed 11-8-12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.06 BUILDING MATERIAL SCRAPS, TREE TRIMMINGS/YARD WASTE AND BULK TRASH
PICKUP.
   (A)   Building material scrap, tree trimmings/yard waste and bulk trash
shall be removed at the owner’s expense by hauling materials to the country
dumping facilities or by direct arrangement with the county waste contractor.
The town may provide exception for tree trimmings and yard waste collection.
See
§ 51.07.
   (B)   Residents shall not store building material scrap, tree trimmings/yard
waste and bulk trash along side of the street. Residents may however place
these items on the street side in accordance with the announced dates so as to
be available for pickup on the day prior to a scheduled pickup.
(Res. passed 6-14-01; Am. Res. passed 11-8-12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.07 TWICE YEARLY TREE TRIMMING/YARD WASTE CLEAN-UP.
   The town may provide a spring and fall cleanup day for disposal of tree
trimming and yard waste. Newspaper and town website announcements will be made
prior to the cleanup days and information can be obtained by the calling the
Town Hall.
(Res. passed 6-14-01; Am. Res. passed 11-8-12)
§ 51.08 BURNING OR BURYING REFUSE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful to burn or set fire to or bury any solid waste for the
purpose of disposal. Also see open burning,
§ 93.16.
(Am. Res. passed 6-14-01; Am. Res. passed 11-8-12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.09 HAZARDOUS WASTE AND OTHER BANNED MATERIALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or deposit in any solid waste
containers for collection and disposal of any materials classified by state
statutes or federal regulations as hazardous waste. The following are
specifically prohibited: antifreeze, medical waste, hazardous waste, lead acid
batteries, tires, used oil, oil-based paint, white goods, yard waste and all
items prohibited by state law.
(‘75 Code, § 3-14-8) (Am. Res. passed 6-14-01; Am. Ord. passed 11-8-12)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 51.10 EMERGENCY STORM DEBRIS REMOVAL.
   In the event of a catastrophic emergency where the Mayor of the town has
proclaimed that a state of emergency exists and has ordered the exercise of
public emergency powers in order to eliminate immediate threats to life, public
health, and safety; eliminate immediate threats of significant damage to
improved property; or to ensure economic recovery of the affected community to
the benefit of the community-at-large. the town shall ingress on private roads
within the town for the propose of removing debris within the right- of-ways of
the public vehicular access areas.
(Am. Ord. 2016-004, passed 6-9-16)
CHAPTER 52: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Effluent spraying
   
52.02   Mandatory connection
   
52.03   Purpose and policy
   
52.04   Definitions
   
52.05   Abbreviations
   
52.06   Applicability of chapter
Use of Public Sewers
   
52.20   Required
   
52.21   Private wastewater disposal
   
52.22   Building sewers and connections
   
52.23   Prohibited discharges
   
52.24   Specific pollutant limitations
   
52.25   Separate connections required
   
52.26   Outside connections
   
52.27   Powers and authority for inspection
   
52.28   Measurement of flow
   
52.29   Determining of character and concentration of wastes
   
52.30   Maintenance and repair of connections; plugging of discontinued
connections
   
52.31   Damaging or obstructing system
   
52.32   Protection from damages
   
52.33   Extension to sanitary sewer system and services
 
   
52.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Power to require connections to water or sewer service, see G.S. § 160A-317
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 EFFLUENT SPRAYING.
   (A)   The Town of Oak Island, at its own cost and expense, may secure
permits for and install a reuse line to allow it to dispose of treated effluent
within the corporate limits of the Town of Caswell Beach. properties within the
Town of Caswell Beach may be subject to the spraying, placing or depositing of
any spray effluent produced by the Oak Island waste water treatment facility.
   (B)   It shall be the obligation and responsibility of the Town of Oak
Island to provide Caswell Beach with a copy of the after treatment numbers that
are produced at each time the treated effluent is monitored, said information
to include the specific criteria for effluent limits.
   (C)   The town of Oak Island shall comply with all reclaim standards and
reuse rules imposed by the state and federal government.
(Res. passed 11-10-11)
§ 52.02 MANDATORY CONNECTION.
   (A)   At such time as municipal water or sewer becomes available and ready
for use to properties not presently served by a municipal system, the owner of
every abutting lot where water or sewer is supplied for any human use shall
cause a direct connection to be made from the building water and sewer to the
municipal system within 180 days.
   (B)   Every taxable building parcel will be required to pay an assessment in
accordance with the town fee schedule.
   (C)   Billing will commence immediately following connection to the
municipal system or, if not connected, at the end of 180 days following
availability, as allowed by the ordinance to connect to the system.
   (D)   No connection shall be made to any sewer or water lateral except after
the written application therefor has been approved by the town. Permits shall
be issued for connections only after the town or the approving authority has
determined the type of connection required, the type of waste to be placed in
the system, and, if required by the town, an approved plumbing system within
the dwelling, building or structure desiring connection. New sewer and new
connections shall be properly designed and constructed in accordance with such
guidelines as published by the Environmental Protection Agency and approved by
the town. Under no conditions shall sanitary wastewater be discharged into any
storm sewer system and no person shall make connection of roof downspouts,
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of infiltration/inflow to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(Res. passed 4-9-09; Am. Res. passed 4-5-11; Am. Res. passed 6-6-11) Penalty,
see §
52.99
§ 52.03 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
discharges into the wastewater disposal system for the town and enables the
board of commissioners to comply with all applicable state and federal laws
required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 as amended and the general pretreatment
regulations (40 C.F.R. § 403).
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are to:
      (1)   Prevent the discharge of pollutants into the wastewater disposal
system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the
resulting sludge;
      (2)   Prevent the discharge of pollutants into the wastewater disposal
system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving
waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
      (3)   Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the system; and
      (4)   Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the wastewater
disposal system.
   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
discharges to the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) through the issuance of
permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general
requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement
activities, requires user reporting, assumes that existing customers’ capacity
will not be preempted, and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established in this chapter.
   (D)   This chapter shall apply to the town and to persons outside the town
who are, by contract or agreement with the board of commissioners, users of the
POTW. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Director of Public
Utilities shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
(Res. passed 4-5-11)
§ 52.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, as amended.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Board of Commissioners or their authorized deputy,
agent or representative.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER.
      (1)   A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-
president, if the industrial user is a corporation.
      (2)   A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a
partnership or proprietorship, respectively.
      (3)   A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above
if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
   BILLABLE EXCESS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD 5). A user’s loading in
pounds of BOD 5 calculated using the billable flow and concentration of BOD 5
in the wastewater in excess of 300 mg/l.
   BILLABLE EXCESS CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). The user’s loading in pounds
of COD calculated using the billable flow and concentration of COD in the
wastewater in excess of 600 mg/l.
   BILLABLE EXCESS TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN). A user’s loading in pounds of
TKN calculated using the billable flow and concentration of TKN in the
wastewater in excess of 50 mg/l.
   BILLABLE EXCESS TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). A user’s loading in pounds of
TSS calculated using the billable flow and concentration of TSS in the
wastewater in excess of 300 mg/l.
   BILLABLE FLOW. A user’s recorded water usage as metered by the appropriate
water utility, plus metered water from wells and other sources, and less any
sewer-exempt metered flow data, times the local government approved percentage
factor for wastewater entering the wastewater disposal system out of the
metered water. Residential users on unmetered wells and users with no history
of billable flow shall have their billable flow estimated by averaging the
billable flow of other residential users of the same class.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD 5). The quantity of oxygen, expressed in
milligrams per liter (mg/l), utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedures in five days at 20°C.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives sanitary or industrial wastewater only and is located
inside the walls of a building and conveys the wastewater to the building
sewer, which begins ten feet outside the building wall.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal and conveys only sanitary or industrial wastewater.
   CATEGORICAL STANDARDS. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or
pretreatment standard.
   CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD). The total amount of oxygen required to oxidize
all of the organic matter in a waste to carbon dioxide, water and ammonia
nitrogen by potassium dichromate under acid conditions as described in standard
methods.
   CLASSES OF USERS. The division of POTW customers by waste characteristics
and process discharge similarities or function, such as residential,
commercial, institutional, industrial or governmental.
   COLLECTION SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to collect wastewaters
from individual point source discharges.
   COMMERCIAL USER. A user engaged in the purchase or sale of goods or in a
transaction or business or who otherwise renders a service.
   COMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH, and
fecal coliform bacteria, plus any additional pollutants identified in the POTW
NPDES permit, where the POTW is designed to treat such pollutants and, in fact,
does treat such pollutants to the degree required by the NPDES permit.
   COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
   DIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly
to the waters of the state.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the
administrator or other duly authorized official of that agency.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in a pretreatment facility. A
wastewater shall be considered free of FLOATABLE OIL if it is properly
pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the wastewater disposal
system.
   GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, and from the commercial handling,
storage and sale of produce.
   HEALTH OFFICER. Any person designated by the local government to be
responsible for maintaining sanitary conditions and reporting violations.
   HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical
toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
   INCOMPATIBLE POLLUTANT. All pollutants other than compatible pollutants.
   INDIRECT DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction of nondomestic
pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) or (c) of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste).
   INDUSTRIAL USER. A manufacturing or processing facility which is engaged in
a production or profit-making venture; a source of indirect discharge which
does not constitute a discharge of pollutants under regulations issued pursuant
to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
   INFILTRATION. The water unintentionally entering the public sewer system,
including sanitary building drains and sewers, from the ground through such
means as but not limited to defective pipes, pipe joints, connections or
manhole walls.
   INFILTRATION/INFLOW. The total quantity of water from both infiltration and
inflow without distinguishing the source.
   INFLOW. The water discharged into the public sewer system, including
building drains and sewers, from such sources as but not limited to roof
leaders; cellar, yard and area drains; foundation drains; unpolluted cooling
water discharges; drains from springs and swampy areas; manhole covers; cross
connections from storm sewers and/or combined sewers; catchbasins; stormwaters;
surface runoff; street wash waters; or drainage.
   INTERCEPTOR SEWER. A sewer whose primary purpose is to transport wastewater
to a treatment facility.
   INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes
or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirements of the
POTW’s NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or
disposal by the POTW in accordance with § 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or
any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or
more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of the SWDA) applicable to the
method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The town, acting through its Mayor and Board of
Commissioners.
   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with §307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which applies to
a specific category of industrial users.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION PERMIT. A permit issued under the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) for discharge of
wastewaters to the navigable waters of the United States.
   NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD.
Any regulation developed under the authority of § 307(b) of the Act and 40
C.F.R. § 403.5.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
surface water or groundwater.
   pH. The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in grams
per liter of solution. A stabilized pH will be considered as pH which does not
change beyond the specified limits when the waste is subjected to aeration. A
pH value indicates the degree of acidity or alkalinity.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer which is owned and controlled by the town and is
separate from and does not include sewers owned by other governmental units.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works as defined by § 212
of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) owned by the town. This definition includes any
sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include
pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing
treatment. For the purposes of this chapter, POTW shall also include any sewers
that convey wastewaters from persons outside the town who are, by contract or
agreement with the local government, users of the POTW.
   REPLACEMENT COSTS. The capital expenditures for obtaining and installing
equipment, accessories or appurtenances necessary during the service life of
the POTW to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works were
designed and constructed.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sanitary and/or industrial wastewaters
from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions.
SANITARY SEWERS are separate and distinct from storm sewers and are not
intended to carry surface runoff or groundwater.
   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the POTW who:
      (1)   Has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or more per average work
day;
      (2)   Has a flow greater than five percent of the flow in the POTW;
      (3)   Has in his or her wastes toxic substances as defined pursuant to
§307 of the Act or state statutes and rules; or
      (4)   Is found by the local government, division of environmental
management (DEM) or the EPA to have significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater disposal
system, the quality of sludge, the system’s effluent quality, or air emissions
generated by the system.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water or wastewater which, in concentration of any
given constituent or in quantity of flow, exceeds for any period duration
longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration
or flow during normal operation and shall adversely affect the wastewater
disposal system so as to prevent attainment of effluent limitations or to
substantially increase operation and maintenance requirements.
   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification pursuant to the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the
President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972.
   STANDARD METHODS. The laboratory procedures set forth in the following
sources: Standard Method for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, 14th
Edition, as amended, prepared and published jointly by the American Public
Health Association, American Water Works Association, and Water Pollution
Control Federation; Methods for Chemical Analysis of Water and Wastes, 1971,
prepared and published by the Analytical Quality Control Laboratory, U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency; Guidelines Establishing Test Procedures for
the Analysis of Pollutants, enumerated in 40 C.F.R. §§ 136.1 et seq. (1975), as
amended; and/or any other procedures recognized by the EPA and the state
division of environmental management.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries only stormwaters, surface runoff, street
wash and drainage, and to which sanitary and/or industrial wastewater is not
intentionally admitted.
   SUPERINTENDENT. The Board of Commissioners or their authorized deputy, agent
or representative.
   TOTAL KJELDAHL NITROGEN (TKN). The organic nitrogen and ammonia nitrogen
content of a wastewater as determined by standard methods.
   TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS). Total suspended matter that either floats on
the surface of or is in suspension with water, wastewater or other liquids and
is removable by laboratory filtration as prescribed in standard methods.
   TOXIC SUBSTANCES. Any substances, whether gaseous, liquid or solid, which,
when discharged into the wastewater disposal system in sufficient quantities,
may tend to interfere with any wastewater treatment process, or to constitute a
hazard to recreation in the receiving waters of the effluent from the POTW.
These substances include but are not limited to those listed as toxic in
regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provisions of Clean Water Act §
307(a) or other acts.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water of a quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect, or water that is of sufficient quality that it would not be
in violation of federal or state water quality standards if such water were
discharged into navigable waters of the state.
   USEFUL LIFE. The anticipated term in years of physical and/or functional
productivity of elements and/or the whole of the wastewater disposal system.
   USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the POTW.
   USER CHARGE SYSTEM. The system of charges levied on users for the cost of
operation and maintenance, including replacement reserve requirements on new
and old wastewater collection and treatment facilities.
   WASTEWATER. The combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, including
polluted cooling water and unintentionally admitted infiltration/inflow.
      (1)   INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER. A combination of liquid and water-carried
wastes discharged from any industrial establishment and resulting from any
trade or process carried on in that establishment, and shall include the wastes
from pretreatment facilities and polluted cooling water.
      (2)   SANITARY WASTEWATER. The combination of liquid and water-carried
wastes discharged from toilet and other sanitary plumbing facilities.
   WASTEWATER DISPOSAL SYSTEM. The structures, equipment and processes owned
and controlled by the town (unless specified otherwise) required to collect,
transport, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and to dispose of the
effluent and accumulated residual solids.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through, or border upon the state or any portion of the state.
(Res. passed 4-5-11)
§ 52.05 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
    BOD   Biochemical oxygen demand.
   C.F.R.   Code of Federal Regulations.
   COD   Chemical oxygen demand.
   CWA   Clean Water Act.
   DEM   The division of environmental management, department of natural
resources and community development of the state.
   EPA   The Environmental Protection Agency.
   l   Liter.
   mg   Milligrams.
   mg/l   Milligrams per liter.
   NH3-N   Ammonia nitrogen.
   NPDES   National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
   POTW   Publicly owned treatment works.
   SIC   Standard Industrial Classification.
   SWDA   Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.
   U.S.C.   United States Code.
   TKN   Total Kjeldahl nitrogen.
   TSS   Total suspended solids.
(Res. passed 4-5-11)
§ 52.06 APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall apply to any person now using the town’s existing sewer
system as well as any future person tapping on to the town’s sewer system.
(Res. passed 4-5-11)
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 52.20 REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town any human excrement,
garbage or objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
town or in any area under the jurisdiction of the town any wastewater or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this division and with regulations of
the division of environmental management, department of natural resources and
community development of the state. Except as otherwise provided, it shall be
unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool
or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
   (C)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation or other purposes situated within the town
and abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is located a
public sanitary sewer of the town is required at the owner’s expense to install
suitable toilet facilities and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this section, within
90 days after date of official notice to do so, provided the public sewer is
within 150 feet of the property line and the town deems it reasonable and
proper to connect consistent with system design. Sewer user charges will
commence within 90 days of official notice to connect or from the date of
actual physical connection to the system, whichever comes first.
   (D)   Any water discharged into the town’s sewer system shall have been
purchased from the town or individually metered public water system such as
Brunswick County.
(Res. passed 4-5-11) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.21 PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL.
   After the public sewer system is operational, the property owner must apply
for a sewer hookup permit within 180 days of the system becoming operational.
After that time, the sewer base rate will be applied to their account.
(Res. passed 4-5-11; Am. Res. passed 6-6-11) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.22 BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Any person desiring to deposit or discharge or who is now depositing
or discharging any domestic, or commercial waste into the sanitary sewers shall
make application for the disposal of commercial or domestic waste to the town;
and the approving authority shall approve such application only when evidence
is submitted by the applicant that the discharge into the sanitary sewer will
comply with all of the regulations of this section.
   (B)   No person shall make any connection to the sanitary sewer system until
a permit has been issued by the town. Permits shall be issued for connections
only after the town or the approving authority has determined the type of
connection required; the type of waste to be placed in the system; and, if
required by the town, an approved plumbing system within the dwelling, building
or structure desiring connection.
   (C)   All connections to the sanitary sewer system shall be made by
authorized employees of the town in accordance with specifications for such
connection that may be adopted by the town. If authorized by the Board of
Commissioners, connections may be made by plumbers licensed to perform plumbing
work in the town. All construction shall be in conformity with the state
plumbing and building codes, as amended. Any sewer connection made by an
authorized licensed plumber shall be inspected by the approving authority after
such work has been completed and prior to the time such connection is covered.
   (D)   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains,
areaway drains or other sources of infiltration or inflow to a building sewer
or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public
sanitary sewer.
   (E)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the local government.
   (F)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to keep and
maintain the building sewer connected to the public sewer in good repair. The
owner shall be responsible for making necessary repairs, at his own expense, to
the building sewer when notified in writing by the local government that
repairs are necessary. Should the owner fail to repair the building sewer
within 30 days after receiving written notification by the local government,
the local government may make the necessary repairs to the building sewer and
shall assess the owner for the cost of the repairs.
   (G)   Grease, oil and sand interceptors (grease traps) shall be provided by
the owner when, in the opinion of the approving authority, they are necessary
for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing floatable oil in excessive
amounts, sand or other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall
not be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority and shall
be located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be maintained by
the owner at his or her expense in continuously efficient operation at all
times. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be responsible
for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the captured
material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of disposal which
are subject to review by the approving authority. Any removal and hauling of
the collected materials not performed by owner personnel must be performed by
currently licensed waste disposal firms. Violations of this division shall
entitle the town to discontinue water service until such time that the
violation has been corrected by the owner.
   (H)   When in the opinion of the approving authority the proposed flow may
create a surge or unusual loading condition at the treatment facility, the user
shall be required to construct and maintain as a portion of the pretreatment
works a flow equalization tank or basin to provide a uniform flow over a period
acceptable to the approving authority.
   (I)   Plans for the construction of the storage tank, control manhole and
controlling devices shall be approved by the approving authority prior to the
beginning of construction.
   (J)   Any increase in sewage discharge from any dwelling which derives from
growth or expansion of facilities must be approved by the governing body and
the governing body, must be notified of the increase.
(Res. passed 4-5-11) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.23 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be
discharged any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation
and/or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such
users of the POTW, whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment
standards or requirements. A user may not discharge the following substances to
the POTW:
      (1)   Any unpolluted waters such as infiltration or inflow to any
sanitary sewer. Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designed as storm sewers or to a
natural outlet approved by the approving authority and the DEM. No untreated
sanitary wastewater shall be discharged to any storm sewer or natural outlet;
      (2)   Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or
quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other
substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the
POTW or to the operation of the POTW. Materials specifically prohibited from
discharge into the POTW include gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, fuel oil, and any
other substances which the local government, the state or the EPA has notified
the user is a fire hazard or a hazard to the system;
      (3)   Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the flow
in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the POTW, such as but
not limited to: floatable oil, garbage with particles greater than one-half
inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair,
hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand,
spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass
clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas,
tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or
lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes;
      (4)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or greater than 9.0 or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment and/or personnel of the POTW;
      (5)   Any wastewater containing toxic substances in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure or interfere
with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or exceed
the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard;
      (6)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either
singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for their maintenance and repair;
      (7)   Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process where the
POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance
discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to fail to be in compliance with sludge
use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under §405 of the
Act; any criteria, guidelines or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal
developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the
Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used;
      (8)   Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or
state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards;
      (9)   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as but not limited to dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions;
      (10)   Any wastewater, liquid or vapors having a temperature higher than
150°F;
      (11)   Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD and the
like), released at a flow and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or
has reason to know will cause interference;
      (12)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the local
government in compliance with applicable state and/or federal regulations; and
      (13)   Quantities of flow, concentrations or both which constitute a
slug.
   (B)   When the approving authority determines that a user is discharging any
of the substances enumerated in division (A) of this section in such amounts as
to interfere with the operation of the POTW, the approving authority shall:
      (1)   Advise the user of the impact of the discharge and applicable
penalties associated with the continuation of such discharge; and
      (2)   Develop effluent limitations for such user to correct the
discharge.
   (C)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the town and any person
whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be admitted
into the sanitary sewers by the town after approved pretreatment.
(Res. passed 4-5-11) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.24 SPECIFIC POLLUTANT LIMITATIONS.
   No discharge shall contain pollutant concentrations exceeding the following
prohibitive limits (maximum for any day based on composite samples). The local
government may require payment to cover the costs of handling and treating the
pollutants in excess of that enumerated as follows:
      0.01 mg/l arsenic
      1.5 mg/l antimony
      0.1 mg/l cadmium
      5.0 mg/l copper
      20.0 mg/l iron
      0.5 mg/l lead
      0.01 mg/l mercury
      5.0 mg/l nickel
      0.5 mg/l hexavalent chromium
      5.0 mg/l total chromium
      0.1 mg/l selenium
      0.1 mg/l silver
      5.0 mg/l zinc
      10.0 mg/l total of above heavy metals (excluding iron)
      1.0 mg/l cyanide
      5.0 mg/l phenolic compounds
      300 mg/l biochemical oxygen demand
      600 mg/l chemical oxygen demand
      75 mg/l oil and grease
      300 mg/l total suspended solids
      50 mg/l total Kjeldahl nitrogen
(Res. passed 4-5-11) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.25 SEPARATE CONNECTIONS REQUIRED.
   Each separate dwelling, structure, business or other building shall have a
separate connection to the system; however, apartments or other multiuse or
multioccupancy buildings may have one combined connection at the discretion of
the approving authority.
(Res. passed 4-5-11)
§ 52.26 OUTSIDE CONNECTIONS.
   Any person owning or controlling premises beyond the corporate limits of the
town and desiring to install a plumbing system for the purpose of discharging
domestic and/or industrial waste into the sanitary sewers of the town may do so
upon approval and acceptance by the Board of Commissioners and any state agency
involved. All costs associated with such connection shall be the responsibility
of the property owner and shall be done under the supervision of the town or
its designated agent.
(Res. passed 4-5-11)
§ 52.27 POWERS AND AUTHORITY FOR INSPECTION.
   The approving authority and other duly authorized employees of the town,
bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to enter upon
all properties for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Res. passed 4-5-11)
§ 52.28 MEASUREMENT OF FLOW.
   The volume of flow used in computing waste charges shall be based upon
metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter reading maintained
by the town.
(Res. passed 4-5-11)
§ 52.29 DETERMINING OF CHARACTER AND CONCENTRATION OF WASTES.
   (A)   The commercial waste of each person discharging such waste into the
town sanitary sewers shall be subject to periodic inspection; and a
determination of character and concentration of such wastes shall be made
quarterly, or oftener as may be deemed necessary, by the approving authority or
his authorized assistants.
   (B)   Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative of
the actual quality of the wastes. The laboratory methods used in the
examination of the wastes shall be those set forth in Standard Methods, the
most recent edition, or any other pertinent method, standards and procedures
proposed, published, and as required by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
   (C)   The determination of the character and concentration of the commercial
wastes by the approving authority, or his or her authorized assistants, shall
be binding as a basis for charges.
   (D)   Total costs incident to the supervision, inspection, sampling and
analyzing of wastes shall be included in the charge made to persons discharging
wastes into the town sanitary sewers.
(Res. passed 4-5-11)
§ 52.30 MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF CONNECTIONS; PLUGGING OF DISCONTINUED
CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Whenever any service to any building or premises becomes clogged,
broken, out of order, or in any condition detrimental to the use of the sewer
service, the owner, agent or occupant having charge of such building or
premises shall be held responsible for the immediate renewal or repair of the
sewer service necessary to maintain an uninterrupted sanitary disposal system.
Renewal or repair of sewer service from the main to the property line shall be
made at the expense of the town, while renewal or repair of sewer service from
the property line to the source of discharge is the responsibility of the
property owner. Such work shall be performed by authorized personnel only.
   (B)   Upon the permanent discontinuance of the use of the town sewer system
at any premises, including discontinuance caused by abandonment of any
premises, tearing down of any building or any other cause, the property owner
shall cause the connection to the sewer main of the town to be plugged in a
manner which will be strong enough to resist breakage and be watertight enough
to prevent any leakage of any fluids. All such plugging shall be subject to
inspection and approval by the plumbing inspector of the town, provided that no
permit fee, inspection fee or other fee shall be charged for such inspection.
If the owner of the property fails to plug the sewer connection in a
satisfactory manner within 30 days of the time the owner is notified in writing
by the plumbing inspector to plug the sewer service line, the town shall
proceed to plug the service line and bill the owner for the costs. The cost may
be collected by the town in a civil action filed in court. The collection of
the costs in a civil action shall not prevent the filing of an action for a
fine for violation of this chapter.
(Res. passed 4-5-11)
§ 52.31 DAMAGING OR OBSTRUCTING SYSTEM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, tamper with or otherwise do
harm to the mains, pipes, manholes, apparatus or other parts of the sanitary
sewer system, or to place or cause to be placed any object of any nature
whatsoever into the system that blocks or obstructs or impedes the normal flow
in the sewer system.
(Res. passed 4-5-11) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.32 PROTECTION FROM DAMAGES.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any equipment or materials
belonging to the town used for the purpose of making tests or examinations and
left upon the premises of a person discharging wastes into the sewers.
(Res. passed 4-5-11) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.33 EXTENSION TO SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM AND SERVICES.
   (A)   Additions to the town’s sanitary sewer system shall be in accordance
with policies established by the town’s Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   Sanitary sewer system improvement to serve undeveloped, previously
platted areas, subdivisions or other developments within the jurisdiction area
of the town or within the town limits shall be handled in full accord with the
following:
      (1)   The developer will submit preliminarily plans for review and
approval by the town;
      (2)   Upon review and approval by the town of preliminarily plans, the
developer shall submit final plans, technical specifications, applications and
all else needed final approval by town and state agencies;
      (3)   Upon approval of final plans, the developer shall have improvements
installed by a North Carolina licensed utilities contractor, inspected and
certified by the design professional engineer and shall pay all costs for
improvements or extensions. All construction of sewer system extensions or
improvements shall be completed within three years from date of state and town
permit approval. Sanitary sewer allocations will be withdrawn by the town if
construction is not completed within above time frame;
      (4)   Upon completion of the improvements the developer will deed the
complete facility, to include all rights-of-way, easements, permits,
franchises, and authorizations or other instruments needed for the operation
and maintenance of the improvements, to the town;
      (5)   All sanitary sewer system improvements shall be designed and
constructed in frill accord with all materials, construction methods and
regulations of the town sanitary sewer standards available from the supervisor
of public utilities. All sewer lines and sewer service lines shall be within
the street right-of-way. All services shall be installed on the street right-
of-way line; and
      (6)   In the maintenance of sewer lines and sewer service lines, any
landscaping, plants, driveway gravel or either improvements made by property
owners shall be replaced and or repaired by the property owner.
(Res. passed 4-5-11)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Civil penalties shall be imposed as set forth hereinafter to
address all violations contained within the Code of Ordinances, save and except
for those violations contained in §§
130.01 and
130.02, the violations being criminal violations imposed by state law.
      (2)   Each day a provision of the code or an ordinance is violated is a
separate offense. There shall be a civil fine imposed of $25 for each
violation, which fine will accrue daily, starting on the day the violation
first occurs and continuing through the day the violation ceases.
      (3)   When a citation is mailed to the offender, payment of the citation
shall be due and payable ten days following the mailing of same at the Post
Office by the Clerk. The fines are payable at the Town Hall during regular
business hours.
      (4)   Service of a civil citation is completed on the day it is
personally delivered, or three days after it is mailed, to the following: An
offender who is an individual or owner of a sole proprietorship, any general
partner of a partnership that is the offender, or is the registered agent, or
manager or other person in a supervisory capacity at the local place of
business of an offender who is a corporation. The three day period for mailed
service shall begin the day it is placed in the United States mail, in a
properly stamped and addressed envelope, addressed to the appropriate person
named above at the offender’s first known address. Personal service may be made
by any police officer, town manager or building inspector.
      (5)   Recovery of overdue civil penalties shall be by a civil action
against the offender in the nature of debt.
      (6)   Civil citation for all violations of code provisions and ordinances
regulating building, housing, environmental matters, mobile homes, zoning and
subdivisions shall be issued by the Building Inspector. All other civil
citations may be issued by any police officer or town manager.
   (B)   The penalty provisions for all ordinances and regulations contained in
the Code of Ordinances for the town shall be modified to comply with the
provisions of this section, save and except for those violations contained in
§§
130.01 and
130.02, said violations being criminal violations imposed by state law.
(Res. passed 6-6-11)
   TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
72.   GOLF CART REGULATION
      
73.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
70.01   Motor vehicles on strand and dune areas
   
70.02   Fixed winged aircraft and helicopters
   
70.03   Authorization to patrol streets
 
   
70.99   Penalty
§ 70.01 MOTOR VEHICLES ON STRAND AND DUNE AREAS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purposes of this chapter, the words STRAND OF THE
BEACH shall mean all that area lying east, and south and southeast of the high
water mark of the Atlantic Ocean.
   (B)   No person, firm or corporation shall operate any motor vehicle
(automobile, off the road, vehicle, motorcycle, wind-powered, motor-powered) on
the beach strand and the dune areas of the town with the exception: an
organization approved by the Board of Commissioners, shall be allowed clearly
identifiable motor vehicles approved by the Town Manager, on the strand of the
beach so long as the organization complies with all requirements set forth by
the Board of Commissioners.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the operation
of police cars, fire trucks, emergency rescue equipment or other official
vehicles while on official duty on the beach strand. Nor shall this section
apply to a governmental agency, its employees, agents, contractors and
subcontractors and their vehicles when engaged in beach restoration or
protection work. Nor shall this section apply to persons with disabilities and
their vehicles or devices designed to propel the persons with disabilities on
the strand of the beach area. Such vehicles or devices, however, are not
permitted in the dune areas.
('75 Code, § 3-7-1) (Am. Ord. 2016-003, passed 5-26-16) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.02 FIXED WINGED AIRCRAFT AND HELICOPTERS.
   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall operate any fixed winged aircraft
or helicopter on the beach strand, dune areas, residential area, conservation
areas, recreation areas, or roadways within the town limits.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the operation
of emergency rescue aircraft or helicopter while in the performance of such
service.
(Ord. passed 1-12-89)
Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.03 AUTHORIZATION TO PATROL STREETS.
   (A)   The law enforcement officers serving the Town of Caswell Beach, and
any officers from any municipalities who may be called upon in certain
situations in accordance with the Mutual Aid Agreements in effect between the
Town and other municipalities, shall be authorized to patrol and police the
streets, roadways and public vehicular areas in the Caswell Dunes regime for
purposes of enforcing all traffic regulations.
   (B)   Caswell Dunes shall be responsible for posting the roadways with
appropriate speed limit signs. Until signs are installed, speed limit cannot be
monitored.
(Res. passed 2-12-98)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who violates any section of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $50 and/or 30 days in jail. ('75 Code, § 3-7-1(C)) (Ord. passed 1-12-
89)
   (B)   In addition to the provisions in division (A), any person, firm or
corporation who violates
§ 70.02 shall be responsible for restitution to the town for any damages caused
by the violator. (Ord. passed 1-12-89)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Parking along Caswell Beach Road (State Road 1100)
   
71.02   Parking on streets or private road open to the public
 
   
71.99   Penalty
§ 71.01 PARKING ALONG CASWELL BEACH ROAD (STATE ROAD 1100).
   (A)   No person shall park a vehicle or permit it to stand, whether attended
or unattended:
      (1)   Along either side of Caswell Beach Road (State Road 1100) within
the town limits, unless the vehicle is disabled to such an extent that it is
impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the vehicle along the side
of the road;
      (2)   In the public parking facilities located opposite the Duke Power
property or on the Oak Island Lighthouse property when those facilities are
closed as approved by the Town Manager, including but not limited to closures
to accommodate tours and special events or needs of those who have contracted
to provide services to the town; or
      (3)   In violation of any time limits or other restrictions from time to
time approved by the Town Manager and posted for those public parking
facilities.
   (B)   This section shall not:
      (1)   Be construed to prohibit or restrict the operation of police cars,
fire trucks, emergency rescue equipment or other official vehicles while on
official duty;
      (2)   Apply to town staff, any governmental agency, its employees,
agents, contractors and subcontractors and their vehicles while on official
duty;
      (3)   Apply to persons with disabilities and their vehicles or devices
designed to propel the persons with disabilities to the strand of the beach
area;
      (4)    Apply to approved contractors parking at active worksites and
volunteers to the extent allowed by permit issued by the town; and
      (5)   Apply to other persons to the extent permitted by the Town Manager.
   (C)   Parking in handicap parking spaces.
      (1)   Any automobile, truck or vehicle that is found to be parked in a
properly designated handicap parking space without an authorized license plate
or removable windshield placard that displays the international handicap symbol
is in violation of this section. Any vehicle parked in violation of this
section may be towed by a Caswell Beach police officer.
      (2)   The officer shall not be held to answer in any civil or criminal
action to any owner, lienholder or other person legally entitled to the
possession of any vehicle towed from a space pursuant to this section.
('75 Code, § 3-7-2(A)) (Am. Ord. 2014-007, passed 9-11-14; Ord. passed 5-10-18;
Ord. passed 11-8-18; Am. Ord. passed 1-12-23; Am. Ord. passed 4-10-25) Penalty,
see §
71.99
§ 71.02 PARKING ON STREETS OR PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO THE PUBLIC.
   (A)   No vehicle shall stand or park on any street or private road open to
the public.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Emergency vehicles;
      (2)   Public utility vehicles;
      (3)   Owners or drivers of vehicles who make brief stops while engage in
delivery of mail, building supplies or packages;
      (4)   Owner or drivers of garbage trucks while in the course of work;
      (5)   Tow vehicles engaged in towing a vehicle; and
      (6)   Apply to other persons to the extent permitted by the Town Manager.
(Ord. 2016-006, passed 9-8-16; Am. Ord. passed 1-12-23)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates an ordinance regulating the operation or parking of
vehicles shall be subject to being towed at the owner’s expense and responsible
for an infraction and shall be required to pay a penalty of not more than $50.
(G.S. § 14-4(b)) (Ord. passed 5-10-18; Am. Ord. passed 1-12-23)
CHAPTER 72: GOLF CART REGULATION
Section
   
72.01   Policy statement
   
72.02   Rules and regulations
   
72.03   Permit required
 
   
72.99   Penalty
§ 72.01 POLICY STATEMENT.
   This chapter is adopted to address the interest of public safety under the
provisions of House Bill 2027, Session Law 2006-149 which provides the Town of
Caswell Beach authority to regulate the use of golf carts in the town that have
not been outfitted and registered as required by state law. Generally, golf
carts, hereinafter called “carts”, that have not been outfitted and registered
are not designed or manufactured to be used on other than golf courses, and the
Town of Caswell Beach in no way advocates or endorses their operation elsewhere
in town. The town, by regulating such operation is merely trying to address
obvious safety issues, and adoption of this chapter is not to be relied upon as
a determination that operation is safe or advisable if done in accordance with
this chapter. All persons who operate or ride upon carts do so at their own
risk and peril, and must be observant of, and attentive to the safety of
themselves and others, including their passengers, other motorists, bicyclists,
and pedestrians. The Town of Caswell Beach has no liability under any theory of
liability, for permitting carts to be operated in town. The owner and operator
of a cart are responsible for any liability involved in using a cart. Without
the adoption of standards for operation on private streets, there are currently
no rules or regulations that address golf cart operation and by creating
standards for limited operation on the private streets within Caswell Beach,
the town is responding to citizen concerns regarding operation deficiencies.
These regulations impose more stringent policies on cart operation. The town
does not encourage cart operation and does not represent that operation of
carts under these rules will render cart operation totally safe and without
risk to the driver and passenger of said vehicles.
(Res. passed 5-11-17)
§ 72.02 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   Carts that are not equipped and registered as required by the State Motor
Vehicle Law may only be operated within the Town of Caswell Beach, in areas
other than the golf course, in accordance with the following rules and
regulations. Operation of carts in violation of these rules and regulations
shall be subject to the penalty provisions of §
72.99 or in egregious cases, may constitute reckless driving as defined in
North Carolina General Statutes.
   (A)   Each owner of a golf cart that operates within the town limits of the
Town of Caswell Beach shall be liable for any and all losses, liabilities,
claims, damages and expenses arising from or in connection with any operation
of that golf cart within those town limits by any person, whether or not
authorized by that owner and whether or not such operation is negligent or not.
   (B)   Carts shall not be driven on or across Caswell Beach Road (State Road
1100) nor any other state, county or town road within the Town of Caswell
Beach.
   (C)   Drivers of carts shall stay to the far right of the traveled portion
of the road and yield the right-of-way to overtaking motor vehicles.
   (D)   Carts operating between the time of one-half hour after sunset and
one-half hour before sunrise shall be equipped with and have in use headlights
and reflectors located on the rear of the cart.
   (E)   Carts shall be equipped with at least one operational mirror allowing
the operator to see behind the cart.
   (F)   The number of individuals in a golf cart is limited to the number of
seats available and individuals must remain seated while the golf cart is in
operation.
   (G)   An unaccompanied driver must be at least 15 years old, and possess a
state-issued permit allowing them to operate a vehicle.
   (H)   Any person younger than 18 years old who does not satisfy the
unaccompanied driver requirement of division (G) of this section may drive a
golf cart within the town limits of the Town of Caswell Beach only so long as
an individual with a valid state issued driver’s license is seated beside that
driver during operation of the cart.
   (I)   No individual may operate a golf cart unless their feet reach both
pedals on the cart while seated or the cart is equipped with hand controls.
   (J)   To ensure safety, the lap of a golf cart driver shall remain free of
all encumbrances.
   (K)   No golf cart or other vehicle shall be allowed on or to block the
access to any public walkways.
   (L)   North Carolina laws as found G.S. § 20-138, regarding use of alcoholic
beverages, apply to golf cart regulation in the Town of Caswell Beach.
(Res. passed 5-11-17) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No golf cart may be driven on public vehicular access ways within the
Town of Caswell Beach, without a permit being acquired from Town Hall and
attached to said golf cart in a conspicuous place.
   (B)   Town Hall staff is hereby authorized to issue a permit to all
appropriate applicants, one per golf cart to be operated. When issuing this
permit, Town Hall staff shall require the applicant to sign a statement
certifying he or she has read the provisions of town’s ordinance on golf cart
usage as set forth in §
72.02 above. The permit shall be in such form as the Town Hall may deem
practicable for ease of visibility.
(Res. passed 5-11-17) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor and the owner of the cart
punished with a fine of $50 for the first violation, $100 for the second
violation and $500 for successive violations.
(Res. passed 5-11-17)
CHAPTER 73: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Section
   
Schedule I.   Speed limits
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   No person shall drive a vehicle on a town street or public vehicular area at
a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then
existing. No person shall drive a vehicle on a town street or public vehicular
area in excess of the speed limit posted on appropriate signs erected upon the
streets affected. The fine for violation of this schedule shall be $50.
 
Street                       Speed Limit Ordinance No. Passage Date
Caswell Beach Road (SR 1100) 35 m.p.h.   --            3-10-22
 
(Ord. passed 3-10-22)
   TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.     ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES
      
91.     ANIMALS
      
92.     BEACHES AND WATERWAYS
         
APPENDIX A: RELATED STATUTORY PROVISIONS
      
93.     FIRE PREVENTION
      
94.     911 SERVICES
      
95.     NUISANCES
      
96.     STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
97.   PROPERTY REMOVAL FROM TOWN PUBLIC AREAS
      
98.   PROTECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF AREAS ZONED CONSERVATION
      
99.   ALCOHOL REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
General Provisions
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Administration and enforcement
   
90.03   Protection against criminal or civil liability
   
90.04   Exceptions
Removal Procedures; Disposition of Vehicles
   
90.15   Abandoned vehicles prohibited; removal authorized
   
90.16   Nuisance vehicle prohibited; removal authorized
   
90.17   Junked motor vehicles regulated; removal authorized
   
90.18   Pre-towing notice requirements
   
90.19   Exceptions to prior notice requirements
   
90.20   Post-towing notice requirements
   
90.21   Right to hearing before sale or final disposition of vehicle
   
90.22   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings
   
90.23   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicles
   
90.24   Removal of vehicles from private property
   
90.25   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE.
      (1)   A vehicle left upon a public street or highway in violation of a
law or ordinance prohibiting parking; or
      (2)   A vehicle left on a public street or highway for longer than seven
days; or
      (3)   A vehicle left on property owned or operated by the town for longer
than 24 hours; or
      (4)   A vehicle left on private property without the consent of the
owner, occupant, or lessee thereof, for longer than two hours.
   AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL. The supervisory employee of the Police Department or
the Town Clerk and Town Attorney (or other public official), respectively,
designated to authorize the removal of vehicles under the provisions of this
chapter.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303.2, the
term, JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE, means a vehicle that does not display a current
license plate lawfully upon that vehicle and:
      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or
      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it was
originally intended to move; or
      (3)   Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less than $100.
   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. All machines designated or intended to travel over
land by self- propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.
   NUISANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle on public or private property that is determined
to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, and unlawful, including a
vehicle found to be:
      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats or
other pests; or
      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over
eight inches in height; or
      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water; or
      (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, or other
flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor; or
      (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be operated from
the inside, such as trunks, hoods, and the like; or
      (6)   So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or
turning over; or
      (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food, waste, animal
waste, or any other putrescible matter of any kind; or
      (8)   One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp
edges of metal or glass; or
      (9)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard
and public nuisance by the governing body of the town.
('75 Code, § 3-18-2)
§ 90.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Police Department, Town Attorney and Town Clerk (or other public
official) shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this
chapter. The Police Department shall be responsible for administrating the
removal and disposition of vehicles determined to be abandoned on the public
streets and highways within the town, and on property owned by the town. The
Town Clerk, in conjunction with the Town Attorney shall be responsible for
administering the removal and disposition of abandoned, nuisance, or junked
motor vehicles located on private property. The town may, on an annual basis,
contract with private tow truck operators or towing businesses to remove,
store, and dispose of abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles, and junked motor
vehicles in compliance with this chapter and applicable state laws. Nothing in
this chapter shall be construed to limit the legal authority or powers of
officers of the Town Police Department in enforcing other laws or otherwise
carrying out their duties.
('75 Code, § 3-18-1)
§ 90.03 PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.
   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any
owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicle, or disposing of such vehicle as provided in
this chapter.
('75 Code, § 3-18-13)
§ 90.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle which is:
   (A)   In an enclosed building; or
   (B)   On the premises of an business or enterprise being operated in a
lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the
enterprise; or
   (C)   Which is in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful place and manner by the town.
('75 Code, § 3-18-14)
REMOVAL PROCEDURES; DISPOSITION OF VEHICLES
§ 90.15 ABANDONED VEHICLES PROHIBITED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such a vehicle to be abandoned as the
term is defined herein.
   (B)   Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the town may
determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed.
('75 Code, § 3-18-3)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.16 NUISANCE VEHICLE PROHIBITED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to a
motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the real property upon
which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to remain on the
property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle.
   (B)   Upon investigation, the Town Clerk, or other public official, may
determine and declare that a vehicle is a safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle
as defined above, and order the vehicle removed.
('75 Code, § 3-18-4)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.17 JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES REGULATED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant
of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered
removed.
   (B)   Subject to the notice requirements set forth in
§§ 90.18 and
90.19, upon investigation, the Town Clerk and Town Attorney (or other public
official) may order the removal of a junked motor vehicle as defined in this
chapter after finding in writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing the
vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the private property owner. Such
finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent
owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing
community, neighborhood, or area appearance. The following relevant factors may
be considered:
      (1)   Protection of property values;
      (2)   Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities;
      (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;
      (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and
      (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of area
residents.
('75 Code, § 3-18-5)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 90.18 PRE-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as set forth in
§ 90.19, an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which is to be removed shall
be towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of the vehicle is given. This may be by certified mail, by posting,
or by personal service of notice or letter to the owner of real property by a
Town Police Officer. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor
vehicle, if the names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person
entitled to possession of the vehicle, or the owner or lessee, or occupant of
the real property upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class
certified mail, return receipt requested. The person who mails the notice(s)
shall retain a written record to show the name(s) and address(es) to which the
notices were mailed, and the date mailed to each. If such names and addresses
cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle removed is an abandoned vehicle, notice
shall be given by affixing on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on
the vehicle a notice indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the town on
a specified date (no sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed). The
notice shall state that the vehicle will be removed by the town on a specified
date, no sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed or mailed, unless
the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time.
   (B)   With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property, nuisance
vehicles, and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to be given, if
the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the
vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned,
a nuisance vehicle or in the case of a junked motor vehicle that the aesthetic
benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens, such appeal shall be
made to the Board of Commissioners, in writing, heard at the next regularly
scheduled Commissioners' meeting, and further proceedings to remove the vehicle
shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided.
('75 Code, § 3-18-6)
§ 90.19 EXCEPTIONS TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an abandoned
car, nuisance or junked motor vehicle may be omitted in those circumstances
where there is special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions
or to otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. Such
finding shall, in all cases, be entered by the authorizing official in the
appropriate daily records. Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles
without prior notice include:
   (A)   Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the public
streets and highways, the governing body hereby determines that immediate
removal or such vehicles may be warranted when they are:
      (1)   Obstructing traffic;
      (2)   Parked in violation of an ordinance or restricted parking;
      (3)   Parked in a no-stopping or standing zone;
      (4)   Parked in loading zones; or
      (5)   Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed under
code sections.
   (B)   Other abandoned nuisance vehicles. With respect to abandoned vehicles
left on city-owned or city-operated property other than the streets and
highways, and on private property, such vehicles may be removed without giving
prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing official finds a
special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health,
safety and welfare. By way of illustration and not of limitation, such
circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to
businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such a manner as to pose a
traffic hazard, and vehicles causing damage to public or to private property.
('75 Code, § 3-18-7)
§ 90.20 POST-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered
removed may, as directed by the town, be removed to a storage or garage or
other appropriate area by a towing business contracting to perform such
services for the town. Whenever such a vehicle is removed, the authorizing town
official shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the
vehicle, such notice to include the following:
      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;
      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;
      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
      (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and
      (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause
hearing on the removal.
   (B)   The town shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by
telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written
notice, including the information set forth in subsection (1) through (5) of
division (A), shall also be mailed to the registered owners last known mailing
address, unless the notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his
agent.
   (C)   If the vehicle is registered in the state, notice shall be given to
the registered owner within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the
state, notice shall be given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the
removal of the vehicle.
   (D)   Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is removed,
and such vehicle has no valid registration plates, the authorizing city
official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle
identification number, to determine the last registered owner of the vehicle
and to notify him of the information set forth in subsections (1) through (5)
of division (A).
('75 Code, § 3-18-8)
§ 90.21 RIGHT TO HEARING BEFORE SALE OR FINAL DISPOSITION OF VEHICLE.
   After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle, or junked motor
vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is entitled to a
hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing
the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed with the County Magistrate
designated by the Chief District Court Judge to receive such hearing requests.
The Magistrate will set the hearing within 72 hours of the receipt of the
request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
G.S. § 20-219.11, as amended.
('75 Code, § 3-18-9)
§ 90.22 REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.
   At any stage in the proceedings before the probable cause hearing, the owner
may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the towing fee,
including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double the amount of
such fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing business having
custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of a vehicle, the
owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle shall not allow or
engage in further violations of this chapter.
('75 Code, § 3-18-10)
§ 90.23 SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES.
   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by the
owner or other party will be disposed of by the tow truck operator or towing
business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of such vehicle shall be
carried out in accordance with the town and in accordance with G.S. Chapter
44A, Article 1.
('75 Code, § 3-18-11)
§ 90.24 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   As a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private
property if the owner, occupant, or lessee of such property could have the
vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a
vehicle be removed by the town without written request from the owner, occupant
or lessee, except in those cases where a vehicle is a nuisance or is a junked
motor vehicle which has been order removed by the appropriate Town Official.
The town may require any person requesting the removal of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicle from private property to indemnify the town
against any loss, expense or liability incurred because of the removal,
storage, or sale thereof.
('75 Code, § 3-18-12)
§ 90.25 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any
storage facility designated by the town any vehicle which has been impounded
pursuant to the provisions of this code unless and until all towing and
impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees have been paid.
('75 Code, § 3-18-15)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Powers and duties of the Animal Control Supervisor
   
91.03   Impoundment
   
91.04   Procedures for redemption of impounded animals
   
91.05   Dogs to wear collars; tags
   
91.06   Dogs to be restrained
   
91.07   Reserved
   
91.08   Responsibility for disposal of animal waste
   
91.09   Regulations regarding treatment of wild animals
   
91.10   Regulations regarding treatment of animals
   
91.11   Animal creating nuisance
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any animal, other than a cat or dog, being wild or domestic, endowed
with ability of voluntary motion.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. The Chief of Police or his or her designee on any
given shift of duty.
   ANIMAL CONTROL SHELTER. The Brunswick County Animal Control Shelter.
   ANIMAL CONTROL SUPERVISOR. The Chief of Police.
   AT LARGE. Off the premises of the owner, when neither under the control of
the owner or some other person assuming responsibility for the owner.
   CAT. A domestic feline of either sex, regardless of age.
   CONTROL. An animal that:
      (1)   Is leashed; or
      (2)   Is physically capable of hearing normal commands and is, at the
time under consideration, within reasonable proximity to the controller so that
shouting or excessively loud commands are not necessary and has been adequately
trained in obedience to be capable of understanding control commands; and
either continually demonstrates or is able to demonstrate on demand, response
to a command that will cause the animal to immediately come into close
proximity to the controller and cease any kind of aggressive behavior or action
that would be offensive to other persons or animals.
   DANGEROUS OF VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal which has attacked one or more
persons causing bodily harm and verified by the Health Director or the
Director's agent. Upon verification, an Animal Control Officer shall give
written notice to the owner that his or her animal has been classified
dangerous or vicious.
   DOG. A domestic canine of either sex, regardless of age.
   IMPOUNDMENT. To take custody of an animal, under legal authority, in a
confined area or pen.
   LOST. An animal, reported by its owner, to be off the owner's property and
whereabouts unknown.
   OWNER. Any person owning, keeping, or harboring an animal, and for the
purposes hereof, the head of the household shall be presumed to be the owner in
respect to any animal owned, kept, or harbored by any persons residing in such
household and kept on the premises within the town. The OWNER shall be
responsible for the actions of his animal.
   PUPPY. A dog between birth and four to five months old, before the permanent
teeth appear.
   QUARANTINE. To confine an animal, under legal authority, to prevent
specifically a suspected rabid animal's contact with other animals or humans.
   RABID. An animal infected with the animal virus rhabdovirus. The existence
of infection is ascertained by a trained person observing fanatical behavior or
a frothing at the jaws. Determination is made by laboratory analysis of the
severed, intact animal head (maintained on ice but not frozen) for viral
antigen or Negri bodies.
   RESTRAINT OF VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMAL. A vicious or dangerous animal is
under restraint within the meaning of this chapter if it is:
      (1)   Controlled by a leash;
      (2)   On or within any vehicle being driven or parked on the street and
unable to bite persons outside the vehicle; or
      (3)   Confined within the property limits of the owner or keeper.
   STRAY. An AT LARGE animal.
   VACCINATION. The administration of rabies vaccine by a licensed veterinarian
approved by the U.S. Bureau of Animal Industry, the state Department of
Agriculture, and the state Commission of Health Services, and required by G.S.
§ 130A-185.
   WILD ANIMALS. Any animal which:
      (1)   Is typically found in a non-domesticated state and which, because
of its size, physical characteristics or vicious propensities shall pose a
potential danger to persons, domesticated animals or property; or
      (2)   Is classified as a wild animal by the state Wildlife Resources
Commission. Wild animals typically located within town limits are alligator,
bear, bobcat, deer, raccoon, possum, fox and otter.
(Am. Res. passed - - ; Am. Res. passed 6-12-08 )
§ 91.02 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE ANIMAL CONTROL SUPERVISOR.
   (A)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall have the power and
responsibility of enforcement within the town of this chapter and of all state
laws pertaining to control and vaccination of all animals and shall cooperate
with officers of other agencies within the county in fulfilling this
responsibility.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or his or her designee shall enforce the
provisions of the state rabies law and the dog warden law, including but not
limited to the following activities:
      (1)   Impounding stray animals; and
      (2)   Assisting county animal control officers in investigating animal
bite cases.
§ 91.03 IMPOUNDMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or his or her designee to take
into custody any domestic animal found running at large or unrestrained as
required under this chapter and, after making reasonable effort to contact the
owner if ascertainable, either transport the animal to a suitable municipal
shelter, the County Animal Control Shelter or to turn the animal over to an
appropriate municipal or county animal control officer, if practical.
(Am. Res. passed 1-12-06)
§ 91.04 PROCEDURES FOR REDEMPTION OF IMPOUNDED ANIMALS.
   Any animal taken into custody by the Chief of Police or his or her designee
must be redeemed at the County Animal Control Shelter after paying any fines or
fees required by the shelter.
§ 91.05 DOGS TO WEAR COLLARS; TAGS.
   Every dog and cat in the town shall wear a collar bearing a rabies
vaccination tag, as required by G.S. § 130A-190.
(Am. Res. passed 1-12-06)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.06 DOGS TO BE RESTRAINED.
   Except as noted in this chapter, every dog within the town shall be leashed
when not inside of the owner's residence or property or a closed vehicle. Dogs
not leashed, but under control of its owner, are permitted on the beach strand
between the hours of dawn and 9:00 a.m.; additionally from October 15 through
March 15, dogs not leashed, but under control of its owner, are permitted on
the beach strand. Reference is made to the definition of “control” in §
91.01.
(Am. Res. passed - - ; Am. Res. passed 9-6-01; Am. Res. passed 11- 11-04; Am.
Res. passed 10-11-07; Am. Ord. passed 11-8-18) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.07 RESERVED.
§ 91.08 RESPONSIBILITY FOR DISPOSAL OF ANIMAL WASTE.
   Any person owning, keeping, possessing or harboring any dog shall carry
adequate materials to promptly remove and dispose of all feces left by the dog
on any public property and on any private property not owned or lawfully
occupied by the person within the town and shall promptly remove the feces left
by the dog to a location off public or private property or into an appropriate
waste receptacle.
(Res. passed - - )
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 91.09 REGULATIONS REGARDING TREATMENT OF WILD ANIMALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally feed any wild
animal located within the town limits.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally annoy, harass,
provoke, injure or otherwise infuriate or enrage any wild animal located within
the town limits.
   (C)   A violation of this section shall be punishable with a fine of $500.
   (D)   No provisions of this chapter should be construed as preventing the
attempt by individuals to adopt and domesticate feral cats or to provide for
the removal of beavers. An adoption shall require one to provide proof of the
administration of rabies shots and the spaying or neutering of the animal. Upon
request, the town shall be provided with evidence of the procedures.
(Res. passed 6-12-08; Am. Res. passed 9-11-08; Am. Res. passed 5-13-10)
§ 91.10 REGULATIONS REGARDING TREATMENT OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   A person shall not leave or confine an animal in any unattended motor
vehicle under conditions that endanger the health or well-being of an animal
due to heat, cold, lack of adequate ventilation, or lack of food or water, or
other circumstances that could reasonably be expected to cause suffering,
disability or death to the animal.
   (B)   Any police officer, firefighter, or animal control officer is
authorized to take all steps that are reasonably necessary in their discretion
for the rescue of an animal from a motor vehicle, including but not limited to
breaking into the motor vehicle after a reasonable effort to locate the owner
or other person responsible.
   (C)   Any police officer, firefighter, animal control officer who removes an
animal from a vehicle in accordance with this section shall not be liable for
actions taken reasonably and in good faith and shall not be liable for damages
caused in connection with or arising from those actions.
   (D)   Any person who violates this section shall be subject to all
applicable penalties of Federal, state and local law.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 91.11 ANIMAL CREATING NUISANCE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper of animals to permit an
animal to create a nuisance, or to maintain a nuisance created by an animal.
   (B)   Possession of certain reptiles is unlawful. It shall be unlawful for
any persons to keep, maintain, possess, or have under their control within the
town limits any venomous reptile, or non-venomous reptile weighing over 30
pounds at maturity. This prohibition is primarily based upon concern to protect
the health, safety, and welfare of the town’s residents.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for a person to own, keep, or have within the
town an animal, bees, or the like, that habitually or repeatedly disturbs,
annoys, or frightens the residents as determined by an animal control officer/
law enforcement officer.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for a person to own, keep, or have within the
town an animal that habitually or repeatedly creates unsanitary conditions in
the area where the animal primarily resides, that is not removed, in a timely
manner, by the owners or keepers.
   (E)   Compliance shall be required as follows:
      (1)   When a law enforcement officer determines that a violation has
occurred on private property, the owner or keeper shall be given written
notification of such violation and be given 48 hours from the time of the
notification to abate the nuisance. If the animal commits any further
violations or if the owner of the animal fails to abate the condition which
constitutes the nuisance, the animal control/law enforcement officer may issue
a notice of violation and civil penalty for the first offense and additional
penalties for any and all subsequent offenses. If the owner fails to abate the
nuisance after the second civil penalty, animal control officers/law
enforcement may deem the animal a habitual public nuisance and/or seize and
impound the animal. If the animal is seized, animal control/law enforcement
officers must post a notice of seizure and impoundment with the owner. The
owner may reclaim the animal upon payment of civil fees, redemption fees, and
boarding. If the animal is not reclaimed within five days, it shall become the
property of the town and turned over to Brunswick County Animal Services.
      (2)   When an animal control officer/law enforcement officer determines
that a violation has occurred on public property, the owner must remove the
animal from the public area immediately and may be charged criminally as
provided by G.S. § 160A-175, and/or subject to civil penalties as provided in
the town’s fee schedule.
      (3)   Any animal that has been previously deemed by an animal control
officer or law enforcement officer as being at large, based upon probable
cause, or has previously caused injury to a person or animal, or has displayed
vicious tendencies, or has been a habitual public nuisance, must be restrained
by a fence or enclosure by the owner even when on the owner’s property based on
the owner’s failure to abate the nuisance. The restraint must be deemed
appropriate by the animal control supervisor. Any person guilty of violations
of this section shall be subject to criminal or civil proceedings, or by any
other remedy provided for under G.S. § 160A-175. Fines for civil violations are
set in the town’s fee schedule maintained at the Town Hall. The provisions for
violation in this section are separate and severable and either civil or
criminal action may be instituted notwithstanding the other.
   (f)   No person shall, without prior approval from Town Administration and
for a limited amount of time, keep or maintain any fowl, hooved animal, cow,
horse, pony, mule, sheep, or goat including, but not limited to, other similar
livestock animals on any lot or within any pen, stable, or other enclosure or
building within the corporate limits of the town.
(Ord. passed 8-17-23) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 92: BEACHES AND WATERWAYS
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Strand defined
   
92.02   Unlawful to ride or walk horses on or along strand
   
92.03   Removal of sand
   
92.04   Dunes protection
   
92.05   Personal watercraft safety
   
92.06   Lighthouse parking area
   
92.07   Public nudity
Sea Turtle Sanctuary
   
92.15   Area
   
92.16   Restriction
   
Appendix A: Related Statutory Provisions
Cross-reference:
   Motor vehicles on strand or dune areas, see
§ 70.01
   Fixed winged aircraft or helicopters on strand or dune areas, see
§ 70.02
   Property removal from town public areas, see
Chapter 97
   Glass containers regulated, see
§ 131.16
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 STRAND DEFINED.
      For the purpose of this chapter, the words STRAND OF THE BEACH shall mean
all that area lying east, and south and southeast of the high water mark of the
Atlantic Ocean.
('75 Code, § 3-6-2)
§ 92.02 UNLAWFUL TO RIDE OR WALK HORSES ON OR ALONG STRAND.
   It shall be unlawful at all times for any person to ride or walk a horse, or
to permit a horse to walk or to be ridden, on or along the strand of the beach
within the corporate limits.
('75 Code, § 3-6-1)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.03 REMOVAL OF SAND.
   No person, firm or corporation shall remove or cause to be removed any beach
sand from its natural state, except necessary excavation in preparation for
building, remodeling, or repairing the premises; provided that any beach sand
so removed shall be placed nearer the road adjoining the premises or, at the
option of the owner of the premises, hauled to another suitable location within
the town limits, provided also that the sand dunes lying adjacent to the ocean
front shall not be lowered below six feet in height above the abutting street
elevation, and that in making such excavation no vegetation shall be destroyed
which is growing on the front slope of the ocean front sand dune. Provided
further that under no circumstances shall any quantity of beach sand be
transported to a location outside the town limits.
('75 Code, § 3-12-1)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 92.04 DUNES PROTECTION.
   (A)   The term PRIMARY DUNE shall be defined as the first mounds of sand
located landward of the ocean beaches having an elevation equal to the mean
flood level for the area plus six feet. In areas where there is a primary dune,
that dune shall be deemed to be the frontal dune. Where there is no primary
dune, the FRONTAL DUNE shall be deemed to be the first mound of sand located
landward of the ocean beach with sufficient vegetation, height, continuity and
configuration to offer protective value from storms.
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person not on his own property to
traverse or walk upon, over or across, or to damage in any manner whatsoever,
the primary or frontal sand dune at any point within the corporate limits of
the town other than at the points designated as “beach accessways” which
provide access to the beach over the primary or frontal sand dune. At the
access points (which are designated and properly marked), individuals may only
use the improved, artificial walkway to gain access to the beach over the
frontal or primary sand dune, and shall not traverse on the sand or vegetation
directly.
      (2)   The town shall properly identify all accessways and shall post
notices to the effect that it is unlawful to traverse the dunes at any point
other than an accessway.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally damage in any
manner whatsoever, vegetation growing anywhere on the beach or frontal dune.
The penalty for failure to comply with this section shall be as prescribed in
§ 10.99.
   (D)   Violation of this section shall be a misdemeanor and punished with a
fine of $100 for each violation.
(Ord. passed - -99; Am. Res. passed 7-12-01; Am. Res. passed 11-10-05)
§ 92.05 PERSONAL WATERCRAFT SAFETY.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, PERSONAL WATERCRAFT shall
be defined as in G.S. § 75A-13.3(a).
   (B)   Operator. The restrictions for operation of a personal watercraft
shall be as described in G.S. § 75A-13.3(b), except that only persons at least
13 years of age but under 16 years of age may operate personal watercraft
pursuant to subparagraphs (1) and (2) of that Statute.
   (C)   Speed. In all Brunswick County waters, no person may operate a person
watercraft in excess of headway speed, which shall not exceed six mph:
      (1)   Within 50 feet of posted waterbird sanctuaries or management areas.
      (2)   Within 25 feet of the Marsh or shore within the Intracoastal
Waterway.
   (D)   Wildlife. In accordance with G.S. § 113-291.1, it shall be unlawful
for an operator of a personal watercraft on the waters in Brunswick County to
chase, harass, molest, or disturb any wildlife except when lawfully angling
for, hunting or trapping such wildlife.
   (E)   Sale. At the time of purchase, a dealer in personal watercraft shall
require the buyer of a personal watercraft to receive instruction addressing
safe operation of the watercraft.
   (F)   Lease. A personal watercraft livery owner or the livery owner’s agent
or employee shall:
      (1)   Require positive identification from all renters;
      (2)   Post personal watercraft regulations;
      (3)   Require all renters to read the regulations;
      (4)   Require all renters to sign a rental contract, containing a clause
stating that the renter has read and understood all applicable safety
regulations;
      (5)   Instruct all renters in the safe operation of the personal
watercraft.
   (G)   Penalty. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section
shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than
$500 or imprisonment for not more than 20 days, in the discretion of the Court,
as provided by G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. passed 5-11-00)
§ 92.06 LIGHTHOUSE PARKING AREA.
   The following regulations apply to public parking at the Oak Island
Lighthouse.
   (A)   Parking duration will be one hour;
   (B)   The public parking area at the lighthouse will be open between dawn
until dusk only. Parking will not be permitted at other times.
(Ord. passed 1-13-05)
§ 92.07 PUBLIC NUDITY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any female over the age of five years to
willfully expose her breasts in any public area. For the purpose of this
section, the term “expose her breasts” shall mean the revealing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering on any portion thereof lower than
the top of any part of the areola, except as provided in G.S. 14-190.9(b)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person over the age of five years to
appear in any public area in such a state of dress or undress so as to expose
to the view of others the human male or female pubic area, pubic hair, anus,
vulva or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering.
   (C)   For the purposes of this section, a public area is any area in the
town limits ordinarily open to public use, including but not limited to, the
beach strand, commercial premises and parking areas, public parking and access
areas, town rights-of-way, public parks and town-owned property and any areas
within town limits that are visible under normal and usual lighting conditions,
to anyone making ordinary use of those areas.
(Res. passed 6-9-05)
SEA TURTLE SANCTUARY
§ 92.15 AREA.
   All areas within the town limits above the mean low water mark of the
Atlantic Ocean, and extending therefrom in the direction of the primary dune a
distance of 150 feet, are hereby declared to be a sea turtle sanctuary.
('75 Code, § 3-17-1)
§ 92.16 RESTRICTION.
   It shall be unlawful within the sea turtle sanctuary for any person to
willingly take, disturb or destroy any sea turtle, including green, hawksbill,
loggerhead and leatherback turtles, or their nest or eggs. Furthermore, between
May 1 and November 1 of each year, there shall not be allowed after dark any
use of the sea turtle sanctuary other than pedestrian traffic, except that
commercial fishing activities as specifically allowed by law shall be allowed.
('75 Code, § 3-17-2)
Penalty, see § 10.99
APPENDIX A: RELATED STATUTORY PROVISIONS
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA
SESSION 2003
SESSION LAW 2003-282
HOUSE BILL 542
AN ACT TO ALLOW THE TOWNS OF CASWELL BEACH, OAK ISLAND, OCEAN ISLE BEACH, AND
SUNSET BEACH AND THE VILLAGE OF BALD HEAD ISLAND TO EXERCISE THE POWER OF
EMINENT DOMAIN FOR THE PURPOSES OF ENGAGING IN BEACH EROSION CONTROL, FLOOD AND
HURRICANE PROTECTION WORKS, AND PUBLIC BEACH ACCESS.
The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:
   SECTION 1. G.S. 40A-3(bl) reads as rewritten:
   (bl)   Local Public Condemnors - Modified Provision for Certain Localities.
For the public use or benefit, the governing body of each municipality or
county shall possess the power of eminent domain and may acquire by purchase,
gift or condemnation any property or interest therein, either inside or outside
its boundaries, for the following purposes.
      (1)   Opening, widening, extending, or improving roads, streets, alleys,
and sidewalks. The authority contained in this subsection is in addition to the
authority to acquire rights-of-way for streets, sidewalks and highways under
Article 9 of Chapter 136. The provisions of this subdivision (1) shall not
apply to counties.
      (2)   Establishing, extending, enlarging, or improving any of the public
enterprises listed in G.S. 160A-311 for cities, or G.S. 153A-274 for counties.
      (3)   Establishing, enlarging, or improving parks, playgrounds, and other
recreational facilities.
      (4)   Establishing, extending, enlarging, or improving storm sewer and
drainage systems and works, or sewer and septic tank lines and systems.
      (5)   Establishing, enlarging, or improving hospital facilities,
cemeteries, or library facilities.
      (6)   Constructing, enlarging, or improving city halls, fire stations,
office buildings, courthouse jails and other buildings for use by any
department, board, commission or agency.
      (7)   Establishing drainage programs and programs to prevent obstructions
to the natural flow of streams, creeks and natural water channels or improving
drainage facilities. The authority contained in this subdivision is in addition
to any authority contained in Chapter 156.
      (8)   Acquiring designated historic properties, designated as such before
October 1, 1989, or acquiring a designated landmark designated as such on or
after October 1, 1989, for which an application has been made for a certificate
of appropriateness for demolition, in pursuance of the purposes of G.S. 160A-
399.3, Chapter 160A, Article 19, Part 3B, effective until October 1, 1989, or
G.S. 160A-400.14, whichever is appropriate.
      (9)   Opening, widening, extending, or improving public wharves.
      (10)   Engaging in or participating with other governmental entities in
acquiring, constructing, reconstructing, extending, or otherwise building or
improving beach erosion control or flood and hurricane protection works,
including, but not limited to, the acquisition of any property that may be
required as a source for beach renourishment.
           (11)   Establishing access for the public to public trust beaches
and appurtenant parking areas.
   The board of education of any municipality or county or a combined board may
exercise the power of eminent domain under this Chapter for purposes authorized
by G.S. Chapter 115C.
   The power of eminent domain shall be exercised by local public condemnors
under the procedures of Article 3 of this chapter.
   This subsection applies only to Carteret and Dare Counties, the Towns of
Atlantic Beach, Carolina Beach, Caswell Beach, Emerald Isle, Holden Beach,
Indian Beach, Kill Devil Hills, Kitty Hawk, Kure Beach, Nags Head, North
Topsail Beach, Oak Island, Ocean Isle Beach, Pine Knoll Shores, Sunset Beach,
Surf City, Topsail Beach, and Wrightsville Beach, and the Village of Bald Head
Island. This subsection, excluding subdivision (11) of this subsection, applies
to the Town of Duck.
   SECTION 2. G.S. 40A-42(a)(2) reads as rewritten:
      (2)   [Modified Provision for Certain Localities]. When a local public
condemnor is acquiring property by condemnation for a purpose set out in G.S.
40A-3(bl)(1), (4), (7), (10), or (11), or when a city is acquiring property for
a purpose set out in G.S. 160A-311(1), (2), (3), (4), (6), or (7), or when a
county is acquiring property for a purpose set out in G.S. 153A-274(1), (2) or
(3), or when a local board of education or any combination of local boards of
education is acquiring property for any purpose set forth in G.S. 115C-517, or
when a condemnor is acquiring property by condemnation as authorized by G.S.
40A-3(c)(8), (9), (10), (12), or (13), title to the property and the right to
immediate possession shall vest pursuant to this subsection. Unless an action
for injunctive relief has been initiated, title to the property specified in
the complaint, together with the right to immediate possession thereof, shall
vest in the condemnor upon the filing of the complaint and the making of the
deposit in accordance with G.S. 40A-41.
   This subdivision applies only to Carteret and Dare Counties, the Towns of
Atlantic Beach, Carolina Beach, Caswell Beach, Duck, Emerald Isle, Holden
Beach, Indian Beach, Kill Devil Hills, Kitty Hawk, Kure Beach, Nags Head, North
Topsail Beach, Oak Island, Ocean Isle Beach, Pine Knoll Shores, Sunset Beach,
Surf City, Topsail Beach, and Wrightsville Beach, and the Village of Bald Head
Island.
   SECTION 3. This act is effective when it becomes law.
CHAPTER 93: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Fire limits
Open Burning
   
93.15   Definition
   
93.16   Open burning prohibited
   
93.17   Beach fire regulations and permit
False Alarms
   
93.20   Definition
   
93.21   Intentional false alarm prohibited
   
93.22   Negligent false alarms
   
93.23   Civil penalty
   
93.24   Service fee
   
93.25   Alarm reset
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 FIRE LIMITS.
   As the town has no principal business district that would require the
establishment of a primary fire district, the town takes the position that
neither primary nor secondary fire limits are necessary and in the public
interest.
('75 Code, § 3-15-1)
OPEN BURNING
§ 93.15 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BURN IN THE OPEN. An unconfined fire; a fire having no enclosing or
confining barrier.
('75 Code, § 3-3-2)
§ 93.16 OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to burn in the
open or cause to be burned in the open any trash, refuse, shavings, paper,
leaves, grass, brush, litter or other material of any kind within the corporate
limits of the town.
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.17 BEACH FIRE REGULATIONS AND PERMIT.
   (A)   Permits shall only be issued to Caswell Beach property owners. The
permit shall include the name and telephone number of the property owner, the
specific time/duration of the fire and beach access number.
   (B)   The permit shall include an acknowledgment that the property owner is
responsible for all damage to personal property of residents and the town
resulting from its beach fire.
   (C)   A property owner shall be defined as the deedholder of the residence
or its adult children at the age of 21 or older.
   (D)   A property owner must always be in attendance during the fire.
   (E)   Beach fires shall only be allowed within 20 yards east or west of a
Caswell Beach public access.
   (F)   A refundable permit fee shall be $300 and shall clearly state that
this is not the limit of the property owner's responsibility.
   (G)   Beach firepits shall be limited to four feet in width and two feet in
height. Flames shall not exceed the height of the pit.
   (H)   Material to be burned shall be limited to firewood, vegetation or
synthetic fire logs. No other material, including lumber or treated wood, shall
be allowed.
   (I)   All fires shall be located five feet landward of the most recent two
hightides and 50 feet from the closest dune/vegetation line. Permits shall not
be issued in areas where this is not achievable as determined by the town in
its sole discretion. Currently this is eastward of Marker #3.
   (J)   The property owner must have sufficient equipment on-site to
extinguish the fire. Equipment should include, but not limited to, an operable
fire extinguisher, five-gallon bucket of water and a shovel.
   (K)   The property owner must remain at the site of the fire until it is
completely extinguished.
   (L)   The property owner shall be responsible for removing all debris prior
to leaving the site and must return not later than 10:00 a.m. the following
morning to verify that all remnants of debris have been properly disposed. No
fire debris may be deposited in a town trash receptacle.
   (M)   Subject to a town representative validating the fire pit has been
successfully cleaned of all fire remnants, the permit fee shall be returned to
the property owner within seven days.
   (N)   When wind gusts are forecasted to exceed ten miles per hour, permits
shall not be issued or shall be automatically revoked should unexpected gusts
increase to that threshold. It shall be the explicit responsibility of the
property owner to monitor the weather prior to and during the fire. The
property owner must be accessible to town personnel by phone prior to and
during the time of the fire.
   (O)   No permits shall be issued between May 1 and the later of September 30
or the emergence of the town's last turtle nest.
   (P)   No permits shall be issued if either the Town of Caswell Beach,
Brunswick County or State of North Carolina (Fire Marshall's Service or North
Carolina Forest Service) issues burn bans for open fires.
   (Q)   A property owner failing to comply with any of these requirements
shall, at the sole discretion of the town, forfeit its permit fee.
(Res. passed 5-10-07; Ord. passed 8-8-24; Ord. passed 1-8-26) Penalty, see §
10.99
FALSE ALARMS
§ 93.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FALSE ALARM. Any call for fire or police service resulting from an equipment
malfunction or user error in operating a fire alarm/burglar alarm system.
(Ord. 2013-14-O, passed 9-12-13)
§ 93.21 INTENTIONAL FALSE ALARM PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall intentionally make a false fire alarm within the town.
   (B)   Violation of the section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable in
accordance with §
10.99(A).
(Ord. 2013-14-O, passed 9-12-13)
§ 93.22 NEGLIGENT FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   All private fire and burglar alarm systems shall be maintained in good
working order.
   (B)   No person shall negligently make a false fire alarm within the town’s
jurisdiction.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, a person shall be guilty of
negligently making a false fire alarm when and if the fire alarm serving his or
her structure sounds and there is not, in fact, a fire to which the Fire
Department should respond, and the person or entity has been given prior notice
that the fire alarm system is malfunctioning and fails to remedy the
malfunction within 72 hours after notice. Once notice is given, the owner/
operator of the system shall contact town hall and shall notify the Town
Manager, or his or her designee, that there has been maintenance and correction
of the malfunction.
(Ord. 2013-14-O, passed 9-12-13)
§ 93.23 CIVIL PENALTY.
   The Town Manager, or his or her designee, shall have the authority to impose
a civil penalty as referenced in the fee schedule per false alarm response,
doubled after each additional response, on any property owner with more than
two false alarms within a 30 day period.
(Ord. 2013-14-O, passed 9-12-13)
§ 93.24 SERVICE FEE.
   False alarms in excess of two within 30 days will cause a service fee to be
imposed upon the use for each such false alarm. The service fee will be
indicated on the fee schedule to be maintained in the office of the Town Clerk.
(Ord. 2013-14-O, passed 9-12-13)
§ 93.25 ALARM RESET.
   The property owner or an alarm user or his or her representative shall reset
an alarm in an expedient manner when notified that the alarm has been
activated. If the alarm cannot be reset it shall be taken out of service. In
buildings required by the North Carolina Fire Code, the responsible party shall
post a fire watch until the system is put back in service.
(Ord. 2013-14-O, passed 9-12-13)
CHAPTER 94: 911 SERVICES
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Imposition of monthly charges
   
94.03   Service supplier's responsibility
   
94.04   Administration
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXCHANGE ACCESS FACILITY. The access from a particular telephone
subscriber's premises to the telephone system of a service supplier. EXCHANGE
ACCESS FACILITIES includes service supplier provided access lines, PBX trunks
and centrex network access registers, all as defined by tariffs of telephone
companies as approved by the North Carolina Utilities Commission. EXCHANGE
ACCESS FACILITIES do not include service supplier owned and operated telephone
pay station lines, or Wide Area Telecommunications Service (WATS), Foreign
Exchange (FX) or incoming only lines.
   911 CHARGE. A contribution to the local government for the 911 service
start-up equipment costs, subscriber notification costs, addressing costs,
billing costs, and nonrecurring and recurring installation, maintenance,
service, and network charges of a service supplier providing 911 service
pursuant to G.S. §§ 62A-1 et seq.
   911 SYSTEM or 911 SERVICE. An emergency telephone system that provides the
user of the public telephone system the ability to reach a public safety
answering point by dialing the digits 911. The terms 911 SYSTEM or 911 SERVICE
also includes ENHANCED 911 SERVICE which means an emergency telephone system
that provides the user of the public telephone system with 911 service, and, in
addition, directs 911 calls to appropriate public safety answering points by
selective routing based on the geographical location from which the call
originated and provides the capability for automatic number identification and
automatic location identification features.
   PUBLIC SAFETY TELEPHONE ACT. G.S. §§ 62A-1 et seq.
   SERVICE SUPPLIER. A person or entity who provides exchange telephone service
to a telephone subscriber.
   TELEPHONE SUBSCRIBER or SUBSCRIBER. A person or entity to whom exchange
telephone service, either residential or commercial, is provided and in return
for which the same person or entity is billed on a monthly basis. When the same
person, business, or organization has several telephone access lines, each
exchange access facility shall constitute a separate subscription.
(G.S. § 62A-3(9)) (Ord. passed 2-8-90)
Editor’s note:
   This section references G.S. §§ 62A-1 et seq. and 62A-3(9) which were
repealed in 2007.
§ 94.02 IMPOSITION OF MONTHLY CHARGES.
   (A)   Effective August 1, 1990, there is imposed a monthly 911 charge in the
amount specified in division (B) upon each exchange access facility subscribed
to by telephone subscribers whose exchange lines are in the area served by or
which will be served by the 911 service of the town.
   (B)   The monthly 911 charge is $1.00 for each exchange access facility
subscribed to by a telephone subscriber whose exchange access line or lines are
located in the town and which are in the area served by or which will be served
by the 911 service of the county.
(Ord. passed 2-8-90; Am. Res. passed 9-14-06)
§ 94.03 SERVICE SUPPLIER'S RESPONSIBILITY.
   Service suppliers shall be responsible for collecting and remitting to the
county all of the 911 charges as provided in the Public Safety Telephone Act.
(Ord. passed 2-8-90)
§ 94.04 ADMINISTRATION.
   Administration and collection activities as well as all financial accounting
procedures necessary to enforce and give full effect to the provisions of this
chapter shall be conducted pursuant to and in strict conformity with the
provisions of the Public Safety Telephone Act.
(Ord. passed 2-8-90)
CHAPTER 95: NUISANCES
Section
Noise Control
   
95.01   Unnecessary noise
   
95.02   Citation for violations
Weeds, Grass, and Refuse
   
95.15   Certain conditions prohibited
   
95.16   Authority of town to investigate
   
95.17   Notice to abate nuisance
   
95.18   Failure to abate; removal procedures
   
95.19   Cost of removal; liens
   
95.20   Additional remedies
Cross-reference:
   Solid waste, see
Chapter 51
NOISE CONTROL
§ 95.01 UNNECESSARY NOISE.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of this subchapter, the creation of any
unreasonably loud, disturbing and unnecessary noise in the town is prohibited.
('75 Code, § 3-2-1)
   (B)   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing
and unnecessary noise in violation of this section, but the enumeration shall
not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:
      (1)   Blowing horns. The sounding of any horn or signal device on any
automobile, motorcycle, bus or other vehicle, except as a danger signal, so as
to create any unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or the sounding of such device
for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
      (2)   Radios, phonographs, juke boxes, and the like. The playing of any
radio, phonograph or other instrument through which noises can be amplified, in
such manner or with such volume, between midnight and 7:30 a.m. on Friday and
Saturday; and between 10:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. from Sunday through Thursday, so
as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of any person in any
dwelling or other type of residence.
      (3)   Gongs. The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle, other than
police, fire, or other emergency vehicle.
      (4)   Animals. It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or have
in his possession, or harbor, any dog, other animal or bird which, by frequent
or habitually howling, yelping, barking or otherwise, causes loud noises and
produces seriously annoying disturbance to any person or to the neighborhood.
      (5)   Construction. Construction activities which create any unreasonably
loud or harsh sound shall not be allowed between sunset and 7:30 a.m.
('75 Code, § 3-2-2) (Am. Ord. 2015-002-O, passed 10-8-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.02 CITATION FOR VIOLATIONS.
   Anyone violating
§ 95.01 shall be cited by the Chief of Police or one of his deputies.
('75 Code, § 3-2-3)
WEEDS, GRASS AND REFUSE
§ 95.15 CERTAIN CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
   The existence of any of the following conditions on any vacant lot or other
parcel of land within the corporate limits is hereby declared to be dangerous
and prejudicial to the public health or safety and to constitute a public
nuisance:
   (A)   The uncontrolled growth of noxious weeds or grass to a height in
excess of 24 inches causing or threatening to cause a hazard detrimental to the
public health or safety.
   (B)   Any accumulation of rubbish, trash, junk, or other materials, causing
or threatening to cause a fire hazard, or causing or threatening to cause the
accumulation of stagnant water, or causing or threatening to cause the
inhabitation therein of rats, mice, snakes, or vermin of any kind which is or
may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health.
   (C)   Any accumulation of animal or vegetable matter that is offensive by
virtue of odors or vapors or by the inhabitance therein of rats, mice, snakes,
or vermin of any kind which is or may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public
health.
   (D)   Any condition detrimental to the public health which violates the
rules and regulations of the County Health Department.
   (E)   The plant known as Beach Vitex (Vitex rotundifolia), is hereby found
and is declared to be a public nuisance due to the significant negative impacts
this plant will have upon the public beaches and sand dunes, loggerhead turtles
and native vegetative such as Sea Oats, Bitter Panicum, Seashore Elder, and
American Beachgrass. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant or cause to
be planted Beach Vitex (Vitex rotundifolia) on any property located within the
municipal town limits of the Town of Caswell Beach.
('75 Code, § 3-10-1) (Am. Ord. passed 10-13-05)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.16 AUTHORITY OF TOWN TO INVESTIGATE.
   The Town Clerk, upon notice from any person of the existence of any of the
conditions described in
§ 95.15, shall cause to be made by the appropriate County Health Department
official, or town official, such investigation as may be necessary to determine
whether, in fact, such conditions exist as to constitute a public nuisance as
declared in
§ 95.15.
('75 Code, § 3-10-2)
§ 95.17 NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE.
   (A)   Upon a determination that such conditions constituting a public
nuisance exist, the Town Clerk shall notify, in writing, the owner, occupant or
person in possession of the premises in question of the conditions constituting
such public nuisance and shall order the prompt abatement thereof within 15
days from the receipt of such written notice.
   (B)   In cooperation with the following organizations, said list not being
exhaustive, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, N.C. Cooperative Extension,
South Carolina Beach Vitex Taskforce, North Carolina Beach Vitex Taskforce,
N.C. State University, a program(s) will be developed to eradicate Beach Vitex
from municipal limits. Upon identification of any Beach Vitex plant, the
property owner shall be ordered to eradicate the plant from his or her property
pursuant to an acceptable means of removal and disposal. As eradication
precedes restoration, the plant must be removed from properties before the
property is restored with native plants or other appropriate plants. As Beach
Vitex has the ability to generate new plants from seeds, stem sections and root
sections, the proper disposal of plants and plant parts is important. The town
shall be responsible for the collection of Vitex separately from other yard
waste and will treat it appropriately. Beach Vitex clippings shall not be
chipped and shredded into mulch and distributed to any yard waste disposal
site. The town shall cooperate with private landowners in this task to proceed
with the eradication.
('75 Code, § 3-10-3) (Am. Ord. passed 10-13-05) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.18 FAILURE TO ABATE; REMOVAL PROCEDURES.
   If any person, having been ordered to abate such a public nuisance, fails,
neglects, or refuses to abate or remove the condition constituting the nuisance
within 15 days from receipt of such order, the Town Clerk shall cause the
condition to be removed or otherwise remedied by having employees of the town
to go upon the premises and remove or otherwise abate such nuisance under the
supervision of an officer or employee designated by the Town Clerk. Any person
who has been ordered to abate a public nuisance may within the time allowed by
this subchapter request the town in writing to remove such condition, the cost
of which shall be paid by the person making such request.
('75 Code, § 3-10-4)
§ 95.19 COST OF REMOVAL; LIENS.
   (A)   The actual cost incurred by the town in removing or otherwise
remedying a public nuisance shall be charged to the owner of such lot or parcel
of land, and it shall be the duty of the Tax Collector to mail a statement of
such charges to the owner or other person in possession of such premises with
instructions that such charges are due and payable within 30 days from the
receipt thereof. ('75 Code, § 3-10-5)
   (B)   In the event charges for the removal or abatement of a public nuisance
are not paid within 30 days after the receipt of a statement of charges as
provided for in division (A) of this section, such charges shall become a lien
upon the land or premises where the public nuisance existed and shall be
collected as unpaid taxes, as provided in G.S. § 160A-193.
('75 Code, § 3-10-6)
§ 95.20 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   The procedure set forth in this subchapter shall be in addition to any other
remedies that may now or hereafter exist under law for the abatement of public
nuisances, and this subchapter shall not prevent the town from proceeding in a
criminal action against any person, firm or corporation violating the
provisions of this chapter as provided in G.S. § 14-4.
('75 Code, § 3-10-7)
CHAPTER 96: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
House Numbering
   
96.01   Posting required
   
96.02   Specifications of house numbers
   
96.03   Display of unassigned house numbers prohibited
   
96.04   Maintenance
   
96.05   New construction requirements
   
96.06   Noncompliance; enforcement
Cross-reference:
   Filming and videotaping in the town, see
Chapter 113
   Property removal from town public areas, see
Chapter 97
HOUSE NUMBERING
§ 96.01 POSTING REQUIRED.
   Each and every building or unit within the corporate limits of the town
shall permanently affix and display the address number which has been assigned
by the Town Clerk in the manner specified in the sections below.
(Res. passed 10-10-91)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.02 SPECIFICATIONS OF HOUSE NUMBERS.
   (A)   Design. The assigned address number shall be displayed on all
buildings or units, by numerals. Written, printed or scripted words shall not
be used. If posted within ten feet of ground level, each numeral shall be a
minimum of three inches in height; if posted over ten feet above ground level,
each numeral shall be a minimum of four inches in height.
   (B)   Color. The color of the numerals shall be in sharp contrast to any
background color and/or texture, so as to be plainly visible and legible from
the center line of the designated street during daylight hours.
   (C)   Location of number display. The assigned address number shall be
displayed on the facade of the building or unit. The facade of the building or
unit for purposes of this subchapter shall be that side facing the street for
which a number has been assigned to that building or unit. For all residential
properties, except multi-story condominiums, where a building or unit is set
back more than 60 feet from the edge of the improved portion of the street, the
assigned address number shall additionally be displayed on a freestanding post
or mailbox. Such additional displays shall comply with all specifications
enumerated in this section, where applicable, and shall be located on one of
the following:
      (1)   A post no smaller than four inches by four inches, sufficient in
height to be visible, located at the edge of the street. The number display
shall appear on both sides of the post facing traffic.
      (2)   A mailbox located according to U.S. Postal Service regulations at
the edge of the street. The number display shall appear on both sides of the
mailbox facing traffic.
   (D)   Obstruction. The assigned address number shall be displayed so that
its view from the street is not wholly or significantly obstructed by trees,
yard ornaments, shrubbery, porches, building architecture or other physical
impediments.
(Res. passed 10-10-91; Am. Res. passed 4-9-09)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.03 DISPLAY OF UNASSIGNED HOUSE NUMBERS PROHIBITED.
   The display of any address number other than that assigned by the Town Clerk
is expressly prohibited.
(Res. passed 10-10-91)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.04 MAINTENANCE.
   It shall be the responsibility of the building or unit owner to maintain at
all times the number display as required by and in accordance with the
provisions of the chapter.
(Res. passed 10-10-91)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.05 NEW CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   New construction. Owners, or agents of owners, of all lots or parcels
for which new construction has been approved (as evidenced by issuance of a
building or improvements permit) shall temporarily display the assigned address
numbers prior to the performance of any construction inspection.
   (B)   Completed construction. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued
until the assigned address number is permanently displayed in accordance with
provisions of this chapter.
(Res. passed 10-10-91)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.06 NONCOMPLIANCE; ENFORCEMENT.
   The owner of each building or unit failing to properly display an assigned
address number as prescribed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall
be deemed to be in violation thereof. Upon the determination of any such
violation, the Town Clerk shall issue a notice of violation to the owner of the
lot or parcel or land by regular mail to the owner's last known address,
informing them of the violation and the penalty that may be imposed if they do
not comply, and stating that they have a period of 30 days to correct the
violation. In the event any owner refuses to comply with this chapter, the town
is hereby empowered to proceed to file a criminal action against the owner
pursuant to G.S. § 14-4 and as set forth in
§ 10.99 of this code.
(Res. passed 10-10-91)
CHAPTER 97: PROPERTY REMOVAL FROM TOWN PUBLIC AREAS
Section
   
97.01   Definitions
   
97.02   Removal of private property from town public areas
   
97.03   Beach equipment on Caswell Beach
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned, nuisance and junked motor vehicles, see
Chapter 90
§ 97.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED PROPERTY. Tangible personal private property, including beach
equipment left unattended on town public roads, public right-of-ways or the
public beach.
   BEACH EQUIPMENT. On Caswell Beach, any man-made apparatus or paraphernalia
designed or manufactured for use or actually used on the beach. Examples
include, but are not limited to: chairs, lounges, umbrellas, cabanas, canopies,
tents, horseshoes and stakes, kayaks, paddle vessels, sailboards, surfboards,
fishing gear, sporting equipment, rafts, flotation devices, beach toys,
baskets, bags, towels, coolers and any other personal property items. Beach
equipment shall not include municipal trash containers, signage or structures,
or any items placed or permitted by a governmental agency (such as signs or
protection devices for turtle nests).(Ord. 2014-005-O, passed 6-12-14; Am. Ord.
2016-002, passed 4-14-16; Am. Ord. passed 4-10-25)
§ 97.02 REMOVAL OF PRIVATE PROPERTY FROM TOWN PUBLIC AREAS.
   (A)   Abandoned property located on town public roads, public right-of-ways
and/or the public beach shall only be removed by town personnel and shall be
disposed of in a manner to be determined by the Town Manager or his or her
designee.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner of the
private property or town employees, to remove or attempt to remove private
property and/or beach equipment from any town public location without the
owner's consent.
   (C)    All beach equipment shall be set at least ten feet from any sea
turtle nest.
(Ord. 2014-005-O, passed 6-12-14; Am. Ord. 2016-002, passed 4-14-16) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 97.03 BEACH EQUIPMENT ON CASWELL BEACH.
   All beach equipment on Caswell Beach must be removed from the beach by its
owner or permitted user on a daily basis. All personal items and beach
equipment unattended and remaining on the public beach during the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall be classified as abandoned property which may be
destroyed upon removal by the town. The effective dates shall commence on the
first day of May of each calendar year until September 30 of each calendar
year.
(Ord. 2016-002, passed 4-14-16; Am. Ord. passed 4-10-25)
CHAPTER 98: PROTECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF AREAS ZONED CONSERVATION
Section
   
98.01   Protection and maintenance of areas zoned Conservation
§ 98.01 PROTECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF AREAS ZONED CONSERVATION.
   (A)   No trees, vines, undergrowth, or other vegetation shall be removed
from areas zoned Conservation without written approval from the town. Approval
from the town will only be granted for the purpose of:
      (1)   Preserving the existing maritime vegetation and related ecosystem;
or
      (2)   In support of a permitted use in the areas zoned Conservation, said
permitted use only being permitted to the extent that it can be accomplished in
a manner and in a location which will not harm, impair, diminish, or degrade
the existing maritime vegetation.
   (B)   Before trees, vines, undergrowth, or other vegetation can be removed
for any reason from areas zoned Conservation the town may require that the
property owner submit a plan certified by a licensed certified professional
stating that the removal of vegetation or trees is:
      (1)   Necessary for the benefit and preservation of the existing maritime
vegetation and related ecosystem; or
      (2)   Is necessary in support of a permitted use and is designed so that
it will not harm, impair, diminish, or degrade the existing maritime
vegetation.
   (C)   The town reserves the right to have the submitted certified plan
reviewed by a licensed certified professional of the town’s choosing. Should a
disagreement arise between the town’s and property owner’s expert the opinion
of the professional selected by the town shall prevail. Federal, state and town
infrastructure projects shall be exempt from this section.
   (D)   For reference, although this chapter shall apply to any future area
that may be zoned Conservation, the principal areas currently zoned
Conservation are:
      (1)   Any lands bordering the marsh/sound that are outside of the
individual property lines; and
      (2)   The areas comprising what is known as the Maritime Forest along
Caswell Beach Road, and the south side of Caswell Dunes and Ocean Greens
Condominiums.
   (E)   The maximum fine for violation of this chapter exceeds $50 and is $500
for each individual violation of this chapter. Damage or removal of each piece
of vegetation is a separate violation of this chapter and will be subject to a
$500 fine. For example, if a tree limb on which a vine is growing is removed,
the total fine will be $1,000; $500 for damaging the tree and $500 for damaging
the vine. Violation of this chapter may result in the town applying to the
appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for an injunction or order
of abatement. Should the town take the steps required to execute the order of
abatement and restore the property to its prior condition the town shall have a
lien against the property for its cost incurred executing the order of
abatement. Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor offense.
CHAPTER 99: ALCOHOL REGULATIONS
Section
   
99.01   Wine, fortified wine, and mixed beverages on Sunday mornings
§ 99.01 WINE, FORTIFIED WINE, AND MIXED BEVERAGES ON SUNDAY MORNINGS.
   The sale of malt beverages, unfortified wine, fortified wine and mixed
beverages shall be allowed within the town corporate limits at any premises
licensed pursuant to G.S. 18B-1001 on Sunday beginning at 10:00 a.m.
(Ord. passed - - )
   TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.    CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
      
111.    PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
      
112.    RESERVED
      
113.   FILMING AND VIDEOTAPING
CHAPTER 110: CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
Section
   
110.01   Franchise ordinance adopted by reference
§ 110.01 FRANCHISE ORDINANCE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The Time-Warner Entertainment - Advance/Newhouse Partnership License
Agreement is hereby adopted by reference and shall have the full force and
effect of law as if fully set out at length in this code of ordinances. A copy
of the license agreement, with all amendments, shall be maintained for public
inspection in the office of the Clerk.
('75 Code, § 5-4-1) (Ord. passed 12-9-04; Am. Res. passed 3-9-06)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
Section
   
111.01   Peddling prohibited; exception
§ 111.01 PEDDLING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   The activity of peddling within the town limits is expressly
prohibited. For the purpose of this chapter, PEDDLING shall mean the selling,
bartering or exchanging, renting, and the offering for sale of either an item
of tangible personal property or a personal service unless the activity is
conducted on property zoned commercial or designated for home occupation by the
town's zoning ordinance. This chapter shall include the sale of food and the
rental of items for use at the beach. Peddling may not take place upon or along
the streets, highways, beach strand, or public places of the town or from
private property with or without the permission of the owner thereof, from any
means of conveyance (including but not limited to a wagon, truck, car,
pushcart), concession stand, or tent, or other movable receptacles of any kind.
   (B)   This chapter shall not apply to any activities that may fall within
the above definitions that are engaged in for the support of any recognized
religious or charitable purpose. However, those who solicit for these purposes
are requested to notify the Chief of Police and Town Clerk of their intentions.
('75 Code, § 3-16-1)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 112: RESERVED
CHAPTER 113: FILMING AND VIDEOTAPING
Section
   
113.01   Application for permit
   
113.02   Insurance
   
113.03   Indemnification
   
113.04   Availability of location manager
   
113.05   Use of the town identification
   
113.06   Activities limited
   
113.07   Notification
   
113.08   Traffic control
   
113.09   Explosives
   
113.10   Special effects hours
   
113.11   Lighting
   
113.12   Use of public right-of-way
   
113.13   Filming and/or videotaping on private property
   
113.14   Garbage assistance
   
113.15   Parking of equipment
   
113.16   Base camps
   
113.17   Areas of environmental concern
   
113.18   Daily cleanup
   
113.19   Removal of sets
   
113.20   Expenses
   
113.21   Oak Island Lighthouse film guidelines
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Any film production company desiring to film and/or videotape on public
property, or to film and/or videotape so as to affect public property or the
movement of people, vehicles or watercraft within the town, must apply for a
permit. The application must be presented to the  Town Manager , or his or her
designee, at least 21 days prior to the date of filming/videotaping. The
application shall include all information as required by the town in such
application. Following the submission of the application, a preproduction
meeting between the  Town Manager  and the location manager will be held for
the purpose of reviewing the application and to verify the production company’s
public liability insurance certificate. If the Oak Island Lighthouse will be
included in the town property to be used during filming, the Friends of the Oak
Island Lighthouse representative must also attend this meeting. No permits will
be issued until this meeting has taken place and the insurance certificate
furnished.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14; Ord. 2014-006-O, passed 7-7-14)
§ 113.02 INSURANCE.
   Any production company filming/videotaping on location within the town shall
be required to maintain public liability insurance in the currently required
amounts which are on file and available in the town hall.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.03 INDEMNIFICATION.
   The production company shall, prior to the issuance of a permit, sign an
agreement to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the town, its officers, agents
and employees from and against all claims, suits, actions, damages, liability
and expenses for bodily or personal injury, loss of life or property or damage
arising from, or out of, any occurrence while filming and/or videotaping in the
town.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.04 AVAILABILITY OF LOCATION MANAGER.
   The location manager shall provide the  Town Manager , or his or her
designee, with a cellular telephone number, pager number or other means for
immediate contact if necessary. The location manager shall be available during
the entire time that filming and/or videotaping is in progress. The location
manager, his or her vehicle, and other film support vehicles, shall be visibly
identified as participants in the filming process.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.05 USE OF THE TOWN IDENTIFICATION.
   The name “Caswell Beach,” the town seal or flags shall not be used without
written authorization of the  Town Manager .
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.06 ACTIVITIES LIMITED.
   The production company shall limit the activities at each location to those
outlined in the filming/videotaping permit.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.07 NOTIFICATION.
   The production company will notify all businesses and residences affected by
the filming and/or videotaping activity. Notification should take place no less
than 14 days prior to the start of filming and/or videotaping. Notification
should include information concerning the location and duration of the filming
activities as well as specifics regarding lights, noise and special effects.
The area to be covered by the notification shall be determined by the  Town
Manager  and will vary depending upon the impact of the planned activity. A
list of those persons or businesses requiring notification must be forwarded to
the  Town Manager , or his or her designee, ten days prior to beginning of the
filming/videotaping. The list should include the name and address of the person
contacted and the date the notification was made. The town may deny or revoke
permits where insufficient time has been allowed for notification, or when the
notification process has been improperly applied.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.08 TRAFFIC CONTROL.
   (A)   Approval must be obtained from the  Town Manager  and the Chief of
Police prior to any film and/or videotape activity that would disrupt the
normal flow of traffic on any town street or state road inside the town limits.
If needed, traffic control must be handled by the town’s police officers that
are hired by the production company.
   (B)   Requests for traffic control or diverting of traffic should be made
seven days prior to the start of the activity to allow for the planning of
alternate routes and proper signage. Requests must be forwarded to the  Town
Manager  and the Chief of Police. Any diversion of a state road or highway must
have prior approval of the State Department of Transportation and be approved
by the  Town Manager  and Chief of Police.
   (C)   All filming and/or videotaping activity that involves the holding,
delaying or rerouting of traffic in residential areas must be accompanied by at
least one police officer.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.09 EXPLOSIVES.
   (A)   Explosives, pyrotechnics, fire, smoke-making machines or other special
effects shall not be used unless specifically approved by the  Town Manager
and the Fire Chief.
   (B)   A noise ordinance exception must be approved by the  Town Manager  and
the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.10 SPECIAL EFFECTS HOURS.
   Special effects involving sirens, gunshots, speeding cars or other loud
noises are limited to the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.11 LIGHTING.
   (A)   Lighting for filming and/or videotaping, both during the day and at
night, shall be oriented away from neighboring residences whenever possible.
   (B)   Lighting shall not interfere with the safe movement of traffic at any
time.
   (C)   Lighting shall not be placed in any area where sea turtles could be
affected by lighting.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.12 USE OF PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Residents or business owners may not charge the production company for
the use of the public right-of-way in front of their homes or businesses, nor
prohibit its use.
   (B)   Removal, cutting or trimming of vegetation in the public right-of-way
shall be prohibited unless specifically approved by the  Town Manager .
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.13 FILMING AND/OR VIDEOTAPING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No filming and/or videotaping shall take place on private property without
the consent of the property owner.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.14 GARBAGE ASSISTANCE.
   Whenever the production company blocks or holds traffic on streets scheduled
for garbage pickup, the company shall move all trash containers to a location
that is accessible to the sanitation vehicles. After the trash containers have
been emptied, they will be returned to their proper owners.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.15 PARKING OF EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   All equipment and support vehicles not in immediate use shall be
parked so as not to cause any interference to pedestrians or vehicular traffic,
or to impede safe lines of vision at intersections. Production company vehicles
or equipment must not block fire hydrants, driveways or other accessways unless
authorized by the town or the resident or property owner affected.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.16 BASE CAMPS.
   (A)   Base camps and dressing room trailers shall be parked away from
residential areas unless approved by the  Town Manager . Steps shall be taken
to control noise from generators, slamming doors, engines, and the like,
between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (B)   Base camps and equipment trucks should not move into residential areas
between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. without prior approval of the
Town Manager .
   (C)   Base camps and staging areas should be sited only in areas zoned
commercial unless approved by the  Town Manager .
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.17 AREAS OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERN.
   Whenever a film/videotape set contains dirt, sod, plants, oil products, or
other materials and is located near an environmentally sensitive area, the
production company shall take such measures as deemed necessary to ensure that
such materials do not encroach, seep or intrude into the environmentally
sensitive area.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.18 DAILY CLEANUP.
   At the end of each shooting day, the production company will clean and
restore the site location, including public and private lands, to its original
condition. The town may grant an exception for period shots that are more than
one day in duration.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.19 REMOVAL OF SETS.
   (A)   All sets, piling, fences, building materials, debris and equipment
shall be removed within seven days after the conclusion of filming and/or
videotaping.
   (B)   All public property shall be restored to its original condition.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.20 EXPENSES.
   The production company shall be responsible to the town and shall reimburse
the town for any expenses, including employee overtime, that are directly
attributable to the filming and/or videotaping.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 113.21 OAK ISLAND LIGHTHOUSE FILM GUIDELINES.
   (A)   The Friends of the Oak Island Lighthouse (FOIL) Chairman (or his or
her designated liaison) will be the official contact to represent the
lighthouse’s interest. This liaison/representative will coordinate with the
town's film liaison concerning any issues or requirements the filming company
has that will affect the lighthouse use.
   (B)   A representative from FOIL will be on site at all times during any
filming or site preparations by the filming company.
   (C)   All modification to the lighthouse proper or grounds must have prior
approval from FOIL and the town. Once the filming is completed, the lighthouse
and grounds will be restored to its original conditions at the filming company
cost and the restoration must be accepted by FOIL and the town before the
obligation is completed.
   (D)   All activity that affects the operation of the navigational beacon
must have the prior approval of the U.S. Coast Guard. This is a written request
outlining the exact conditions and length of requested beacon outage/
modification.
   (E)   The filming company will provide liability insurance as required by
the town ordinance and will hold harmless and indemnify FOIL and the town of
any liability that may occur in the lighthouse or grounds during the filming.
   (F)   No one under the age of seven years old is allowed in the lighthouse
above the ground level.
   (G)   The service bucket cannot be used to move individuals up/down the
lighthouse; it can only be used for equipment movement.
   (H)   An hourly fee will be charged for the use of the lighthouse and
grounds and a signed contract with the Town of Caswell Beach will in place
prior to any filming. Invoices will be prepared by the  Town Manager .
(Ord. 2014-006-O, passed 7-7-14)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Failure to comply with the guidelines and conditions set forth in this
chapter, or the requirements of any specific permit, may result in penalties in
accordance with §
10.99, sanctions or suspension or revocation of any or all permits and/or loss
of filming/videotaping privileges inside the town.
   (B)   Prior to taking any punitive action against the production company,
the  Town Manager  will meet with the location manager to allow the company to
be heard.
   (C)   The production company shall be responsible to the town for any costs
incurred as a result of the company’s failure to follow this chapter.
(Ord. 2014-002-O, passed 4-10-14; Am. Ord. 2014-006-O, passed 7-7-14)
   TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.     OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
      
131.     OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE AND SAFETY
Section
   
130.01   Discharge of firearms and other weapons; confiscation
   
130.02   Unlawful transportation
   
130.03   Camping out prohibited
§ 130.01 DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS; CONFISCATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot, discharge, or fire
within the corporate limits of the town any gun, pistol, air rifle, spring gun,
spring pistol, compressed air rifle or pistol, or any other similar devise
which impels with force a shot or pellet of any kind; provided, however, that
this section shall not apply to the following:
      (1)   Law enforcement officers while engaged in the lawful discharge of
their duties;
      (2)   Any person while exercising a legal right to defend his person or
property;
      (3)   Any person using a nail gun for the purpose of construction; and
      (4)   Any person using a BB gun or cork gun.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly permit a child under
the age of 12 years to have access to, or possession, custody, or use in any
manner whatever, of any gun, pistol, or other dangerous firearm, whether such
weapon be loaded or unloaded, unless the person has the permission of the
child's parent or guardian, and the child is under the supervision of an adult.
   (C)   North Carolina G.S. 14-415.23 authorizes municipalities to adopt
ordinances to permit the posting of prohibition against carrying a concealed
handgun, in accordance with G.S. 14-415.11(c) on local government buildings,
their appurtenant premises, and parks. It is the intent of this section to
direct the posting of municipal property such that, pursuant to G.S. 14-415.11
(c), the carrying of concealed handguns on the posted premises will constitute
a violation of G.S. 14-415.10 et seq.
      (1)   Posting of signs required. The town is hereby authorized and
instructed to post conspicuous signage at appropriate locations on or within
the following municipal property, indicating that carrying a firearm, concealed
or otherwise, is prohibited therein: the Oak Island Lighthouse and its
appurtenant premises;
      (2)   Location of signs. Signs on buildings shall be visibly posted on
the exterior of each entrance by which the general public can access the
building or property. The town shall exercise discretion in determining the
number and appropriate location of signs to be placed on or within appurtenant
premises.
   (D)   The Chief of Police or any police officer shall have the authority to
seize and hold, subject to a court order, any gun or other device discharged in
violation of this section. The court may, in its discretion order the gun
confiscated, destroyed, or turned over to a state agency for educational
purposes.
(75 Code, §§ 3-9-1 and 3-9-2) (Ord. 2016-005, passed 8-11-16) Penalty, see §
10.99
Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to prohibit the discharge of firearms, see G.S. § 160A-189
§ 130.02 UNLAWFUL TRANSPORTATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to transport in the passenger area of
any motor vehicle any malt beverages or unfortified wine if the tab, cap, or
seal on the container or containers has been opened or broken on the public
streets and boulevards, belonging to the town.
('75 Code, § 3-11-1) (Am. Ord. passed 11-10-11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.03 CAMPING OUT PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, group of persons, firm, or corporation
to camp out within the town limits. CAMP OUT shall be defined as being the
living out of doors from any permanent residential structure including the
pitching and erecting of tents, lean-to's and other shelters erected for the
purpose of living in as well as the use of any camper trailer, truck camper,
self contained motor camper unit, mobile home, or any other conveyance to be
used for the purpose of habitation, other than a house, apartment, condominium,
motel, or hotel.
('75 Code, § 3-8-1)
Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Section
General Provisions
   
131.01   Damaging ordinances prohibited
   
131.02   Price gouging prohibited
Littering
   
131.15   Littering prohibited
   
131.16   Maintenance of public areas; receptacles
   
131.17   Transportation of garbage and refuse
   
131.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 131.01 DAMAGING ORDINANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall tear or deface any of the town ordinances.
('75 Code, § 1-4-9)
Penalty, see § 131.99
§ 131.02 PRICE GOUGING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   At any time within 30 days of any declaration of a state of emergency,
no person, merchant or business within the Town of Caswell Beach shall sell any
goods at a price that is greater than 150% of the amount charged prior to the
state of emergency, except as shall be provided herein.
   (B)   Sales of goods above predisaster levels shall be allowed only if the
merchant can document by receipt or other form of verifiable paper-writing the
increase in price to the merchant of the item in question. Nonresident
merchants or vendors not doing business in Caswell Beach prior to the
declaration of the state of emergency need to document by receipt or other form
of verifiable paper-writing the elevated price levels if the charged by a
particular item exceeds the general market value charged by resident merchants
by 150%.
   (C)   Violations of this section shall be punished in accordance with G.S.
14-3, the offense being a misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 9-9-04)
LITTERING
§ 131.15 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit
upon any street, sidewalk, or beach strand, or upon any private property except
with written permission of the owner or occupant of the private property, any
trash, refuse, garbage, building material, cans, bottles, broken glass, paper,
or any type of litter.
   (B)   Littering from vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person while a
driver or a passenger in a vehicle to throw or deposit litter upon any street
or other public place within the town or upon private property.
('75 Code, §§ 3-1-1 and 3-1-2)
Penalty, see § 131.99
§ 131.16 MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC AREAS; RECEPTACLES.
   (A)   Requirement. Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person in
charge of any commercial establishment or premises which maintains any paved or
unpaved areas for the use of the public, either for parking or as access areas
and incident to the carrying on of the principal business of any commercial
establishment or premises and which parking or access areas abut or lie within
ten feet of any public street or other public way, shall keep and maintain the
areas clean and free from trash, litter, rubbish, and any materials liable to
be blown, deposited, or cast upon the street or other public way.
   (B)   Receptacles. Suitable receptacles may be provided in parking or access
areas within the meaning of division (A) of this section. The receptacles shall
be plainly marked and constructed to prevent scattering of any trash, litter,
rubbish or other materials deposited therein.
('75 Code, §§ 3-1-4 and 3-1-5)
Penalty, see § 131.99
§ 131.17 TRANSPORTATION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE.
   (A)   Any person who carries or moves building material, scraps, fill dirt,
garbage, refuse, solid wastes, and tree trimmings, shall be required to secure
same within containers or the debris shall be covered while in transit to
insure that it does not blow or fall from the vehicle in which it is being
transported.
   (B)   The duties and responsibilities herein imposed shall be applicable
alike to the owner of a vehicle, the operator hereof, and the person from whose
home or business establishment the litter or other cargo originated.
('75 Code, § 3-1-6)
Penalty, see § 131.99
Cross-reference:
   Solid waste, see
Chapter 51
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided shall be subject to the penalty in
§ 10.99.
   (B)   Anyone violating
§§ 131.15 through
131.17 shall be cited by the Chief of Police or one of his deputies. The
offender shall pay a civil penalty of $25 into the Office of the Town Clerk
within 72 hours following receipt of the citation. If the penalty is not paid,
in accordance with G.S. § 160A-175, violation of any provision of
§§ 131.15 through
131.17 hereof shall be a misdemeanor as provided in G.S. § 14-4, punishable
upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30
days. ('75 Code, § 3-1-7)
   TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.     BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.     FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
152.     SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
153.     ZONING CODE
      
154. STORMWATER REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.001   Scope of chapter and regulatory codes
   
150.002   Building code
   
150.003   Plumbing code
   
150.004   Mechanical code
   
150.005   Electrical code
   
150.006   Residential building code
   
150.007   Gas code
   
150.008   Amendments to codes
   
150.009   Compliance with codes
   
150.010   Copies of code to be filled with Town Clerk
   
150.011   Moving of houses
Inspection Department
   
150.015   Department created
   
150.016   Duties and responsibilities
   
150.017   Financial support
   
150.018   Conflicts of interest
   
150.019   Reports and records
   
150.020   Inspection procedure
   
150.021   Oversight not to legalize violation
   
150.022   Powers of inspection officials
   
150.023   Enforcement of zoning ordinance
Registration and Permit Requirements
   
150.030   Permits required
   
150.031   Application for permit
   
150.032   Plans and specifications
   
150.033   Limitations on issuance of permits
   
150.034   Issuance of permit
   
150.035   Revocation of permits
   
150.036   Time limitation on validity of permits
   
150.037   Changes in work
   
150.038   Permit fees; schedules
   
150.039   Registration of contractors; clean up bond
Repair, Closing, or Demolition of Abandoned and Unsafe Structures
   
150.050   Findings; intent
   
150.051   Duties and powers of the building inspector
   
150.052   Conditions deemed in violation
   
150.053   Procedure for enforcement
   
150.054   Service of complaints and orders
   
150.055   Removal or destruction by town; placarding
   
150.056   Creation of lien on premises
   
150.057   Alternative remedies
Construction Requirements
   
150.070   Exterior lighting restrictions
   
150.071   Build-to-line
   
150.072   Landscape construction requirements
   
150.073   Filling, grading, and excavation
Administration and Enforcement
   
150.100   Equitable enforcement
   
150.101   Appeals in general
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.001 SCOPE OF CHAPTER AND REGULATORY CODES.
   (A)   The location, design, materials, equipment, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, maintenance, moving, demolition, removal,
use, and occupancy of every building or structure or any appurtenances
connected or attached to such building or structure.
   (B)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of
plumbing systems consisting of house sewers, building drains, waste and vent
systems, hot and cold water supply systems, and all fixtures and appurtenances
thereof;
   (C)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of
mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air conditioning, and
refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment, and appurtenances thereof;
   (D)   The installation, erection, alteration, repair, use and maintenance of
electrical systems and appurtenances thereof;
   (E)   The adoption of this chapter and the codes herein adopted by reference
shall constitute a resolution within the meaning of G.S. § 143-138 making the
regulatory codes herein adopted applicable to dwellings and out buildings used
in connection therewith and to apartment buildings used exclusively as the
residence of not more than two families.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
ADOPTION OF REGULATORY CODES BY REFERENCES
§ 150.002 BUILDING CODE.
   The current edition of the State Building Code, General Construction, and
Fire Prevention Code, as adopted by the State Building Code Council and as
amended from time to time, is hereby adopted by reference as fully as though
set forth herein as the building code of the town to the extent such code is
applicable for safe and stable design, methods of construction, minimum
standards, and use of materials in building or structures hereafter erected,
enlarged, altered, repaired or otherwise constructed or reconstructed.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.003 PLUMBING CODE.
   The current edition of the State Plumbing Code as adopted and published by
the State Building Code Council and as amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the plumbing code
for the town.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.004 MECHANICAL CODE.
   The current edition of the State Mechanical Code as adopted and published by
the State Building Code Council and as amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the heating code
for the town.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.005 ELECTRICAL CODE.
   The current edition of the State Electrical Code as adopted by the State
Building Code Council and as amended from time to time is hereby adopted by
reference as fully as though set forth herein as the electrical code for the
town.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.006 RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE.
   The current edition of the State Residential Building Code, as adopted by
the State Building Code Council and as amended from time to time, is hereby
adopted by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the residential
building code for one and two family residential buildings in the town.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.007 GAS CODE.
   The current edition of the State Building Code Fuel Gas, as adopted by the
State Building Code Council and as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted
by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the gas code for the town.
(Ord. passed 3-10-94; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.008 AMENDMENTS TO CODES.
   Amendments to the regulatory codes adopted by reference herein, which are
from time to time adopted and published by the agencies or organizations
referred to herein, shall be effective in the town at the time such amendments
as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.009 COMPLIANCE WITH CODES.
   (A)   All buildings or structures which are hereafter constructed,
reconstructed, erected, altered, extended, enlarged, repaired, demolished, or
moved shall conform to the requirements, minimum standards, and other
provisions of the adopted North Carolina State Building Codes.
   (B)   Every building or structure intended for human habitation, occupancy,
or use shall have plumbing, plumbing systems, or plumbing fixtures installed,
constructed, altered, extended, repaired, or reconstructed in accordance with
the minimum standards, requirements, and other provisions of the State Plumbing
Code.
   (C)   All mechanical systems consisting of heating, ventilating, air
conditioning, and refrigeration systems, fuel burning equipment, and
appurtenances shall be installed, erected, altered, repaired, used, and
maintained in accordance with the minimum standards, requirements, and other
provisions of the State Mechanical Code or Fuel Gas Code as applicable.
   (D)   All electrical wiring, installations and appurtenances shall be
erected, altered, repaired, used and maintained in accordance with the minimum
standards, requirements, and other provisions of the State Electrical Code.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.010 COPIES OF CODE TO BE FILLED WITH TOWN CLERK.
   An official copy of each regulatory code adopted herein, and official copies
of all amendments thereto, shall be kept on file in the office of the Town
Clerk. Such copies shall be the official copies of the codes and the
amendments.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.011 MOVING OF HOUSES.
   (A)   The moving of houses shall be allowed in or out of the town’s
jurisdiction only on Wednesday, from 10:00 a.m. until 2:00 p.m. No more than
one house may be moved on any given Wednesday and permits will be issued by
town Building Inspection Department during regular operating hours on a first-
come, first-serve basis. Manufactured homes shall be exempt from this section
and must abide by North Carolina state laws and codes. Waivers to the Wednesday
only policy shall be made by the Town Manager on an as needed basis.
   (B)   The following information is required to be submitted to the town
Police Department a minimum of two weeks prior to the moving of a house within
the town’s jurisdiction:
      (1)   Copy of applicable D.O.T. and town permits/licenses; and
      (2)   A dated letter giving two-week notification to the Police
Department. The date of the notification letter shall be after the moving
permit is issued by the town Building Inspection Department.
   (C)   That it shall further be the policy of the town that the mover shall
erect signage on both sides of the Oak Island bridge prior to move, indicating
the date and time that such a move will occur. These signs shall be erected
five days prior to move and will be four feet by four feet in size with the
ability to change date and time to correspond with each move. The mover will be
responsible for removing said signage after the house moving is completed.
(Res. passed 3-9-06; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
INSPECTION DEPARTMENT
§ 150.015 DEPARTMENT CREATED.
   The town is authorized to create an Inspection Department and shall appoint
one or more inspectors who may be given the titles of Building Inspector,
Electrical Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Housing Inspector, Zoning Inspector,
Mechanical Inspector, Fire Prevention Inspector, or Deputy or Assistant
Inspector, or such other titles as may be generally descriptive of the duties
assigned. The Department will be headed by a Superintendent or Director of
Inspections.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions, see G.S.§ 160D-1102
§ 150.016 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The duties and responsibilities of an Inspection Department and the
Inspectors therein shall be to enforce, within their territorial jurisdiction,
state and local laws relating to:
      (1)   The construction of buildings and other structures;
      (2)   The installation of such facilities as plumbing systems, electrical
systems, heating systems, refrigeration systems, and air conditioning systems;
      (3)   The maintenance of buildings and other structures in a safe,
sanitary, and healthful condition;
      (4)   Other matters that may be specified by the Board.
   (B)   These duties shall include the receipt of applications for permits and
the issuance or denial of permits, the making of any necessary inspections, the
issuance or denials of certificates of compliance, the issuance of orders to
correct violations, the bringing of judicial actions against actual or
threatened violations, the keeping of adequate records, and any other actions
that may be required in order adequately to enforce those laws. The Board shall
have the authority to enact reasonable and appropriate provisions governing the
enforcement of those laws.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions, see G.S.§ 160D-1102
§ 150.017 FINANCIAL SUPPORT.
   The Board may appropriate, for the support of the Inspection Department, any
funds that it deems necessary. It may provide for paying Inspectors fixed
salaries or it may reimburse them for their services by paying over part or all
of any fees collected. It shall have power to fix reasonable fees for issuance
of permits, inspections, and other services of the Inspection Department.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions, see G.S.§ 160D-402(d)
§ 150.018 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   (A)   No member of an Inspection Department shall be financially interested
or employed by a business that is financially interested in the furnishing of
labor, material, or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance
of any building within the town's jurisdiction or any part or system thereof,
or in the making of plans or specification therefor, unless he is the owner of
the building. No member of an Inspection Department or other individual or an
employee of a company contracting with a town to conduct inspections shall
engage in any work that is inconsistent with his or her duties or with the
interest of the town, as determined by the town. The town must find a conflict
of interest if any of the following is the case:
      (1)   If the individual, company, or employee of a company contracting to
perform inspections for the town has worked for the owner, developer,
contractor, or project manager of the project to be inspected within the last
two years;
      (2)   If the individual, company, or employee of a company contracting to
perform inspections for the town is closely related to the owner, developer,
contractor, or project manager of the project to be inspected; or
      (3)   If the individual, company, or employee of a company contracting to
perform inspections for the town has a financial or business interest in the
project to be inspected.
   (B)   The provisions of this section do not apply to a firefighter whose
primary duties are fire suppression and rescue, but who engages in some fire
inspection activities as a secondary responsibility of the firefighter's
employment as a firefighter, except no firefighter may inspect any work
actually done, or materials or appliances supplied, by the firefighter or the
firefighter's business within the preceding six years.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   For similar provisions, see G.S. § 160D-1108
§ 150.019 REPORTS AND RECORDS.
   The Inspection Department, and each Inspector, shall keep complete,
permanent, and accurate records in convenient form of all applications
received, permits issued, inspections and reinspections made, and all other
work and activities of the Inspection Department. Periodic reports shall be
submitted to the Board, and to other agencies, as required.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.020 INSPECTION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Inspections.
      (1)   The Inspection Department shall inspect all buildings and
structures and work therein for which a permit of any kind has been issued as
often as necessary in order to determine whether the work complies with the
latest edition of the North Carolina State Building Code Administration &
Enforcement Requirements Code and this chapter and the appropriate codes.
      (2)   When deemed necessary by the appropriate inspector, materials and
assemblies may be inspected at the point of manufacture or fabrication, or
inspections may be made by approved and recognized inspection organizations,
provided that no approval shall be based upon reports of such organizations
unless the same are in writing and certified by a responsible officer of such
organization.
      (3)   All holders of permits, of their agents, shall notify the
Inspection Department and the appropriate inspector at each of the following
stages of construction outlined in the North Carolina Administration &
Enforcement Requirements Code so that approval may be given before work is
continued. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to provide access to and
means for inspection of the work for any inspections that are required by the
code.
         (a)   Foundation inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated
and the necessary reinforcement and forms are in place, and before concrete is
placed. Drilled footings, piles, and similar types of foundations shall be
inspected as installed.
         (b)   Framing inspection. To be made after all structural framing is
in place and all roughing-in of plumbing and electrical and heating has been
installed, after all fire blocking, chimneys, bracing and vents are installed,
but before any of the structure is enclosed, elements shall be inspected before
each pour of any structural member.
         (c)   Insulation inspection. To be made after all areas required to be
insulated are to verify that all “R” values required by code are complied with
and all vapor barriers are intact.
         (d)   Final inspection. To be made after building or structure has all
doors hung, fixtures set and ready for occupancy, but before the building is
occupied.
   (B)   Calls for inspection.
      (1)   Requests for inspections may be made to the office of the
Inspection Department or to the appropriate inspector. The Inspection
Department shall make inspections as soon as practicable after request is made
therefor, provided that such work is ready for inspection at the time the
request is made.
      (2)   Reinspections may be made at the convenience of the Inspector. No
work shall be inspected until it is in proper and completed condition ready for
inspection. All work which has been concealed before the inspection and
approval shall be uncovered at the request of the Inspector and placed in
condition for proper inspection. Approval or rejection of the work shall be
furnished by the appropriate inspector in the form of a notice posted on the
building or given to the permit holder or his agent. Failure to call for
inspections or proceeding without approval at each stage of construction shall
be deemed a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Street or alley lines. Where the applicant for a permit proposes to
erect any building or structure on the line of any street, alley, or other
public place, he or she shall secure a survey of the line of such street,
alley, or other public place adjacent to the property upon which such building
or structure is to be erected before proceeding with construction of such
building or structure. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to see
that the building does not encroach upon such street, alley, or other public
place.
   (D)   Certificate of occupancy. No new building or part thereof shall be
occupied, and no addition or enlargement of any existing building shall be
occupied, and no existing building after being altered or moved shall be
occupied until the Inspection Department has issued a certificate of occupancy
therefor. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion or
portions of a building which may safely be occupied prior to final completion
and occupancy of the entire building. Application for a certificate of
occupancy may be made by the owner or the owner's agent after all final
inspections have been made for new buildings, or, in the case of existing
buildings, after supplying the information and data necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter, the appropriate regulatory codes and any zoning
ordinance of the occupancy intended. The Inspection Department shall issue a
certificate of occupancy when, after examination and inspection, it is found
that the building in all respects conforms to the provisions of this chapter,
the regulatory codes, any zoning ordinance for the occupancy intended, and the
property has been properly cleared of debris as provided in §
150.039(B).
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. passed 2-12-04; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-
16)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Zoning provisions for certificate of occupancy, see
§ 153.172
§ 150.021 OVERSIGHT NOT TO LEGALIZE VIOLATION.
   No oversight or dereliction of duty on the part of any inspector or other
official or employee of the Inspection Department shall be deemed to legalize
the violation of any provision of this chapter or any provision of any
regulatory code herein adopted.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.022 POWERS OF INSPECTION OFFICIALS.
   (A)   Authority. Inspectors are hereby authorized, empowered, and directed
to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and the regulatory codes herein
adopted.
   (B)   Right of entry. Inspectors shall have the right of entry on any
premises within the jurisdiction at reasonable hours for the purpose of
inspection or enforcement of the requirements of this chapter and of the
regulatory codes herein adopted, upon presentation of proper credentials.
   (C)   Stop orders.
      (1)   Whenever any building or structure or part thereof is being
demolished, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in a hazardous
manner, or in substantial violation of any state or local building law, or in a
manner that endangers life or property, the appropriate inspector may order the
specific part of the work that is in violation or presents such a hazard to be
immediately stopped. The stop order shall be in writing, directed to the person
doing the work, and shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific
reasons therefor, and the conditions under which the work may be resumed.
      (2)   The owner or builder may appeal from a stop order involving the
alleged violation to the State Commissioner of Insurance or his or her designee
within a period of five days after the order is issued. Notice of appeal shall
be given in writing to the Commissioner of Insurance or his or her designee,
with a copy to the local inspector. The Commissioner of Insurance shall
promptly conduct an investigation, and the appellant and the inspector shall be
permitted to submit relevant evidence. The Commissioner of Insurance or his or
her designee shall as expeditiously as possible provide a written statement of
the decision setting forth the facts found, the decision reached, and the
reasons for the decision. Pending the ruling by the Commissioner of Insurance
or his or her designee on an appeal, no further work shall take place in
violation of a stop order.
      (3)   In the event of dissatisfaction with the decision, the person
affected shall have the options of:
         (a)   Appealing to the Building Code Council; or
         (b)   Appealing to the Superior Court, as provided in G.S. § 143-141.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2- 11-16; Am. Ord. passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   Appeals of stop orders, see G.S. § 160D-1114
   Penalty for failure of inspector to perform duties, see G.S. § 160D-1109
§ 150.023 ENFORCEMENT OF ZONING ORDINANCE.
   The Inspection Department is charged with enforcement of a zoning ordinance.
No permit for alteration, repair, or construction of any building or structure
shall be issued unless the plans and specifications show that the building or
structure, and its proposed use will be in compliance with applicable
provisions of the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
REGISTRATION AND PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
§ 150.030 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Building permit. This section shall apply only to building permits.
Example: landscape permits, etc. do not apply to this section.
      (1)   No person shall commence or proceed with the construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal, or demolition of any building or
other structure, or any part thereof, the cost of which in labor and materials
for each district project exceeds $15,000, without a written permit therefor
from the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector’s cost determination shall
override submitted estimates. Permits are required in cases of work projects
whose costs are $15,000 and less when they involve the following:
         (a)   The addition, repair or replacement of load bearing structures;
         (b)   The addition (excluding replacement of same size and capacity)
or change in the design of plumbing;
         (c)   The addition, replacement or change in the design of heating,
air conditioning, or electrical wiring, devices, appliances, or equipment;
         (d)   The use of materials not permitted by the North Carolina Uniform
Residential Building Code;
         (e)   The addition (excluding replacement of like grade of fire
resistance) of roofing.
         (f)   Permits are required before commencing any construction,
reconstruction, or alterations of structure south of the build-to-line on
ocean-front properties and north of the build-to-line on marsh-side properties.
Repairs involving replacement in kind require no permit.
      (2)   (a)   When the project involves work only on the structure that
does not change the exterior footprint or facade design, nor the taxable
valuation of the structure, and does not exceed $15,000 in labor and materials,
nor include any work item listed in subdivision (1) above, no permit shall be
required. (See G.S. 143-138(b5)). Such projects include:
            1.   Maintenance of exterior such as replacing/repairing siding,
nonstructural deck railing, and the like; painting, repair of stucco or
masonry, repair of windows and doors not including header (structural) members;
            2.   Maintenance of interior such as repair or replace of like
flooring (for example, carpet for carpet, wood for wood, tile for tile).
         (b)   The Building Inspector shall be the judge of projects discovered
to be questionable under these guidelines, and as always, property owners shall
have the right to formally appeal the judgements by the Building Inspector.
      (3)   In all cases of removal or demolition of a building or structure a
good and sufficient bond, as listed in the fee schedule established by the
Board of Commissioners and kept on file in the office of the Town Clerk, shall
be posted by the property owner or by his or her contractor at the time of
application for a permit to insure complete removal or demolition, including
all rubble and debris. Failure on the part of the property owner or his
contractor to completely demolish, remove and clear the premises, after 30 days
notice by the Building Inspector, shall be cause for forfeiture of such bond.
   (B)   Plumbing permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the
installation, extension, or general repair of any plumbing system without a
written permit therefor from the Plumbing Inspector, provided, however, that no
permit shall be required for minor repairs or replacements on the house side of
a trap to an installed system of plumbing if such repairs or replacements do
not disrupt the original water supply or the waste or ventilation systems.
Board of Health approval of property for septic tank is required where town
sewage system does not exist.
   (C)   Heating-air conditioning permit. No person shall commence or proceed
with the installation, extension, alteration or general repair of any heating
or cooling equipment without a written permit from the Heating-Air Conditioning
Inspector, provided, however, that no permit shall be required for minor
repairs or minor burner services or filter replacements of warm air furnaces or
cooling system.
   (D)   Electrical permit. No person shall commence or proceed with the
installation, extension, alteration, or general repair of any electrical
wiring, devices, appliances or equipment without a written permit therefor from
the Electrical Inspector, provided, however, that no permit shall be required
for minor repair work such as the replacement of lamps or the connection of
portable devices to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed;
provided, further, that no permit shall be required for the installation,
alteration, or repair of the electrical wiring, devices, appliances and
equipment installed by or for an electrical public utility corporation for the
use of such corporation in the generation, transmission, distribution, or
metering of electrical energy, or for the use of such corporation in the
operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. passed 1-9-03; Am. Ord. passed 8-22-03; Am. Res.
passed 8-11-11; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. passed - -
) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Building permit required; application, see §
153.136
§ 150.031 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Written application shall be made for all permits required by this chapter
and shall be made on forms provided by the Inspection Department. Such
application shall be made by the owner of the building or structure affected or
by the owner's authorized agent or representative and shall show the following:
   (A)   Name, residence, and business address of owner;
   (B)   Name, residence, and business of authorized representative or agent,
if any;
   (C)   Name and address of the contractor, if any, together with evidence of
a certificate from the appropriate state licensing board for such contractors,
if such be required for the work involved in the permit for which application
is made.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.032 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Detailed plans, specifications, and, when required, plot plans from a
licensed surveyor shall accompany each application for permit. They shall be
clear and drawn to scale and contain sufficient information to indicate that
the work proposed will conform to the provisions of this chapter and the
referenced regulatory codes. A copy of approved plans and specifications shall
be kept at the work until final inspection.
   (B)   Before a permit is issued, each lot corner must be marked by a
concrete monument or iron stake by a registered land surveyor. The owner must
also supply the inspector with a lot elevation from a registered land surveyor
when required.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.033 LIMITATIONS ON ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   (A)   No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure the
estimated total cost of which is more than $30,000 unless the work is to be
performed by a licensed general contractor.
   (B)   No building permit shall be issued for any building or structure other
than a one or two family dwelling, the estimated total cost of which is more
than $90,000 unless the plans bear the state seal of a registered architect or
registered engineer.
   (C)   Where any provision of the General Statutes of the state or of any
ordinance requires that work be done by a licensed specialty contractor of any
kind, no permit for such work shall be issued unless it is to be performed by
such licensed specialty contractor.
   (D)   The exception is that individual owners may act as their own general
contractor to accomplish aforementioned work on property that they own and will
occupy without being licensed, with the stipulation that such work is governed
by all other aspects of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 1- -97; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.034 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   When the Building Inspector has approved the permit application and fees
have been paid pursuant
§ 150.038, the permit shall be issued.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.035 REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   The appropriate inspector may revoke and require the return of any permit by
notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason for such revocation.
Permits shall be revoked for any material departure from the approved
application, plans, or specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with
proper orders of the inspector; for refusal or failure to comply with
requirements of this chapter and the appropriate regulatory codes; or for false
statements or misrepresentations made in securing such permit.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.036 TIME LIMITATION ON VALIDITY OF PERMITS.
   All permits issued under this chapter shall expire by limitation six months
after the date of issuance if the work authorized by the permit has not been
commenced. If after commencement no activity takes place for six continuous
months, the Building Inspector will note that the work has been discontinued;
hence, absent further activity, the original permit shall expire. No work
authorized by any permit which has expired shall thereafter be performed until
permit therefor has been reviewed pursuant
§ 150.031.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.037 CHANGES IN WORK.
   After a permit has been issued, changes or deviations from the terms of the
application and permit, or changes or deviations from the plans or
specifications involving any work under the jurisdiction of this chapter or of
any regulatory code adopted herein, shall not be made until specific written
approval of such changes or deviations has been obtained from the appropriate
inspector.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.038 PERMIT FEES; SCHEDULES.
   Fees for permits shall be based upon the total estimated cost of the
proposed work, including all subcontracts, if any, but in no case shall the
total estimated cost be less than the market value of similar completed work in
the town as determined by the appropriate inspector or inspectors. Permit fees
shall be as follows in divisions (A) through (E) of this section. The penalty
assessed for starting work prior to issuance of a permit will be an amount
equal to the original permit fee. Additionally, for all divisions of this
section, the Building Inspector will charge a fee for reinspections.
Reinspections are defined as additional visits to the work site by the Building
Inspector, other than mandatory inspections, that are required due to
performance deficiencies on the part of the permittee. Mandatory inspections
include sites, footers, pilings including pre-installation quality verification
and use of town-approved water meters and backflow prevention devices,
foundations, joists/framing, sheathing nailing, rough-ins, and finals. Repair
permits will be required for work necessary to repair hurricane or tornado
damaged real property; repair permit fees are, however, may be waived from time
to time in as a result of severe weather occurrences.
   (A)   Building permit fees.
      (1)   Building permits are required for all work which falls within the
purview of this chapter. Fees for permits shall be based upon a schedule
adopted by the Board of Commissioners, which shall be available at the office
of the Clerk and the Building Inspector.
      (2)   Estimating values. For all new buildings, the applicable costs, as
indicated on the schedule maintained in the office of the Clerk and the
Building Inspector, shall be multiplied by gross square footage, as measured
from the outside walls, to determine minimum construction costs, including
insulation. Garages, porches, patios, decks, walkways, carports, open terraces,
and enclosed area at piling level are costed separately and added to the heated
area square footage construction costs. Construction of other structures is
evaluated and fees paid based on the value of work permitted.
         (a)   All bathrooms, elevators and all fireplaces are costed
separately and added to heated area square footage construction costs. Fees for
permits shall be based upon a schedule adopted by the Board of Commissioners,
which shall be available at the office of the Clerk and the Building Inspector.
         (b)   For remodeling of an existing structure, fees will be based on
actual contractor estimates and compared for accuracy against a cost per square
foot of affected heated space. The higher cost will be used in determining the
applicable fee.
      (3)   Asphalt/concrete driveways and parking areas. Fees for permits
shall be based upon a schedule adopted by the Board of Commissioners, which
shall be available at the office of the Clerk and the Building Inspector.
   (B)   Plumbing permit fees.
      (1)   Permit and inspection fees for plumbing work which falls within the
purview of this chapter. Base charge and fees for permits and inspections shall
be based upon a schedule adopted by the Board of Commissioners, which shall be
available at the office of the Clerk and the Building Inspector.
      (2)   Any other plumbing fixture which comprises infrastructure related
to the permit not mentioned in the schedule of division (1) above. Fees for
permits and inspections shall be based upon a schedule adopted by the Board of
Commissioners, which shall be available at the office of the Clerk and the
Building Inspector.
   (C)   Mechanical permit fee.
      (1)   Permit and inspection fee for mechanical work which falls within
the purview of this chapter. HVAC inspection base charge and fees for permits
and inspections shall be based upon a schedule adopted by the Board of
Commissioners, which shall be available at the office of the Clerk and the
Building Inspector.
      (2)   A fee will be charged for extra mechanical inspections. Extra
inspections are defined as those inspections over and above the completed
rough-in and final inspection. Rough-in and final inspections are mandatory.
   (D)   Electrical permit fees.
      (1)   Permit and inspection fees for electrical work which falls within
the purview of this chapter. Base charge and fees for permits shall be based
upon a schedule adopted by the Board of Commissioners, which shall be available
at the office of the Clerk and the Building Inspector.
      (2)   Base charge for new construction will be a flat rate which shall be
based upon a schedule adopted by the Board of Commissioners, which shall be
available at the office of the Clerk and the Building Inspector.
      (3)   For all other electrical contract work under this section the fee
schedule shall be adopted by the Board of Commissioners, which shall be
available at the office of the Clerk and the Building Inspector.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. passed 4-14-94 (Att. A through D); Am. Ord.
passed 5-14-98; Am. Ord. passed 11-8-01; Am. Res. passed 4-8-04)
   (E)   Fire inspection.
      (1)   Fire inspections in the town are conducted for the purpose of
identifying activities and conditions in multi-family buildings, structures and
premises that pose dangers of fire, explosion or related hazards. The fee
schedule and inspection frequency set forth in this division (E) for meeting
the requirements of the State Fire Inspection Code have been adopted for use in
the town.
      (2)   The fee schedule is based upon a reasonable scope of work to be
expended by a Fire or Building Inspector. A fee schedule shall be reviewed
annually by the Board after consultation with the Building Inspector and/or
individuals who routinely provide inspections. The schedule shall be adopted by
the Board of Commissioners on or before December 31 each year and the schedule
shall be maintained in the offices of the Code Enforcement Officer and the Town
Clerk. Each multi-family dwelling shall require access to individual unit wood
balconies. If visual inspection of balconies cannot be accomplished due to
obstructions, access will be required on a case by case basis. Elevator control
rooms require key access. Pool equipment rooms, fire suppression flood valve
rooms, and maintenance buildings (which may house hazardous storage) and
elevator control rooms require entry by the Fire or Building Inspector. The
Fire or Building Inspector must physically enter the structure and check
closets, electrical, mechanical and the like. Property owners shall provide
access to the Building Inspector within a reasonable time of the request.
      (3)   Inspection frequency and facility description. Fire inspections
shall be completed as required by the current North Carolina Fire Prevention
Code as adopted by the North Carolina Building Code Council.
      (4)   Structures built within the town following the adoption of this
section, and not delineated above, shall be inspected on an annual basis if the
structure is subject to the Fire Prevention Code.
(Am. Ord. passed 1-9-03; Am. Res. 12-11-03; Am. Res. 4-8-04; Am. Ord. 2013-09-
O, passed 6-13-13; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.039 REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS; CLEAN UP BOND.
      Persons carrying on the business of building, plumbing, mechanical, or
electrical contractor within the town shall register at the office of the
Inspection Department and each must post a clean-up bond for construction or
remodeling activities that are equal to or exceed the project amount as shown
in the fee schedule maintained in the offices of the Building Inspector and the
Town Clerk. The clean-up bond for designated activities shall also be
maintained in the offices of the Building Inspector and the Town Clerk. During
the period of construction, the contractor will construct a temporary holding
area per the specifications of the town’s Building Inspector to contain
residual materials and other solid waste incidental to work at the site.
Failure to do so or subsequent failure to maintain trash in the containment
area will result in issuing a stop work order, which provides seven working
days for the offender to correct the problem, after which work will be halted
with loss of clean-up bond. Once the situation is corrected, inspected, and new
clean-up bond is posted, resumption of construction will be permitted by formal
letter from the Building Inspector. If final inspection has not been requested
by the time the Inspection Department declares the work discontinued pursuant §
150.036, the Building Inspector will contact the permitted to resolve clean-up
activity, posted bond and document in dormant file. The clean-up of property
must be affected before final inspection by the Building Inspector. If clean-up
is satisfactory, the bond will be returned. If the clean-up is not
satisfactory, the bond will be forfeited, and the town will complete the clean-
up job of the area.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. passed 9-8-88; Am. Ord. passed 11-13-97; Am. Ord.
passed 11-13-97; Am. Res. passed 6-9-11; Am. Ord. 2016- 001, passed 2-11-16)
Cross-reference:
   Permit fees; schedules, see
§ 150.038
REPAIR, CLOSING, OR DEMOLITION OF ABANDONED AND UNSAFE STRUCTURES
§ 150.050 FINDINGS; INTENT.
   (A)   It is hereby found that there may exist from time to time within the
town abandoned or unsafe structures which are found to be hazardous to the
health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the town due to the attraction
of insects or rodents; conditions creating a fire hazard; dangerous conditions
constituting a threat to children; or frequent use by vagrants as living
quarters in the absence of sanitary facilities. The town may exercise its
police power to declare said structures a nuisance and to abate said nuisance.
Therefore, pursuant to the authority granted by G.S. §§ 160D-1201 et seq., the
contents of which are incorporated herein as if set out in full, it is the
intent of this subchapter to provide for the repair, closing, or demolition of
any such structures in accordance with the same provisions and procedures as
are set forth by law for the repair, closing, or demolition of dwellings unfit
for human habitation.
   (B)   When the Building Inspector finds any defects in a structure or finds
that the structure has not been constructed in accordance with applicable state
and local laws or that a structure because
of its condition is dangerous or contains fire-hazardous conditions, it shall
be his or her duty to notify the owner of the structure of its defects,
hazardous conditions, or failure to comply with law. The owner shall
immediately remedy the defects, hazardous conditions, or violations of law in
the property. As used herein, structure shall include beach access walkways,
steps, and detached decks.
   (C)   Defective conditions may include the following, without limiting the
generality of this section: defects therein increasing the hazards of fire,
accident, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary
facilities; and dilapidation, disrepair, structural defects, and uncleanliness.
(Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 150.051 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   (A)   Duties. The Building Inspector is hereby designated as the officer to
enforce the provisions of this subchapter. It shall be the duty of the Building
Inspector to:
      (1)   Locate abandoned and unsafe structures within the town and
determine which structures are in violation of this subchapter;
      (2)   Take such action pursuant to this subchapter as may be necessary to
provide for the repair, closing, and demolition of the structures;
      (3)   Keep an accurate record of all enforcement proceedings begun
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter;
      (4)   Affix a notice of the dangerous character of the structure to a
conspicuous place on the exterior wall of such structure;
      (5)   Perform other such duties as may be prescribed herein or assigned
to him by the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   Powers. The Building Inspector is authorized to exercise such powers
as may be necessary to carry out the intent and the provisions of this
subchapter, including the following powers in addition to others herein
granted.
      (1)   Investigate the condition of the buildings within the town in order
to determine which structures are abandoned or in violation of this subchapter;
      (2)   Enter upon premises for the purpose of making inspections;
      (3)   Administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses, and receive
evidence; and
      (4)   Designate such other officers, agents, and employees of the town as
he deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter.
(Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.052 CONDITIONS DEEMED IN VIOLATION.
   (A)   Every structure within the town shall be deemed in violation of this
subchapter whenever such structure constitutes a hazard to the health, safety,
or welfare of the town citizens as a result of:
      (1)   The attraction of insects or rodents;
      (2)   Conditions are dangerous or contains a fire-hazardous situation;
      (3)   Dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children;
      (4)   Frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the absence of
sanitary facilities; or
      (5)   The building has not been constructed in accordance with applicable
state and local laws.
   (B)   In making the preliminary determination of whether or not a structure
is in violation of this subchapter, the Building Inspector may, by way
illustration and not limitation, consider the presence or absence of the
following conditions:
      (1)   Holes or cracks in the structure's floors, walls, ceilings, or roof
which might attract or admit rodents and insects, or become breeding places for
rodents and insects;
      (2)   The collection of garbage or rubbish in or near the structure which
might attract rodents and insects, or become breeding places for rodents and
insects;
      (3)   Violations of the State Building Code, the State Electrical Code,
or the Fire Prevention Code, which constitute a fire hazard in such structure;
      (4)   The collection of garbage, rubbish, or combustible material, which
constitutes a fire hazard in such structure;
      (5)   The use of the structure or nearby grounds or facilities by
children as a play area;
      (6)   Violations of the State Building Code which might result in danger
to children using the structure or nearby grounds or facilities as a play area;
      (7)   Repeated use of such structure by transients and vagrants, in the
absence of sanitary facilities, for living, sleeping, cooking, or eating; and
      (8)   Overloaded floors, defective construction, unsafe wiring or heating
system, inadequate means of egress, or other causes.
(Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.053 PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing. Whenever a petition is
filed with the Inspector by at least five residents of the town charging that
any structure exists in violation of this subchapter, or whenever it appears to
the Inspector, upon inspection, that any structure exists in violation hereof,
he or she shall if the preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such
charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest
in such structure a complaint stating the charges and containing a notice that
a hearing will be held before the Inspector at a place therein fixed, not less
than ten nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint. The owner or
any party in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint
and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the place and time
fixed in the complaint. The complaint shall be served either personally or by
certified mail. The owner's address as found in the tax records of the town
shall be deemed to be the accurate address for notification. If applicable,
notice of hearing shall also be given to at least one of the persons signing a
petition relating to the structure. Any person desiring to do so may attend
such hearing and give evidence relevant to the matter being heard. The rules of
evidence prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in
hearings before the Inspector. If the name or whereabouts of the owner cannot
after due diligence be discovered, the notice shall be considered properly and
adequately served if a copy thereof is posted on the outside of the structure
in question at least ten days prior to the hearing and if a notice of hearing
is published in a newspaper having general circulation in the town at least
once not later than one week prior to the hearing.
   (B)   Procedure after hearing.
      (1)   After the notice and hearing, the Inspector shall state in writing
his or her determination as to whether the structure violates this subchapter.
      (2)   If the Inspector determines that the structure is in violation, he
or she shall state in writing findings of fact to support the determination and
shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order directing
and requiring the owner to either repair, alter, and improve the structure or
else remove, close, or vacate or demolish the same within a specified period of
time not to exceed 90 days.
   (C)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order under this subchapter may
appeal from the order to the Board of Commissioners by giving notice of appeal
in writing to the Inspector and to the Town Clerk within ten days following the
issuance of the order. In absence of an appeal, the order of the Inspector
shall be final. The Board shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may
affirm, modify, or revoke the order. The provisions of G.S. § 160D-1208, as
amended from time to time, shall be followed.
   (D)   Failure to comply with order.
      (1)   In personam remedy. If the owner of any structure shall fail to
comply with an order of the Inspector within the time specified therein, the
Inspector may submit to the Board of Commissioners at its next regular meeting
a resolution directing the Town Attorney to petition the Superior Court for an
order directing the owner to comply with the order of the Inspector, as
authorized by G.S. § 160D-1208.
      (2)   In rem remedy. After failure of an owner of a structure to comply
with an order of the Inspector within the time specified therein, if injunctive
relief has not been sought or has not been granted as provided in the preceding
division (D)(1), the Inspector shall submit to the Board of Commissioners an
ordinance ordering the Inspector to cause the structure to be removed or
demolished, as provided in the original order of the Inspector, and, pending
the removal or demolition, to placard such dwelling as provided by G.S. § 160D-
1203.
   (E)   Petition to Superior Court by owner. Any person aggrieved by an order
issued by the Inspector shall have the right, within 30 days after issuance of
the order, to petition the Superior Court for a temporary injunction
restraining the Inspector pending a final disposition of the cause, as provided
by G.S. § 160D-1208.
(Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 150.054 SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.
   (A)   Complaints or orders issued by the Inspector pursuant to this
subchapter shall be served upon persons either personally or by registered or
certified mail. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy of
the complaint or order may also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be
deemed sufficient if the registered or certified mail is unclaimed or refused,
but the regular mail is not returned by the post office within ten days after
the mailing. If regular mail is used, a notice of the pending proceedings shall
be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises affected.
   (B)   If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are
unknown and cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, or, if the owners are known but refused to accept service
by registered or certified mail, and the public officer makes an affidavit to
that effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the owners or
other persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general
circulation in the city at least once no later than the time at which personal
service would be required under the provisions of this section. When service is
made by publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected. (G.S. § 160D-1206)
(Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 150.055 REMOVAL OR DESTRUCTION BY TOWN; PLACARDING.
   (A)   After failure of an owner of a structure to comply with an order of
the Inspector issued pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter, and upon
adoption by the Board of Commissioners of an ordinance authorizing and
directing him or her to do so, as provided by G.S. §160A-443(5) and
§ 150.053, the Inspector shall proceed to cause the structure to be removed or
demolished, as directed by the ordinance of the Board of Commissioners, and
shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the structure a placard
prohibiting the use or occupation of the structure. Use or occupation of a
structure so posted shall constitute a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Each ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the Register of
Deeds for the county and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in
the grantor index, as provided by G.S.§ 160D-1203.
(Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.056 CREATION OF LIEN ON PREMISES.
   As provided by G.S. § 160D-1203, the amount of the cost of any removal or
demolition caused to be made or done by the Inspector pursuant to this
subchapter shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred. The lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be enforced and
the costs collected as provided by G.S. Chapter 160D, Article 12.
(Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 150.057 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
   Neither this subchapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed to
impair or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to
enforce this subchapter by criminal process, and the enforcement of any remedy
provided herein shall not prevent the enforcement of any other remedy or
remedies provided herein or in other ordinances or laws.
(Am. Ord. passed 1- -97; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
§ 150.070 EXTERIOR LIGHTING RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Exterior lighting of all new construction shall be governed by the
restriction that all exterior night lighting shall be masked in such a manner
as to prevent illumination beyond the boundaries of the property.
   (B)   All existing construction shall be brought into compliance with this
restriction over a period of time to be determined by the Town Commissioners of
the town. Compliance will be periodically checked by the appropriate town
officials and any non-compliance will be notified in writing of any such
violation. Should such violation continue, appropriate remedial action may be
taken by the town.
(Ord. passed 6-30-88; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.071 BUILD-TO-LINE.
   Please refer to §
153.087 for build-to-line provisions.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 150.072 LANDSCAPE CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   Landscaping or landscape construction includes, but is not limited to,
clearing and site preparation for construction of residence; landscaping area
upon completion of construction; installation of driveways, parking areas,
patios, and sport courts; and any post-construction landscape alterations to
established home site. Prior to initiating the permitted activity, the request
for the appropriate permit must be accompanied by a landscape plan, which has
been approved by the town’s Building Inspector. The permit application and an
example of the construction/landscape plan plot are available from the Town of
Caswell Beach Inspection Department. Such construction shall not be permitted
if it violates the following rules.
   (A)   The proposed modification to the land and resulting residential
construction shall provide positive means of controlling storm water drainage
onto adjacent property or other off-site.
   (B)   Any impervious surfaces to be employed shall have positive means such
as curbs, gutters, and absorption areas to assure that run-off brought about by
increased water velocity shall not cause storm water and/or sediment to collect
in off-site locations.
   (C)   For impermeable driveway construction, one of the following methods
will be used to satisfy the requirements of this chapter.
      (1)   A residential property shall access the roadway by no more than one
24-foot maximum width driveway or two 12-foot maximum width driveways. Total
combined width of all driveways shall not exceed 24 feet. An apron connecting
the driveway to the road may taper from driveway width out to an additional
maximum six-foot width where the apron meets the road. Addition of an apron
shall not cause the width of a driveway to exceed 24 feet. Aprons must taper
directly to driveway width within no more than ten feet from the road.
Beginning at the road, the driveway maximum width(s) may not be exceeded until
it passes the front property line.
      (2)   (a)   All new driveway construction must be permitted and shall
comply with these requirements.
         (b)   Driveway additions and driveway replacements, including
sectional replacements, require submission of plans to the town for review and
approval. The town, at its discretion, may require permitting. In most cases,
increases in impervious surface, increases in grade, increases in elevation, or
significant alteration in location or configuration will require permitting and
an engineered determination that the town’s stormwater regulations are met.
      (3)   Driveway permit applications, when required, shall include an
engineering certification that the plans meet the requirements of the town’s
stormwater regulations (see Chapter 154).
   (D)   The following activities will not be considered landscaping activity
under this section:
      (1)   The use of any land for the purposes of planting, growing, or
harvesting plants, crops, trees, grass or other agricultural or forestry
products; and
      (2)   Work by any utility company and other persons engaged in the
distribution and transmission of petroleum products, water, telephone, or
telegraph messages, or electricity for the purposes of inspecting, repairing,
maintaining, or upgrading, any existing substations sewers, mains, pipes,
cables, utility tunnels, lines, towers, poles, a and the line on any of its
existing utility property or rights-of-way, or the extension of any of the
above distribution related facilities to serve development.
   (E)   Tree removal.
      (1)   The general purpose of this division is to reduce the effect of
development on the problem of storm water run-off and water quality by
regulating and controlling the removal of trees in conjunction with land
development and/or building construction.
      (2)   The specific purposes of this division are:
         (a)   To safeguard and enhance property value and to protect the
public and private investment through the protection of native trees;
         (b)   To prevent the indiscriminate removal of native trees;
         (c)   To mitigate storm-water runoff and water quality problems caused
by removal of native trees;
         (d)   To protect marshlands and estuaries; and
         (e)   To preserve and enhance the visual appearance of the town.
      (3)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH). A standard method of expressing the
diameter of the trunk of a standing tree. In The U.S., breast height diameter
is measured at a height of 1.4 meters (approximately 4.5 feet). The most
effective methods for measuring DBH is use of a girthing (or diameter) tape. A
girthing tape actually measures the girth (circumference) of the tree; the
girthing tape is calibrated in divisions of centimeter (3.14159 cm), thus
giving a directly converted reading of the diameter. This assumes the trunk has
a circular cross-section, which is typically accurate for most trees.
         NEIGHBORHOOD. A subdivision of the Town of Caswell Beach. For this
section, it includes the Arboretum, Caswell Dunes, Ocean Greens, and the Oak
Island Villas.
         PERSON. For the purpose of this section, any individual, property
owner, contractor, corporation, or other entity that might be involved in
removal of trees.
         PLOT CONSTRUCTION/LANDSCAPE PLAN. A formal plan submitted to the
town’s Building Inspector in conjunction with subdivision of land, alteration
of an existing building (residence), or landscape construction prior to start
of site development. The plot construction/landscape plan must show a footprint
and location of intended building and the location of vegetation to be removed.
The plan must also show existing regulated trees (see division (D)(4) of this
section) and trees and shrubs and vegetation to be retained or added.
         PROPERTY OWNER. For purpose of this section, individuals,
corporations, tenants, proprietors or other entities who possess entitlement to
the property.
         TOWN. The Town of Caswell Beach, North Carolina.
         TREE. Any woody perennial deciduous or evergreen plant which usually
has one or more main stems.
      (4)   Tree removal authorization. All requests for cutting shall require
a landscape plan showing the location of regulated trees in relation to site
construction activities, driveways, patios or other paved areas. The plan
should accurately represent the proposed activities, drawn to scale and
certified by both the property owner and the builder. Approval of the landscape
plan will be for the following reasons.
         (a)   The tree to be removed is less than the required minimum:
            1.   Hardwood species at DBH < 6";
            2.   Softwoods/evergreens at DBH < 8"; and
            3.   Flowering species at DBH <2".
         (b)   Whether related to new construction or existing properties
planning to remove vegetation, trees greater than these minimums should not be
removed unless an exception is granted in writing by the town for:
            1.   A tree that is within 12 feet of the building perimeter;
            2.   A tree that is within 3 feet of a driveway or paved walkway;
            3.   A tree severely damaged by lightning;
            4.   A strong lean on the trunk, 45 degrees or less when measured
from the ground; or
            5.   Trees with a suspected disease affecting the structural
soundness of the tree. The condition must be diagnosed by the County Extension
Agent or County Forest Ranger. The property owner must include written
documentation with the landscape plan.
         (c)   No vegetation of any sort may be removed from areas zoned
Conservation without written permission from the town pursuant to Chapter 98.
      (5)   Prerequisite for authorization of building permit.
         (a)   The town’s Building Inspector may withhold or withdraw any
permits, certificates, and other granted authorization, including building
permits, driveway permits, and certificates of occupancy, until an application
for building/landscape construction permit is satisfactorily completed and
approved.
         (b)   In addition, all persons seeking approval for tree removal shall
make application to the town’s Building Inspector. Application shall be in
writing in accordance with procedures approved by the Town Commissioners.
      (6)   Nothing herein shall relieve the property owner or the owner’s
authorized agent from the responsibility to observe applicable local
subdivision or private unit development bylaws and restrictive covenants.
      (7)   Penalty. The maximum fine for violation of this chapter exceeds $50
and is $100 for each individual violation of this chapter. Violation of this
chapter may result in the town applying to the appropriate division of the
General Court of Justice for payment of the fine. Violation of this chapter is
a misdemeanor offense.
(Ord. passed 9-8-94; Am. Ord. passed 12-14-00; Am. Ord. passed 12-14- 00; Am.
Ord. passed 1-9-03; Am. Res. passed 10-13-11; Am. Ord. 2016- 001, passed 2-11-
16; Am. Ord. passed 10-10-19; Am. Ord. passed 1-12-23) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 150.073 FILLING, GRADING, AND EXCAVATION.
   (A)   Quantity. The amount of fill added to a lot will be in accordance with
CAMA requirements, will be no greater than one foot above the crown of road and
will not be greater than is necessary to meet the Health Department
requirements for an improvement permit. Fill will also be limited by the height
of the adjacent lot(s) that have been developed and cannot exceed the developed
lot(s) in height by greater than one foot. Any differential in fill greater
than one foot at the common line of the two lots, the higher lot must construct
a wall, bulkhead, or a satisfactory containment device to prevent the fill and
surface water from running on the lower lot. Fill and sand will be stabilized
in accordance with CAMA to prevent erosion.
   (B)   Lowering level. In lowering the level of a lot by grading or removing
sand, the height limit will not exceed one foot above or below the adjacent
developed or undeveloped lot(s) when finished and stabilized. Stabilization
will be in accordance with CAMA provisions to prevent erosion.
   (C)   Changes.
      (1)   Any proposed change to the natural topography of the land in the
town must be approved and the conditions of the approved and the conditions of
the approval shall be stated on the CAMA permit issued for this purpose prior
to any work being accomplished. Before issuing the permit, the Building
Inspector will insure by an on-site inspection that proposed topographic
changes will not destroy the integrity and protective nature of the dune system
or create conditions which could result in its destruction.
      (2)   These topographic changes shall consist of but not be limited to:
         (a)   Sand or earth moving by bulldozer or other equipment;
         (b)   Removal of natural vegetation;
         (c)   Construction of sand fences or other devices designed to alter
the natural movement of drifting sand;
         (d)   Covering of sand or other surfaces with a stabilizing clay or
marl;
         (e)   Any grading or preparation of a lot for the location of a
structure; and
         (f)   Any earth disturbing activity.
   (D)   Survey. A survey with elevations at the street intersections with the
lot completed by a licensed surveyor is required prior to issuance of a CAMA
permit.
(Ord. passed 9-8-94; Am. Ord. passed 12-14-00; Am. Ord. passed 12-14- 00; Am.
Ord. passed 1-9-03; Am. Res. passed 10-13-11; Am. Ord. 2016- 001, passed 2-11-
16) Penalty, see §
10.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 150.100 EQUITABLE ENFORCEMENT.
   Whenever any violation is denominated a misdemeanor, the town, either in
addition to or in lieu of other remedies, may initiate any appropriate action
or proceedings to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation or to
prevent the occupancy of the building or structure involved.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2-11-16)
§ 150.101 APPEALS IN GENERAL.
   Unless otherwise provided by law, appeals from any order, decision, or
determination by a member of a local Inspection Department pertaining to the
State Building Code or other state building laws may be made by filing written
notice with the Commissioner of Insurance and the Inspection Department in
accordance with G.S. § 160D-1127.
(Ord. passed 6-9-83; Am. Ord. 2016-001, passed 2- 11-16; Am. Ord. passed - -)
Statutory reference:
   Appeals, see G.S. § 160D-1127
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives
   
151.01   Statutory authorization
   
151.02   Findings of fact
   
151.03   Statement of purpose
   
151.04   Objectives
Definitions
   
151.10   Definitions
General Provisions
   
151.15   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
151.16   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas
   
151.17   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
151.18   Compliance
   
151.19   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.20   Interpretation
   
151.21   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
151.30   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
151.31   Floodplain development application, permit and certification
requirements
   
151.32   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
151.33   Corrective procedures
   
151.34   Variance procedures
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
151.40   General standards
   
151.41   Specific standards
   
151.42   [Reserved]
   
151.43   Standards for floodplains without established base flood elevations
   
151.44   Standards for riverine floodplains with base flood elevations but
without established floodways or non-encroachment areas
   
151.45   Floodways and non-encroachment areas
   
151.46   Coastal high hazard area (Zone VE)
   
151.47   Standards for coastal A zones (Zone CAZ) LiMWA
   
151.48   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO)
   
151.49   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (Zone AH)
Legal Status Provisions
   
151.55   Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood damage
prevention chapter
   
151.56   Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits
   
151.57   Severability
   
151.58   Effective date
 
   
151.99   Penalties for violation
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   The Legislature of the state has in G.S. Ch. 143, Part 6, Art. 21 and
Ch. 160D delegated to local governmental units the responsibility to adopt
regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   Therefore, the Town Commission of the Town of Caswell Beach North
Carolina, does ordain as follows.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of Caswell Beach are
subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the
occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.04 OBJECTIVES.
The objectives of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Protect human life, safety, and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e. water and gas
mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and bridges) that
are located in flood prone areas;
   (F)   Minimize damage to private and public property due to flooding;
   (G)   Make flood insurance available to the community through the National
Flood Insurance Program;
   (H)   Maintain the natural and beneficial functions of floodplains;
   (I)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas; and
   (J)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a special
flood hazard area.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
DEFINITIONS
§ 151.10 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage
and to give this chapter it's most reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE or APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure located on the
same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage
sheds are common urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like
qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or may not be located on the
same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.
   ALTERATION OF A WATERCOURSE. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change
in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the
channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may
alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine
flow of water during conditions of the base flood.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated Zone AO or AH on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths determined to be from one to
three feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where
velocity flow may be evident.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). A determination of the water surface elevations
of the base flood as published in the Flood Insurance Study. When the BFE has
not been provided in a Special Flood Hazard Area, it may be obtained from
engineering studies available from a federal, state, or other source using FEMA
approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with the
Freeboard, establishes the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY. A building, portion of a building, or exterior
area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically
reactive products.
   COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT ACT (CAMA). North Carolina's Coastal Area Management
Act, this act, along with the Dredge and Fill Law and the Federal Coastal Zone
Management Act, is managed through North Carolina Department of Environmental
Quality (NCDEQ) Division of Coastal Management (DCM).
   COASTAL A ZONE (CAT). An area within a special flood hazard area, landward
of a V zone or landward of an open coast without mapped V zones; in a Coastal A
Zone, the principal source of flooding must be astronomical tides, storm
surges, seiches, or tsunamis, not riverine flooding. During the base flood
conditions, the potential for wave heights shall be greater than or equal to
1.5 feet. Coastal A Zones are not normally designated on FIRMs. (See LIMIT OF
MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LIMWA)).
   COASTAL BARRIER RESOURCES SYSTEM (CBRS). Consists of undeveloped portions of
coastal and adjoining areas established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act
(CoBRA) of 1982, the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act (CBIA) of 1990, and
subsequent revisions, and includes areas owned by Federal or State governments
or private conservation organizations identified as Otherwise Protected Areas
(OPA).
   COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA. A special flood hazard area extending from
offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and
any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic
sources. The area is designated on a FIRM, or other adopted flood map as
determined in §
151.16, as Zone VE.
   DESIGN FLOOD. See REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. 
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY. Any activity defined as development which will
necessitate a floodplain development permit. This includes buildings,
structures, and non-structural items, including (but not limited to) fill,
bulkheads, piers, pools, docks, landings, ramps, and erosion control/
stabilization measures.
   DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM). The digital official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), on which
both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community are delineated.
   DISPOSAL. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on
any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid
waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into
any waters, including groundwaters.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated
floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers,
pilings, or columns.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures or development into a special flood hazard area, which
may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING BUILDING and EXISTING STRUCTURE. Any building and/or structure for
which the start of construction commenced before January 17, 1986.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was
completed before the initial effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
   (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
   (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map of a community,
issued by the FEMA, on which the special flood hazard areas and the floodways
are delineated. This official map is a supplement to and shall be used in
conjunction with the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
the FEMA, where the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas have been
defined as Zone A.
   FLOOD INSURANCE. The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued by
the FEMA, on which both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community are delineated. (See also DFIRM).
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). An examination, evaluation, and determination
of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate),
flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the
FEMA. The Flood Insurance Study Report includes Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), if published.
   FLOOD PRONE AREA. See FLOODPLAIN.
   FLOOD ZONE. A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or
Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the
area.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances, and other applications of police power. This term describes
federal, state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities,
structures, and their contents.
   FLOOD-RESISTANT MATERIAL. Any building product [material, component or
system] capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact (minimum 72 hours)
with floodwaters without sustaining damage that requires more than low-cost
cosmetic repair. Any material that is water-soluble or is not resistant to
alkali or acid in water, including normal adhesives for above-grade use, is not
flood-resistant. Pressure-treated lumber or naturally decay-resistant lumbers
are acceptable flooring materials. Sheet-type flooring coverings that restrict
evaporation from below and materials that are impervious, but dimensionally
unstable are not acceptable. Materials that absorb or retain water excessively
after submergence are not flood-resistant. Please refer to Technical Bulletin
2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, available from the FEMA.
Class 4 and 5 materials, referenced therein, are acceptable flood-resistant
materials.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse, including the area
above a bridge or culvert when applicable, and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT ANALYSIS. An engineering analysis of the impact that a
proposed encroachment into a floodway or non-encroachment area is expected to
have on the floodway boundaries and flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge. The evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified North
Carolina licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models.
   FREEBOARD. The height added to the BFE to account for the many unknown
factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height
calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave
action, blockage of bridge or culvert openings, and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed. The BFE plus the freeboard establishes the
"Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation."
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, limited to a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. As defined in G.S. Ch. 130A, Art. 9, a
facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling,
recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAGV). The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the
structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the US Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks in
communities with a "Certified Local Government (CLG) Program"; or
      (4)   (a)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a
historic district designated by a community with a "Certified Local Government
(CLG) Program."
         (b)   Certified Local Government (CLG) Programs are approved by the US
Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina Department of
Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having
met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as
amended in 1980.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMCV). An official determination issued by FEMA that
amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance
Study. Letters of Map Change include:
      (1)   Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA). An official amendment, by letter,
to an effective National Flood Insurance Program map. A LOMA is based on
technical data showing that a property had been inadvertently mapped as being
in the floodplain, but is actually on natural high ground above the base flood
elevation. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and
establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is
not located in a special flood hazard area.
      (2)   Letter of Map Revision (LOMR). A revision based on technical data
that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard
area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features.
      (3)   Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F). A determination that
a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the BFE and is,
therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to
qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in
accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations.
      (4)   Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR). A formal review and
comment as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum NFIP
requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood
hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or
Flood Insurance Study; upon submission and approval of certified as-built
documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by FEMA to revise the
effective FIRM.
   LIGHT DUTY TRUCK. Any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds Gross Vehicular
Weight Rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less
and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less as defined
in 40 CFR 86.082-2 and is:
      (1)   Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is
a derivation of such a vehicle;
      (2)   Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity
of more than 12 persons; or
      (3)   Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway
operation and use.
   LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LIMWA). The boundary line given by FEMA on
coastal map studies marking the extents of Coastal A Zones (CAZ).
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG). The lowest elevation of the ground, sidewalk or
patio slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion
of the building.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than
a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, not including the land value and that of
any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may be
established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (Actual Cash Value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NON-CONVERSION AGREEMENT. A document stating that the owner will not convert
or alter what has been constructed and approved. Violation of the agreement is
considered a violation of the ordinance and, therefore, subject to the same
enforcement procedures and penalties. The agreement must be filed with the
recorded deed for the property. The agreement must show the clerk's or
recorder's stamps and/or notations that the filing has been completed.
   NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA (NEA). The channel of a river or other watercourse,
including the area above a bridge or culvert when applicable, and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot as
designated in the Flood Insurance Study report.
   OTHERWISE PROTECTED AREA (OPA). See COASTAL BARRIER RESOURCES SYSTEM (CBRS).
   POST-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred on or after January 17, 1986, the effective date of the
initial Flood Insurance Rate Map.
   PRE-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred before January 17, 1986, the effective date of the
initial Flood Insurance Rate Map.
   PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE (PFD). A continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge
of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward
and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high
tides and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary
frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a
relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. Means that at least 51% of the actual cash value
of the structure is above ground.
   PUBLIC SAFETY and/or NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). 
      (1)   A vehicle, which is:
         (a)   Built on a single chassis;
         (b)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection;
         (c)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck;
         (d)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use;
and
         (e)   Is fully licensed and ready for highway use.
      (2)   For the purpose of this chapter, TINY HOMES/HOUSES and PARK MODELS
that do not meet the items listed above are not considered recreational
vehicles and should meet the standards of and be permitted as residential
structures.
   REFERENCE LEVEL. The top of the lowest floor for structures within special
flood hazard areas designated as Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99. The reference level
is the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
for structures within special flood hazard areas designated as Zone VE.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The Base Flood Elevation plus the
freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where Base Flood Elevations (BFEs)
have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus two feet freeboard.
In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has been established, this elevation
shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the
ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
   SALVAGE YARD. Any non-residential property used for the storage, collection,
and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not limited to
vehicles, appliances and related machinery.
   SAND DUNES. Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds
landward of the beach.
   SHEAR WALL. Walls used for structural support but not structurally joined or
enclosed at the end (except by breakaway walls). Shear walls are parallel or
nearly parallel to the flow of the water.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any facility involved in the disposal of
solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35).
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36), any place
at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or
any other method.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as determined in §
151.16.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas,
liquid, or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any
one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it's before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. See definition of SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place
during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial
damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any correction of existing violations of state or community health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant
to §
151.34.
   TECHNICAL BULLETIN AND TECHNICAL FACT SHEET.
      (1)   A FEMA publication that provides guidance concerning the building
performance standards of the NFIP, which are contained in Title 44 of the U.S.
Code of Federal Regulations at § 60.3. The bulletins and fact sheets are
intended for use primarily by state and local officials responsible for
interpreting and enforcing NFIP regulations and by members of the development
community, such as design professionals and builders. New bulletins, as well as
updates of existing bulletins, are issued periodically as needed. The bulletins
do not create regulations; rather they provide specific guidance for complying
with the minimum requirements of existing NFIP regulations.
      (2)   It should be noted that technical bulletins and technical fact
sheets provide guidance on the minimum requirements of the NFIP regulations.
State or community requirements that exceed those of the NFIP take precedence.
Design professionals should contact the community officials to determine
whether more restrictive state or local regulations apply to the building or
site in question. All applicable standards of the state or local building code
must also be met for any building in a flood hazard area.
   TEMPERATURE CONTROLLED. Having the temperature regulated by a heating and/or
cooling system, built-in or appliance.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in §§
151.30 through
151.34, and §§
151.40 through
151.49 is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION (WSE). The height, in relation to NAVD 1988, of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 151.15 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Caswell Beach.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.16 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the Cooperating
Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North Carolina and FEMA in
its FIS dated August 28, 2018 for Brunswick County and associated DFIRM panels,
including any digital data developed as part of the FIS, which are adopted by
reference and declared a part of this chapter, and all revisions thereto.
Subsequent Letter of Map Revisions (LOMRs) and/or Physical Map Revisions (PMRs)
shall be adopted within three months.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.17 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the
provisions of §
151.16.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.18 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.19 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.20 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.21 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land
outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will
be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability
on the part of the town or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.30 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The  Town Manager , hereinafter referred to as the Floodplain Administrator,
is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter.
In instances where the Floodplain Administrator receives assistance from others
to complete tasks to administer and implement this chapter, the Floodplain
Administrator shall be responsible for the coordination and community's overall
compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program and the provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.31 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application requirements. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall
be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and
other development;
         (b)   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
151.16, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard
area;
         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
151.16;
         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as
determined in §
151.16;
         (e)   The Base Flood Elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in §§
151.16;
151.32; or
151.43;
         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development;
         (g)   The boundary and designation date of the Coastal Barrier
Resource System (CBRS) area or Otherwise Protected Areas (OPA), if applicable;
and
         (h)   The certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor
or professional engineer.
      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
special flood hazard area including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Elevation in relation to NAVD 1988 of the proposed reference
level (including basement) of all structures;
         (b)   Elevation in relation to NAVD 1988 to which any non-residential
structure in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99 will be floodproofed; and
         (c)   Elevation in relation to NAVD 1988 to which any proposed utility
systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
      (3)   If floodproofing, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34)
with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance
plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise, and
maintenance of floodproofing measures.
      (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter are
met. These details include but are not limited to:
         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation
on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls);
         (b)   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with §
151.41(D)(4) when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AE, AH,
AO, A99.
         (c)   The following, in coastal high hazard areas, in accordance with
the provisions of §
151.41(D)(5) and §
151.46 and (§
151.47 if applicable):
            1.   V-Zone Certification with accompanying plans and
specifications verifying the engineered structure and any breakaway wall
designs; in addition, prior to the Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy
issuance, a registered professional engineer or architect shall certify the
finished construction is compliant with the design, specifications and plans
for VE Zone construction.
            2.   Plans for open wood latticework or insect screening, if
applicable; and
            3.   Plans for non-structural fill, if applicable. If non-
structural fill is proposed, it must be demonstrated through coastal
engineering analysis that the proposed fill would not result in any increase in
the BFE or otherwise cause adverse impacts by wave ramping and deflection on to
the subject structure or adjacent properties.
      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      (7)   Certification that all other local, state and federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of §
151.41(F) and (G) are met.
      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on
plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation.
   (B)   Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
      (1)   A complete description of all the development to be permitted under
the floodplain development permit (e.g. house, garage, pool, septic, bulkhead,
cabana, pier, bridge, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials, etc.).
      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in §
151.16.
      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
reference level and all attendant utilities.
      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
protection of all public utilities.
      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse unless
the requirements of §
151.45 have been met.
      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99.
      (8)   Below BFE enclosure uses shall be limited to parking, building
access and limited storage only.
      (9)   If in Zone VE, that there shall be no alteration of sand dunes
which would increase potential flood damage.
      (10)   There shall be no fill used for structural support in Zone VE.
      (11)   All materials below BFE/RFPE must be flood resistant materials.
   (C)   Certification requirements.
      (1)   Elevation certificates.
         (a)   An Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33) is required prior
to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit
holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
elevation of the reference level, in relation to NAVD 1988. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder prior to the
beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to
make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development
permit.
         (b)   An Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33) is required after
the reference level is established. Within seven calendar days of establishment
of the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of the
reference level, in relation to NAVD 1988. Any work done within the seven day
calendar period and prior to submission of the certification shall be at the
permit holder's risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate
data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed.
Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
         (c)   A final Finished Construction Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form
086-0-33) is required after construction is completed and prior to Certificate
of Compliance/Occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy. The Finished Construction Elevation
Certificate certifier shall provide at least two photographs showing the front
and rear of the building taken within 90 days from the date of certification.
The photographs must be taken with views confirming the building description
and diagram number provided in §§
151.01 through
151.04. To the extent possible, these photographs should show the entire
building including foundation. If the building has split-level or multi-level
areas, provide at least two additional photographs showing side views of the
building. In addition, when applicable, provide a photograph of the foundation
showing a representative example of the flood openings or vents. All
photographs must be in color and measure at least three inches by three inches.
Digital photographs are acceptable.
      (2)   Floodproofing certificate.
         (a)   If non-residential floodproofing is used to meet the Regulatory
Flood Protection Elevation requirements, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form
086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and
maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of any new
construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation
of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to NAVD 1988.
Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational
plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such
review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause
to deny a Floodplain Development Permit. Failure to construct in accordance
with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy.
         (b)   A final Finished Construction Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA
Form 086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection
and maintenance plan are required prior to the issuance of a Certificate of
Compliance/Occupancy. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to
the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design
elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to
NAVD 1988. Floodproofing certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational
plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such
review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to Certificate of Occupancy.
Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections
shall be cause to deny a Floodplain Development Permit. Failure to construct in
accordance with the certified design shall be cause to deny a Certificate of
Compliance/Occupancy.
         (c)   If a manufactured home is placed within Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99
and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade,
an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the
provisions of §
151.41(C)(2).
         (d)   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of
the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a professional engineer's
certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying
capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream
and downstream; and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior
to issuance of a floodplain development permit.
         (e)   Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located
within Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing
certification requirements specified in divisions (a) and (b) of this division
(2):
            1.   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of §
151.41(F)(1);
            2.   Temporary structures meeting requirements of §
151.41(G); and
            3.   Accessory structures that are under 400 square feet or less or
$3,000 or less and meeting requirements of §
151.41(H).
         (f)   A V-Zone Certification with accompanying design plans and
specifications is required prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit
within coastal high hazard areas. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant
to submit to the Floodplain Administrator said certification to ensure the
design standards of this chapter are met. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall develop or review the structural design, plans, and
specifications for construction and certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice
for meeting the provisions of this chapter. This certification is not a
substitute for an Elevation Certificate. In addition, prior to the Certificate
of Compliance/Occupancy issuance, a registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify the finished construction is compliant with the design,
specifications and plans for VE Zone construction.
   (D)   Determinations for existing buildings and structures. For applications
for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including
alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy,
additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of
substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and
structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building
Official, shall:
      (1)   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed
work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure
shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are
made;
      (2)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or
structure;
      (3)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
      (4)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood resistant construction requirements of the NC Building Code and
this chapter is required.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.32 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:
   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
   (B)   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been received,
including § 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,
33 U.S.C. 1334.
   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of
Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the
National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained.
   (E)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment areas unless
the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of §
151.45 are met.
   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to NAVD 1988) of the reference
level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of §
151.31(C).
   (G)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to NAVD 1988) to which all new
and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed, in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.31(C).
   (H)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to NAVD 1988) of all public
utilities in accordance with the provisions of §
151.31(C).
   (I)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.31(C) and §
151.41(B).
   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the special flood hazard areas, floodways, or non-encroachment areas (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter.
   (K)   When BFE data has not been provided in accordance with the provisions
of §
151.16, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with
floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or
other source, including data developed pursuant to §
151.43(B)(3), in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   (L)   When BFE data is provided but no floodway or non-encroachment area
data has been provided in accordance with the provisions of §
151.16, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-
encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source in
order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   (M)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or
the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood hazard area is above
the BFE, advise the property owner of the option to apply for a Letter of Map
Amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. However, if the property is to be removed from the
V Zone it must not be located seaward of the landward toe of the primary
frontal dune. Maintain a copy of the LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain
development permit file.
   (N)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of
this chapter and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as
amended.
   (O)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to
a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall
make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the
work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the
terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
   (P)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation
of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor.
   (Q)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain
Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked.
   (R)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each
member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
   (S)   Follow through with corrective procedures of §
151.33.
   (T)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests.
   (U)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to,
historical and effective FIS Report, historical and effective FIRM and other
official flood maps and studies adopted in accordance with the provisions of §
151.16, including any revisions thereto including Letters of Map Change, issued
by FEMA. Notify State and FEMA of mapping needs.
   (V)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including Letters of
Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-Fs) and Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs).
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.33 CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws; it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal service,
stating:
      (1)   That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
      (2)   That a hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at
a designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      (3)   That following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue
an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
   (C)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of the Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance, he or she shall issue an order in writing to the owner, requiring
the owner to remedy the violation within a specified time period, not less than
60 calendar days, nor more than 180 calendar days. Where the Floodplain
Administrator finds that there is imminent danger to life or other property, he
or she may order that corrective action be taken in such lesser period as may
be feasible.
   (D)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the clerk within ten days
following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order
of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The Board of Adjustment shall
hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or
revoke the order.
   (E)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor pursuant to G.S. §
143-215.58 and shall be punished at the discretion of the court.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 151.34 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustments as established by the town, hereinafter
referred to as the Appeal Board, shall hear and decide requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal
such decision to the court, as provided in G.S. Ch. 7A.
   (C)   Variances may be issued for:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the
definition as stated in §
151.10, provided provisions of divisions (I)(2), (3), and (5) of this section
have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public
safety; or
      (3)   Any other type of development provided it meets the requirements of
this section.
   (D)   In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under §
151.10 as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (E)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.
   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
chapter.
   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the BFE and the elevation to which the
structure is to be built and that such construction below the BFE increases
risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the BFE may result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance.
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the FEMA and the State of North Carolina
upon request.
   (I)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or
non-encroachment area if the variance would result in any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit
approval.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (J)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas provided that all of
the following conditions are met.
      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community.
      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood
hazard area.
      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to
at least the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local
laws.
      (5)   The town has notified the Secretary of the North Carolina
Department of Public Safety of its intention to grant a variance at least 30
calendar days prior to granting the variance.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 151.40 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in accordance
with the FEMA Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials
Requirements.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
   (D)   All new electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service equipment shall be located at or above the RFPE or
designed and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during the occurrence of the base flood. These include, but are
not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures,
ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, water heaters,
and electric outlets/switches.
      (1)   Replacements part of a substantial improvement, electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service
equipment shall also meet the above provisions.
      (2)   Replacements that are for maintenance and not part of a substantial
improvement, may be installed at the original location provided the addition
and/or improvements only comply with the standards for new construction
consistent with the code and requirements for the original structure.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (H)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this
chapter and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-encroachment
area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the
regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway, non-encroachment area,
or stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or
replacement meets all of the other requirements of this chapter.
   (I)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in §
151.34(J). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory
flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of §
151.31(C).
   (J)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (K)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by federal or state law, including § 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
   (N)   When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area,
the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
   (O)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest BFE shall apply.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.41 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas where BFE data has been provided, as set
forth in §§
151.16, or
151.43, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
151.40, are required:
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the
reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.10.
   (B)   Non-residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.10. Structures located in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99 may be floodproofed to
the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that
all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation
shall be in accordance with §
151.48(B). A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the floodproofing standards of this section are satisfied. Such certification
shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in §
151.31(C), along with the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance
plan.
   (C)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that
the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.10.
      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured
Homes adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. § 143-143.15.
Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36
inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by
reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is
above 36 inches in height, an engineering certification is required.
      (3)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of division (D) of this section.
      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This
plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the
local Emergency Management Coordinator.
   (D)   Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed area of new construction and
substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor or below the
lowest horizontal structural member in VE zones:
      (1)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only
be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior
door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion
of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms,
except to enclose storage areas;
      (2)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least
to the regulatory flood protection elevation; and
      (3)   Shall include, in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99 flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (b)   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit;
         (d)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the higher of the interior or exterior adjacent grade;
         (e)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
         (f)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
      (4)   Shall, in coastal high hazard areas (Zone VE), either be free of
obstruction or constructed with breakaway walls, open wood latticework or
insect screening, provided they are not part of the structural support of the
building and are designed so as to breakaway, under abnormally high tides or
wave action without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or
supporting foundation system or otherwise jeopardizing the structural integrity
of the building. The following design specifications shall be met:
         (a)   Material shall consist of open wood or plastic lattice (having
an opening ratio of at least 40% or insect screening; or
         (b)   Breakaway walls shall meet the following design specifications:
            1.   Design safe loading resistance shall be not less than ten nor
more than 20 pounds per square foot; or
            2.   Breakaway walls that exceed a design safe loading resistance
of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by state or
local codes) shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the breakaway wall will collapse from a water load less than
that which would occur during the base flood event, and the elevated portion of
the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water
loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and
nonstructural). The water loading values used shall be those associated with
the base flood. The wind loading values used shall be those required by the
North Carolina State Building Code.
   (E)   Fill/grading.
      (1)   Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of
nonstructural fill may be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes
under and around buildings and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios
and walkways.
      (2)   The fill material must be similar and consistent with the natural
soils in the area.
      (3)   The placement of site-compatible, non-structural fill under or
around an elevated building is limited to two feet. Fill greater than two feet
must include an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional
demonstrating no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave
reflection that would increase damage to adjacent elevated buildings and
structures.
      (4)   Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than five
units horizontal to one unit vertical shall be permitted only if an analysis
prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful
diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase
damage to adjacent elevated buildings and structures.
   (F)   Additions/improvements.
      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more non-
conforming than the existing structure; or
         (b)   A substantial improvement, with modifications/rehabilitations/
improvements to the existing structure or the common wall is structurally
modified more than installing a doorway, both the existing structure and the
addition must comply with the standards for new construction.
      (2)   Additions to pre-FIRM or post-FIRM structures that are a
substantial improvement with no modifications/rehabilitations/improvements to
the existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall, shall
require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
only must comply with the standards for new construction consistent with the
code and requirements for the original structure; or
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (4)   Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a one year
period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the improvement or repair is started must comply with
the standards for new construction. For each building or structure, the one
year period begins on the date of the first improvement or repair of that
building or structure subsequent to the effective date of this chapter.
Substantial damage also means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of
the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. If the structure
has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial
improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The requirement
does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required to correct
existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the Building
Official and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living conditions;
or
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
   (G)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:
      (1)   Temporary placement.
         (a)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. (A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no
permanently attached additions.)
      (2)   Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles that do not meet the
limitations of temporary placement shall meet all the requirements for new
construction.
   (H)   Temporary non-residential structures. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood warning
notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the
Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
      (1)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to one
year;
      (2)   The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible
for the removal of the temporary structure;
      (3)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);
      (4)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity
responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
      (5)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside
the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
   (I)   Accessory structures. When accessory structures (sheds, detached
garages, etc.) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the
following criteria shall be met:
      (1)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);
      (2)   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
      (3)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
      (4)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
      (5)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
the provisions of §
151.40(A);
      (6)   All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.40(D); and
      (7)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection elevation in
conformance with the provisions of §
151.41(D)(4).
      (8)   An accessory structure with a footprint less than 400 square feet
or that is a minimal investment of $3,000 or less and satisfies the criteria
outlined above is not required to meet the elevation or floodproofing standards
of §
151.41(B). Elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all other
accessory structures in accordance with §
151.31(C).
      (9)   Tanks. When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a
special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met:
         (a)   Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall
be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood,
including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty;
         (b)   Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard
areas shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation
on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting
structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood
hazard area;
         (c)   Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not
meet the elevation requirements of §
151.41(B) of this chapter shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the
tanks are designed, constructed, installed, and anchored to resist all flood-
related and other loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions
of the design flood and without release of contents in the floodwaters or
infiltration by floodwaters into the tanks. Tanks shall be designed,
constructed, installed, and anchored to resist the potential buoyant and other
flood forces acting on an empty tank during design flood conditions.
         (d)   Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and
vents shall be:
            1.   At or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or
fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of
the contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and
            2.   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during
conditions of the design flood.
      (10)   Other development.
         (a)   Fences in regulated floodways and NEAs that have the potential
to block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh
fences, shall meet the limitations of §
151.45.
         (b)   Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways
and NEAs. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the
placement of fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of §
151.45.
         (c)   Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways and NEAs.
Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water
crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side
of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways
shall meet the limitations of §
151.45.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.42 [RESERVED].
§ 151.43 STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS.
   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Approximate Zone A and
established in §
151.16, where no BFE data has been provided by FEMA, the following provisions,
in addition to the provisions of §
151.40, shall apply:
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements or new development shall be permitted within a distance of 20 feet
each side from top of bank or five times the width of the stream, whichever is
greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall
not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
   (B)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection elevation
shall be determined based on the following criteria:
      (1)   When BFE data is available from other sources, all new construction
and substantial improvements within such areas shall also comply with all
applicable provisions of this chapter and shall be elevated or floodproofed in
accordance with standards in §§
151.40 and
151.41.
      (2)   When floodway or non-encroachment data is available from a federal,
state, or other source, all new construction and substantial improvements
within floodway and non-encroachment areas shall also comply with the
requirements of §§
151.41 and
151.45.
      (3)   All subdivision, manufactured home park and other development
proposals shall provide BFE data if development is greater than five acres or
has more than 50 lots/manufactured home sites. Such BFE data shall be adopted
by reference in accordance with §
151.16 and utilized in implementing this chapter.
      (4)   When BFE data is not available from a federal, state, or other
source as outlined above, the reference level shall be elevated or floodproofed
(nonresidential) to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation, as
defined in §
151.10. All other applicable provisions of §
151.41 shall also apply.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.44 STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS BUT
WITHOUT ESTABLISHED FLOODWAYS OR NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   Along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided by FEMA or is available
from another source but neither floodway nor non-encroachment areas are
identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS report,
the following requirements shall apply to all development within such areas:
   (A)   Standards of §
151.40 and §
151.41; and
   (B)   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated, no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting
technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.45 FLOODWAYS AND NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located within
the special flood hazard areas established in §
151.16. The floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas
due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris
and potential projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards
outlined in §§
151.40 and
151.41, shall apply to all development within such areas:
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless:
      (1)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not result
in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain
Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or
      (2)   A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been approved by
FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must also be obtained within six months
of completion of the proposed encroachment.
   (B)   If division (A) of this section is satisfied, all development shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Manufactured homes may be permitted provided the following provisions
are met:
      (1)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of §
151.41(C); and
      (2)   The encroachment standards of division (A) of this section.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.46 COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA (ZONE VE).
   Coastal high hazard areas are special flood hazard areas established in §
151.16, and designated as Zones VE. These areas have special flood hazards
associated with high velocity waters from storm surges or seismic activity and,
therefore, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
following provisions in addition to the provisions of §§
151.40 and
151.41:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall:
      (1)   Be located landward of the reach of mean high tide; and
      (2)   Comply with all applicable CAMA setback requirements.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated so
that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
(excluding pilings or columns) is no lower than the regulatory flood protection
elevation. Floodproofing shall not be utilized on any structures in coastal
high hazard areas to satisfy the regulatory flood protection elevation
requirements.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space
below the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
free of obstruction so as not to impede the flow of flood waters, with the
following exceptions:
      (1)   Open wood or plastic latticework or insect screening may be
permitted below the lowest floor for aesthetic purposes only and must be
designed to wash away in the event of wave impact and in accordance with the
provisions of §
151.41(D)(5)(a). Design plans shall be submitted in accordance with the
provisions of §
151.31(A)(4)(c)2.; or
      (2)   Breakaway walls may be permitted provided they meet the criteria
set forth in §
151.31(D)(1), (2), (3), and (5)(b). Design plans shall be submitted in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.31(A)(4)(c)1..
   (D)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be securely
anchored to pile or column foundations. All pilings and columns and the
structure attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water loads acting
simultaneously on all building components.
      (1)   Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood.
      (2)   Wind loading values used shall be those required by the current
edition of the North Carolina State Building Code.
   (E)   All elevators, vertical platform lifts, chair lifts, etc., the
following is required:
      (1)   Elevator enclosures must be designed to resist hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic forces as well as erosion, scour, and waves.
      (2)   Utility equipment in coastal high hazard areas (VE Zones) must not
be mounted on, pass through, or be located along breakaway walls.
      (3)   The cab, machine/equipment room, hydraulic pump, hydraulic
reservoir, counter weight and roller guides, hoist cable, limit switches,
electric hoist motor, electrical junction box, circuit panel, and electrical
control panel are all required to be above RFPE. When this equipment cannot be
located above the RFPE, it must be constructed using flood damage-resistant
components.
      (4)   If an elevator is designed to provide access to areas below the
BFE, it shall be equipped with a float switch system that will activate during
a flood and send the elevator cab to a floor above the RFPE.
   (F)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the
provisions of §
151.31 and divisions (C) and (D) of this section, on the current version of the
North Carolina V-Zone Certification form or equivalent local version. In
addition, prior to the Certificate of Compliance/Occupancy issuance, a
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify the finished
construction is compliant with the design, specifications and plans for VE Zone
construction.
   (G)   Fill/grading.
      (1)   Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of
nonstructural fill may be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes
under and around buildings and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios
and walkways.
      (2)   The fill material must be similar and consistent with the natural
soils in the area.
      (3)   The placement of site-compatible, non-structural fill under or
around an elevated building is limited to two feet. Fill greater than two feet
must include an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional
demonstrating no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave
reflection that would increase damage to adjacent elevated buildings and
structures.
      (4)   Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than five
units horizontal to one unit vertical shall be permitted only if an analysis
prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful
diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase
damage to adjacent elevated buildings and structures.
   (H)   There shall be no alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands which
would increase potential flood damage.
   (I)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted except in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be
placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided
the anchoring and elevation standards of this section have been satisfied.
   (J)   Recreational vehicles may be permitted in coastal high hazard areas
provided that they meet the recreational vehicle criteria of §
151.41(F)(1).
   (K)   A deck that is structurally attached to a building or structure shall
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation and any supporting members that extend
below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall comply with the
foundation requirements that apply to the building or structure, which shall be
designed to accommodate any increased loads resulting from the attached deck.
The increased loads must be considered in the design of the primary structure
and included in the V-Zone Certification required under §
151.16(C)(6).
   (L)   A deck or patio that is located below the regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be structurally independent from buildings or structures and
their foundation systems, and shall be designed and constructed either to
remain intact and in place during design flood conditions or to break apart
into small pieces to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing
structural damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and
structures.
   (M)   In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than
buildings and structures shall be permitted only if also authorized by the
appropriate state or local authority; if located outside the footprint of, and
not structurally attached to, buildings and structures; and if analyses
prepared by qualified registered design professionals demonstrate no harmful
diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase
damage to adjacent buildings and structures. Such other development activities
include but are not limited to:
      (1)   Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments, and similar
erosion control structures;
      (2)   Solid fences and privacy walls, and fences prone to trapping
debris, unless designed and constructed to fail under flood conditions less
than the design flood or otherwise function to avoid obstruction of
floodwaters.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.47 STANDARDS FOR COASTAL A ZONES (ZONE CAZ) LiMWA.
   Structures in CAZs shall be designed and constructed to meet V Zone
requirements, including requirements for breakaway walls. However, the NFIP
regulations also require flood openings in walls surrounding enclosures below
elevated buildings in CAZs (see Technical Bulletin 1, Openings in Foundation
Walls and Walls of Enclosures). Breakaway walls used in CAZs must have flood
openings that allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters to minimize
damage caused by hydrostatic loads. Openings also function during smaller
storms or if anticipated wave loading does not occur with the base flood.
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated so
that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
(excluding pilings or columns) is no lower than the regulatory flood protection
elevation. Floodproofing shall not be utilized on any structures in Coastal A
Zones to satisfy the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space
below the lowest horizontal structural member free of obstruction so as not to
impede the flow of flood waters, with the following exceptions:
      (1)   Open wood latticework or insect screening may be permitted below
the lowest floor for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away
in the event of wave impact and in accordance with the provisions of §
151.41(D)(5)(a). Design plans shall be submitted in accordance with the
provisions of §
151.31(A)(4)(c)2.; or
      (2)   Breakaway walls may be permitted provided they meet the criteria
set forth in §
151.41(D)(5)(b). Design plans shall be submitted in accordance with the
provisions of §
151.31(A)(4)(c)1..
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall include, in
Zones CAZ, flood openings to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this
requirement, the openings must either be certified by a professional engineer
or architect or meet or exceed the design criteria in §
151.41(D)(4).
   (D)   Concrete pads, including patios, decks, parking pads, walkways,
driveways, etc. must meet the provisions of §
151.46(E).
   (E)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
provisions of §
151.46(C).
   (F)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the
provisions of §
151.16 and §
151.46(C) and (D), on the current version of the North Carolina V-Zone
Certification form or a locally developed V-Zone Certification form.
   (G)   Recreational vehicles may be permitted in Coastal A Zones provided
that they meet the recreational vehicle criteria of §
151.41(F)(1).
   (H)   Fill/grading must meet the provisions of §
151.46(G).
   (I)   Decks and patios must meet the provisions of §
151.46(K) and (L).
   (J)   In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than
buildings and structures must meet the provisions of §
151.46(M).
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.48 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (ZONE AO).
   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
151.16, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have
special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and indeterminate. In addition to §§
151.40 and
151.41, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
following requirements:
   (A)   The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the depth
number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, plus a
freeboard of two feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least two feet
above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
   (B)   Non-residential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be floodproofed
to the same level as required in §
151.40(A) so that the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below that level shall be watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy. Certification is required in accordance with §§
151.16(C) and
151.41(B).
   (C)   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes,
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.49 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (ZONE AH).
   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
151.16, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas are subject
to inundation by 1%-annual-chance shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding)
where average depths are one to three feet. Base flood elevations are derived
from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone. In addition to §§
151.40 and
151.41, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
following requirements:
   (A)   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes,
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
§ 151.55 EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION CHAPTER.
   (A)   This chapter in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the
provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted May 6, 1976 as
amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and
continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that
all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be
enforced. The enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action, suit or
proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance of the Town of Caswell Beach enacted on May 6, 1976, as amended,
which are not reenacted herein are repealed.
   (B)   The date of the initial Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance for
Brunswick County is April 1, 1985.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.56 EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof
for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this chapter; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such
outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date of
issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.57 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said
holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.58 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective August 28, 2018.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
§ 151.99 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a
Class 1 misdemeanor pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.58. Any person who violates this
chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not more than $100 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days,
or both. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the town from taking such other
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. passed 8-28-18)
CHAPTER 152: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
152.01   Foreward; background information
   
152.02   Title
   
152.03   Purpose
   
152.04   Authority
   
152.05   Jurisdiction
   
152.06   Definitions
   
152.07   Acceptance of streets
   
152.08   Thoroughfare plans
   
152.09   School sites on land use plan
   
152.10   Zoning and other plans
   
152.11   No permits or services until final plat approval
   
152.12   Prerequisite to plat recordation
Plat Requirements; Review Procedure
   
152.25   General procedure for plat approval
   
152.26   Statement by owner
   
152.27   Effect of plat approval on dedications
   
152.28   Plat shall be required on any subdivision of land
   
152.29   Review of major and minor subdivisions
   
152.30   Review of minor subdivisions
   
152.31   Review of major subdivisions (planned unit developments)
   
152.32   Elements of the preliminary plan process
   
152.33   Preliminary plat for major subdivisions
   
152.34   Final plat for major subdivisions
   
152.35   Contents of preliminary and final plats
   
152.36   Filing fee
   
152.37   Vacation of plats
   
152.38   Resubdivision procedure
Planned Development
   
152.39   Purpose; intent
   
152.40   Planned development defined
   
152.41   Site development plan; preliminary and final
   
152.42   Development standards
   
152.43   Procedures for site development plan approval
Design Standards and Requirements; Dedications and Reservations
   
152.49   General policy requirements
   
152.50   Utilities
   
152.51   Streets; general standards
   
152.52   Streets; design standards
   
152.53   Lots
   
152.54   Easements
   
152.55   Buffer strips
   
152.56   Storm water drainage
Improvements
   
152.65   Improvement costs
   
152.66   General improvement requirements
Administrative and Legal Provisions
   
152.75   Subdivision Administrator
   
152.76   Application of standards
   
152.77   Variance
   
152.78   Separability
   
152.79   Vested rights
   
152.80   Adoption
 
   
152.99   Penalty
   
Appendix: Checklist for preliminary plat and final plat
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 FOREWARD; BACKGROUND INFORMATION.
   (A)   Most urban expansion takes place in the form of land subdivision
created by private developers for residential, business and industrial users.
Subdivision of land will be explained in the text of this chapter. Generally,
the great bulk of subdivision activity is for residential use and takes place
in the growing corridors of existing communities.
   (B)   Land subdivision regulation is one of the most important tools for
carrying out plans for the development of the town area. Land development plans
calling for the location of future streets, parks and schools can be
incorporated into plans for new subdivisions. It is customary to require the
dedication, without cost to the community, of public street right-of-way and
open space land. The reservation of sites for public buildings or for later
public acquisition is also a frequent practice.
   (C)   The use of subdivision regulations also protects the community in
other ways. Streets that are properly designed and adequately paved will
require a minimum amount of maintenance. Requirements for installing essential
utilities, paving streets and providing other improvements will discourage the
premature and excessive subdivision of land, which would inevitably result in
scattered development and increase the cost of governmental operation. Properly
subdivided land stabilizes property values and thus strengthens the local tax
base.
   (D)   The subdivision chapter will bring the developer, the local decision-
maker and the homeowners to a common ground of understanding in an urban
environment. Special note: The developer should consult any locally adopted
area thoroughfare plan, and hazard mitigation plan. Reference to these plans by
the developer will assist in proper street design and subdivision location.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.02 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be know and may be called as the "Subdivision Regulations
of the Town of Caswell Beach, North Carolina," and may be referred to as the
subdivision regulations.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.03 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and standards
for the development and subdivision of land within the territorial jurisdiction
of the town. It is further designed to provide for:
      (1)   The orderly growth and development of the town;
      (2)   The coordination of transportation networks and utilities within
proposed subdivisions with existing or planned streets and highways and with
other public facilities;
      (3)   The dedication or reservation of recreation areas serving residents
of the immediate neighborhood within the subdivision or, alternatively, for
provision of funds to be used to acquire recreation areas serving residents of
the development or subdivision or more than one subdivision or development
within the immediate area, and rights-of-way or easements for street and
utility purposes including the dedication of rights-of-way pursuant to G.S. §§
136-66.10 or 136-66.11;
      (4)   The distribution of population and traffic in such a manner that
will mitigate hazards, avoid congestion and overcrowding, and will create
conditions that promote public health, safety and the general welfare.
   (B)   This chapter is designed to further facilitate adequate provision of
water, sewerage, parks, schools and playgrounds, and also to facilitate the
further resubdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.04 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is hereby adopted under the authority and provisions of the
G.S.§ 160D-801.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.05 JURISDICTION.
   The regulations contained herein, as provided in G.S. Chapter 160D, Article
8, shall govern each and every subdivision within the town and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction as shown on the official extraterritorial
boundary map.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.06 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Word interpretations. For the purpose of this chapter certain words
shall be interpreted as follows:
      (1)   Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
      (2)   Words used in the singular number induce the plural and words used
in the plural number include the singular, unless the natural construction of
the wording indicates otherwise.
      (3)   PERSON includes a firm, association, corporation, trust, and
company as well as an individual.
      (4)   USED FOR shall include the meaning "designed for".
      (5)   STRUCTURE shall include the word "building".
      (6)   LOT shall include the words "plot", "parcel", or "tract".
      (7)   SHALL is always mandatory and not merely directory.
      (8)   MAY is permissive.
      (9)   STREET shall include "public" or "private" street unless otherwise
indicated.
   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this chapter the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION. A decision made in the implementation,
administration, or enforcement of development regulations that involve the
determination of facts and the application of objective standards set forth in
this chapter.
      BLOCK. A piece of land bounded by visible physical barriers such as
streets, parks, railroad right-of-ways, streams, etc.
      BUFFER STRIP. A strip of land used for plantings designed for the purpose
of reducing adverse effects of adjacent land uses to the side or rear which may
not be compatible with the use on a particular piece of property, such as
reducing noise, pollution, or blocking glaring lights or visual clutter.
      BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line parallel to the front property line in
front of which no structure shall be erected. Setbacks shall be figured from
the right-of-way line.
      DEDICATION. A gift by the owner, or a right to use of land for a
specified purpose or purposes. Because a transfer of property rights is
entailed, dedication must be made by written instrument, and is completed with
an acceptance.
      DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL. An administrative or quasi-judicial approval made
pursuant to this chapter that is written and that is required prior to
commencing development or undertaking a specific activity, project, or
development proposal. Development approvals include, but are not limited to,
zoning permits, site plan approvals, special use permits, and variances. The
term also includes all other regulatory approvals required by regulations
adopted pursuant to this chapter, including plat approvals, permits issued,
development agreements entered into, and building permits issued.
      EASEMENT.  A grant by the property owner of a strip of land for a
specified purpose and use by the public, a corporation or persons.
      FLOOD HAZARD AREA. That area indicated in the town's hazard mitigation
plan that is prone to flooding and is delineated on the town's flood plain map.
      GRADE. The slope of a road, street, or other public way, specified as a
percentage.
      HALF-STREET.  A street whose centerline coincides with a subdivision plat
boundary, with one-half the street right-of-way width being contained within
the subdivision plat. Also, an existing street to which the parcel of land to
be subdivided abuts on only one side.
      LOT. A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some
legal instrument such as a recorded deed or a recorded map and which is
recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title.
      LOT, DEPTH OF. The distance measured in the mean direction of the side
lot lines from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear
lot line.
      LOT, FRONT OF. The portion of a lot nearest the street. For corner and
through lots, all sides adjacent to street right-of-ways shall be considered
fronts.
      LOT, WIDTH OF. The method of determining lot width whereby the average
width is taken by averaging the front and rear property line.
      LOT AREA. The total circumscribed by the boundaries of a lot, except
that:
         (a)   When the legal instrument creating a lot shows the boundary of
the lot extending to the center of a public street right-of-way or into a
public street right-of-way, then the lot boundary for purposes of computing the
lot area shall be the street right-of-way line, or a line running parallel to
and 30 feet from the center of the traveled portion of the street if the right-
of-way cannot be determined; and
         (b)   In a residential district, when a private road that serves more
than three dwelling units is located along any lot boundary, then the lot
boundary for purposes of computing the lot area shall be the inside boundary of
the traveled portion of that road.
      LOT COVERAGE. That portion of a lot occupied by a structure, either at
ground level or that area directly beneath a raised structure.
      LOT LINE, FRONT. The lines separating said lot from the street right-of-
way.
      LOT LINES. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
      LOT TYPES. Figure 1 illustrates terminology used in this chapter with
reference to corner lots, interior lots, reverse frontage lots and through
lots.
         (a)   CORNER LOT (A).  A lot located at the intersection of two or
more streets. A lot abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered
a corner lot if straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot
lines to the foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than
135 degrees. NOTE: See lots marked A(1) in the diagram below.
         (b)   INTERIOR LOT (B). A lot other than a corner lot with only one
frontage on a street.
         (c)   THROUGH LOT (C). A lot other than a corner lot with frontage on
more than one street. Through lots abutting two streets may be referred to as
double frontage lots.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6aa9dd82310533c6b70a60c5945852cf891e374a/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6157.jpg]
   Figure 1
      MONUMENTS. Markers placed on or in the land, which are metal pins not
less than 3/4-inch in diameter and 18 inches long or concrete monuments four
inches in diameter or square and three feet long.
      NONRESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION. A subdivision whose intended use is other
than residential, such as commercial or industrial.
      OFFICIAL MAPS OR PLANS. Any maps or plans officially adopted by the Town
Council.
      OPEN SPACE.  An area (land and/or water) generally lacking in man-made
structures and reserved for enjoyment in it unaltered state.
      PLANNING BOARD. The Planning Board of the Town of Caswell Beach.
      PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT. A development constructed on a tract of at
least ten acres under single ownership, planned and developed as an integral
unit, and consisting of a combination of principal uses that could not be
combined in any district other than a planned unit development district, in
which the subdivision and zoning controls are applied to the project as a whole
rather than to individual lots as in most subdivisions.
      PLAT. A map or plan of a parcel of land, which is to be or has been
subdivided.
      PLAT, FINAL. A final map or plan of all or a portion of the preliminary
plat of a subdivision which is presented to the Planning Board for its final
approval.
      PLAT, SKETCH. A sketch-map or plan of a subdivision of sufficient
accuracy to be used for the purpose of discussion and classification.
      PRELIMINARY PLAT. A preliminary map or plan indicating the proposed lay-
out of the subdivision which is submitted to the Planning Board for tentative
approval.
      PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.  A roadway serving two or fewer lots, building sites or
other divisions of land and not intended for public ingress and egress.
      PROPERTY OWNER'S ASSOCIATION. An incorporated organization operating
under land agreements through which:
         (a)   Each lot owner is automatically a member;
         (b)   Each lot is automatically subject to a proportionate share of
the expenses for the organization's activities, such as maintaining common
property.
      PUBLIC SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM. A single system of sewage collection,
treatment, and disposal serving two or more dwelling units or other properties
which has been approved by the Brunswick County Health Department and the
appropriate state agency, as provided by law.
      PUBLIC STREET. A street consisting of a publicly dedicated right-of-way
and a roadway maintained by the Town of Caswell Beach or the State of North
Carolina.
      PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM. Any water supply system furnishing potable water to
ten or more residences or businesses, or combination of residences and
businesses, approved by the appropriate state agency, as provided by law.
      RECREATION AREA or PARK.  An area of land and water resources that is
developed for active and/or passive recreation pursuits with various manmade
features and accommodates such activities.
      RESERVATION. A reservation of land does not involve any transfer of
property rights. It simply constitutes an obligation to keep property free from
development for a stated period of time.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a
street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for another specific
use. The usage of the term RIGHT-OF-WAY for land platting purposes shall mean
that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to
be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way
and not include within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels.
      STREET. A right-of-way or easement 50 feet or more in width containing a
roadway which provides or is used primarily for vehicle circulation. NOTE: As
per § 152.52, design of all public streets and roads within the jurisdiction of
this chapter shall be in accordance with the accepted policies of the North
Carolina Department of Transportation, Division of Highways, as described in
its publication Subdivision Road Minimum Construction Standards.
         (a)   Streets.
            1.   LOCAL STREET. A local street is any link not part of a higher
order urban system which primarily serves to provide direct access to abutting
land and access to higher systems.
            2.   MAJOR THOROUGHFARES. Major thoroughfares consist of
interstate, other freeway and expressway links, and major streets that provide
for the expeditious movement of volumes of traffic within and through urban
areas.
            3.   MINOR THOROUGHFARES. Minor thoroughfares are important streets
in the urban system and perform the function of collecting traffic from local
access streets and carrying it to the major thoroughfare system by facilitating
a minor through traffic movement and may also serve abutting property.
         (b)   Specific type rural or urban streets.
            1.   ALLEY.  A strip of land, owned publicly or privately, set
aside primarily for vehicular service access to the back or side of properties
otherwise abutting on a street .
            2.   CUL-DE-SAC. A cul-de-sac is a short street having but one end
open to traffic and the other end being permanently terminated and a vehicular
turn around provided.
            3.   EXPRESSWAY. An expressway is a divided street or road which
serves through traffic with full or partial control of access and generally
with grade separations at intersections; however, infrequent at-grade crossings
may be permitted.
            4.   FREEWAY. A freeway is a divided street or road which serves
through traffic with full control of access and with grade separations at
intersections.
            5.   FRONTAGE ROAD.  A frontage road is a local street or road that
is parallel to a full or partial access-controlled facility and functions to
provide access to adjacent land.
      STREET, PRIVATE. Any right-of-way or area set aside to provide vehicular
access within a development that is not dedicated to the Town of Caswell Beach
or State of North Carolina and that is not maintained by the Town of Caswell
Beach or State of North Carolina. A private street is also a public vehicular
access for purposes of traffic control.
      SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm or corporation who subdivides or develops
any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined.
      SUBDIVISION. All divisions of any single tract or parcel of land into two
or more lots, buildings sites or other divisions for the purpose of sale or
building development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all
divisions of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in
existing streets; but the following shall not be included within these
definitions, nor be subject to any regulations enacted pursuant to this
chapter:
         (a)   The combination or recombination of portions of previously
subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased
and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the town as
shown in this chapter.
         (b)   Division of land into parcels greater than ten acres where no
street right-of-way dedication is involved.
         (c)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the
widening or opening of streets.
         (d)   The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is
no greater than two acres into not more than three lots, where no street right-
of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or
exceed the standards of the town as shown in this chapter.
         (e)   The division of a tract into parcels in accordance with the
terms of a probated will or in accordance with intestate succession under G.S.
Chapter 29.
      SUBDIVISION, MAJOR. Any subdivision of land not meeting the definition of
a minor subdivision.
      SUBDIVISION, MINOR. Any subdivision that involves no new public streets
or roads, no right-of-way dedication, no utility extension, and where four or
fewer lots result after the subdivision completion.
      SUBDIVISION, MINOR EXPEDITED. The division of one existing parcel of land
under single ownership that is not exempt per G.S. § 160D-802(a); (1) where no
part of the tract or parcel to be divided has been divided in the ten years
prior to the proposed division; (2) the entire area of the tract or parcel to
be divided is greater than five acres; (3) after division, no more than three
lots result from the division and all resultant lots comply with all lot
dimension size requirements of the applicable zoning district and the use of
the lots is in conformity with the applicable zoning district; and (4) a
permanent means of ingress and egress is recorded for each.
      TRAVELWAY. That portion of a right-of-way that is improved for use by
either pedestrian or self-propelled vehicles or bicycles, including paved or
gravel areas and any other area intended for vehicle movement.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.07 ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS.
   The town shall not maintain any street, nor street dedication accepted for
ownership and maintenance in any subdivision for which a plat is required to be
approved unless and until the town has approved such final plat.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.08 THOROUGHFARE PLANS.
   Where a proposed subdivision includes any part of a thoroughfare which has
been designated as such upon the officially adopted thoroughfare plan of the
town, such part of such thoroughfare shall be platted by the subdivider in the
location shown on the plan and at the width specified in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.09 SCHOOL SITES ON LAND USE PLAN.
   If the Town Council and Planning Board and Board of Education have jointly
determined the specific location and size of any school sites to be reserved
and this information appears in the comprehensive land use plan, the
Subdivision Administrator shall immediately notify the Board of Education
whenever a sketch plan for a subdivision is submitted which includes all or
part of a school site to be reserved. The Board of Education shall promptly
decide whether it still wishes the site to be reserved. If the Board of
Education does not wish to reserve the site, it shall so notify the Planning
Board. If the Planning Board does wish to reserve the site, the subdivision
shall not be approved without such reservation. The Board of Education shall
then have 18 months beginning on the date of final approval of the subdivision
within which to acquire the site by purchase or by initiating condemnation
proceedings. If the Board of Education has not purchased or begun proceedings
to condemn the site within 18 months, the subdivider may treat the land as
freed of the reservation.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.10 ZONING AND OTHER PLANS.
   Similarly, proposed subdivision must comply in all respects with the
requirements of the approved CAMA Land Use Plan for the town, zoning
regulations in effect in the area to be subdivided, and any other officially
adopted plans.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.11 NO PERMITS OR SERVICES UNTIL FINAL PLAT APPROVAL.
   No permit, other than for the construction of any building or other
improvement requiring a building permit, shall be issued and no street
lighting, water, or sewer shall be extended to or connected with any
subdivision upon any land within the Town of Caswell Beach or its
extraterritorial jurisdiction unless and until the requirements of this chapter
have been met and the final plat approved.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.12 PREREQUISITE TO PLAT RECORDATION.
   After the adoption of this chapter the Brunswick County Register of Deeds
may not record any subdivision, recombination of property, or parcel splits
within the Town of Caswell Beach or its extraterritorial jurisdiction until a
final plat has been approved and certified for recordation by the Subdivision
Administrator for the Town of Caswell Beach.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
PLAT REQUIREMENTS; REVIEW PROCEDURE
§ 152.25 GENERAL PROCEDURE FOR PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   After the effective date of this chapter, no plat of any subdivision
of land, recombination of land, or parcel splits within the Town of Caswell
Beach or its extraterritorial jurisdiction shall be filed or recorded until it
has been submitted to and approved by the Town of Caswell Beach, and until this
approval is entered in writing on the face of the plat by the Subdivision
Administrator for the Town of Caswell Beach.
   (B)   The Register of Deeds shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision
of land, recombination of land, or parcel splits located within the Town of
Caswell Beach or its extraterritorial jurisdiction that has not been approved
in accordance with these provisions, complete with all appropriate
certifications, nor shall the Clerk of Superior Court direct the recording of a
plat if the recording would be in conflict with this section.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.26 STATEMENT BY OWNER.
   The owner of land shown on a subdivision plat submitted for recording, or
his authorized agent, shall sign a statement on the plat stating whether or not
any land shown thereon is within the subdivision regulation jurisdiction of the
town.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.27 EFFECT OF PLAT APPROVAL ON DEDICATIONS.
   Pursuant to G.S. § 160D-806, the approval of a plat shall not be deemed to
constitute or effect the acceptance by the town or public of the dedication of
any street or other ground, public utility line, or other public facility shown
on the plat. However, the Board of Commissioners may by resolution accept any
dedication made to the public of lands or facilities for streets, parks, public
utility lines or other public purposes when the lands or facilities are located
within its subdivision regulation jurisdiction. Acceptance of dedication of
lands or facilities located within the subdivision regulation jurisdiction but
outside the corporate limits of the town shall not place on the town any duty
to open, operate, repair or maintain any street, utility line or other land or
facility, and the town shall in no event be held to answer in any civil action
or proceeding for failure to open, repair or maintain any street located
outside its corporate limits.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.28 PLAT SHALL BE REQUIRED ON ANY SUBDIVISION OF LAND.
   Pursuant to G.S. § 160D-804, a final plat shall be prepared, approved, and
recorded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter whenever any subdivision of
land takes place.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.29 REVIEW OF MAJOR AND MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   All subdivisions shall be considered major subdivisions except those defined
as minor subdivisions in this chapter. Major subdivisions shall be reviewed in
accordance with the procedures beginning in § 152.31. Minor subdivisions shall
be reviewed in accordance with the provisions in § 152.30. However, if the
subdivider owns, leases, holds an option on, or holds any legal or equitable
interest in any property adjacent to or located directly across a street,
easement, road, or right-of-way from the property to be subdivided, the
subdivision shall not qualify under the abbreviated procedure. The abbreviated
procedure may not be used a second time within three years on any property less
than 1,500 feet from the original property boundaries by any subsequent owner,
or individual having an option on, or individual having any legal interest in
the original subdivision at the time the subdivision received final plat
approval, unless this restriction is waived by the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.30 REVIEW OF MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Sketch plan for minor subdivisions: requirements for developer. Prior
to submission of a final plat, the subdivider shall submit to the Subdivision
Administrator two copies of a sketch plan of the proposed subdivision
containing the following information:
      (1)   A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in
relation to neighboring tracts, subdivisions, roads, and waterways;
      (2)   The boundaries of the tract and the portion of the tract to be
subdivided;
      (3)   The total acreage to be subdivided;
      (4)   The existing and proposed use of the land within the subdivision
and the exiting uses of landing adjoining it;
      (5)   The existing street layout and right-of-way width;
      (6)   Proposed lot layout and size of lots;
      (7)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner;
      (8)   The name, if any, of the proposed subdivision;
      (9)   Streets and lots of adjacent developed or plated properties;
      (10)   The zoning classification of the tract and of adjacent properties;
      (11)   A statement from the Brunswick County Health Department that a
copy of the sketch plan has been submitted to them, if a septic tank system or
other onsite water or wastewater system is to be used in the subdivision;
      (12)   Location of any protected wetlands;
      (13)   Submission of the sketch plan shall be accompanied by a filing fee
as required in §
152.36. The fee schedule shall be set by the Board of Commissioners and
available at the Town Hall. The Subdivision Administrator shall review the
sketch plan for general compliance with the requirements of this chapter and
the zoning ordinance. The Subdivision Administrator shall advise the subdivider
or his authorized agent of the regulations pertaining to the proposed
subdivision and the procedures to be followed in the preparation and submission
of the final plat. One copy of the sketch plan shall be retained by the
Subdivision Administrator, and one copy shall be returned to the subdivider or
his authorized agent.
   (B)   Final plat for minor subdivisions.
      (1)   Upon approval of the sketch plan by the Subdivision Administrator
the subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter. The subdivider shall submit the final
plat, so marked, to the Subdivision Administrator for final plat approval
within 15 working days.
      (2)   The final plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor
currently licensed and registered in the State of North Carolina by the North
Carolina State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land
Surveyors, which cost shall be borne by the applicant. The final plat shall
conform to the provisions for plats, subdivision, and mapping requirements set
forth in G.S. § 47-30 and the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North
Carolina.
      (3)   Three paper copies of the final plat shall be submitted according
to the requirements of §
152.34. Material and drawing medium for the original shall be in accordance
with the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina, where
applicable, and the requirements of the Brunswick County Register of Deeds.
      (4)   The Final Plat shall meet the specifications in §
152.34 and the checklist table provided in Appendix: Checklist for Preliminary
Plat and Final Plat to this chapter.
      (5)   The following signed certificates shall appear on all three copies
of the final plat:
         (a)   Certificate of Ownership and Dedication.
I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property shown and described
hereon, which is located in the subdivision jurisdiction of the Town of Caswell
Beach and that I hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my free consent and
establish minimum building setback lines as noted.
Date:                                                         
Owner:                                                       
Notary:                                                       
Notary Expires:                                          
         (b)   Certificate of Survey and Accuracy.  
            1.   In accordance with the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying
in North Carolina: On the face of each map prepared for recordation there shall
appear a certificate acknowledged before an officer authorized to take
acknowledgments and executed by the person making the survey or map including
deeds and any recorded data shown thereon. The certificate shall include a
statement of error of closure calculated by latitudes and departures. Any lines
on the map which were not actually surveyed must be clearly indicated on the
map and a statement included in the certificate revealing the source of
information.
            2.   The certificate shall take the following general form:
State of North Carolina, Brunswick County, Town of Caswell Beach
I hereby certify that this map was (drawn by me) (drawn under my supervision)
from (an actual survey made by me) (an actual survey made under my supervision)
(deed description recorded in Book         , Page         , of the Brunswick
County Registry) (other); that the error of closure as calculated by latitudes
and departures is 1:                        ; that the boundaries not surveyed
are shown as broken lines plotted from information found in Book        , Page
       ; and that this plat was prepared in accordance with G.S. § 47-30, as
amended.
Witness my original signature, registration number, and seal this       day of
           , 20    .
                                                      
Registered Land Surveyor
Official Seal or Stamp
                                                      
Registration Number
(Notarized)
      (6)   Following the review by the Subdivision Administrator, the final
plat shall be approved, conditionally approved with modifications to bring the
plat into compliance, or disapproved with reason, within 45 days of its first
consideration of the plat.
      (7)   During the review of the final plat the Subdivision Administrator
may appoint an engineer or surveyor to confirm the accuracy of the final plat
(if agreed to by the Board of Commissioners). If substantial errors are found,
the costs shall be charged to the subdivider and the plat shall not be approved
until such errors have been corrected.
      (8)   If the final plat is approved, such approval shall be shown on each
copy of the plat by the following signed certificate.
      (9)   Certificate of Approval for Recording.
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to
comply with the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Caswell Beach, North
Carolina and that this plat has been approved for recording in the office of
the Brunswick County Register of Deeds within 60 days of the date below.
                                                            
Subdivision Administrator
Caswell Beach, North Carolina
                                                            
Date
      (10)   If the final plat is disapproved the reasons for such disapproval
shall be stated in writing, specifying the provisions of this chapter with
which the final plat does not comply. One copy of the statement of reasons and
two copies of the plat, shall be returned to the subdivider. If the final plat
is disapproved, the subdivider may make such changes as will bring the final
plat into compliance and resubmit same for reconsideration, or appeal the
decision to the Board of Adjustments.
      (11)   If the final plat is approved, one original reproducible copy
shall be filed with the Register of Deeds. One original reproducible copy and
one print shall be retained by the Subdivision Administrator for his records.
      (12)   The subdivider shall file the approved final plat with the
Register of Deeds of Brunswick County within 60 days of the approval; otherwise
such approval shall be null and void.
      (13)   For qualifying, expedited minor subdivisions, to be approved
administratively by the Subdivision Administrator, only a final plat for
recordation is required for the division of a tract or parcel of land in single
ownership if all of the following criteria are met:
         (a)   The tract or parcel to be divided is not exempted under G.S §
160D-802(a).
         (b)   No part of the tract or parcel to be divided has been divided
under this subsection in the ten years prior to division.
         (c)   The entire area of the tract or parcel to be divided is greater
than five acres.
         (d)   After division, no more than three lots result from the
division.
         (e)   After division, all resultant lots comply with all lot dimension
size requirements of the applicable zoning district, the use of the lots is in
conformity with the applicable zoning district, and a permanent means of
ingress and egress is recorded for each.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.31 REVIEW OF MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS (PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS).
   The sequence of actions prescribed in this section shall be followed
sequentially and may be combined only at the discretion of the Planning Board.
The actions include the following steps:
   (A)   Pre-application discussion - subdivider and Subdivision Administrator;
   (B)   Existing features plan (site analysis) submission;
   (C)   On-site walkabout by Subdivision Administrator and applicant;
   (D)   Pre-submission conference;
   (E)   Sketch plan submission, review and approval;
   (F)   Preliminary plat submission, review, and approval;
   (G)   Final plat submission, review, and approval.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.32 ELEMENTS OF THE PRELIMINARY PLAN PROCESS.
   (A)   Pre-application discussion. A pre-application discussion is strongly
encouraged between the applicant, the site designer(s), and the Subdivision
Administrator. The purpose of this informal meeting is to introduce the
applicant and the site designer(s) to Caswell Beach's zoning and subdivision
regulations and procedures and to discuss the applicant's objectives in
relation to the town's official policies and ordinance requirements.
   (B)   Existing Features Plan (site analysis). Plans analyzing each site's
special features are required for all proposed subdivisions, as they form the
basis of the design process for house locations, lot lines, street alignments,
and conservation areas. The subdivider or his/her representative shall bring a
copy of the Existing Features Plan to the on-site walkabout. Detailed
requirements for the Existing Features Plan shall include, at the minimum:
      (1)   Contour lines based at least upon topographical maps published by
the U.S. Geological Survey;
      (2)   The location of severely constraining elements such as steep slopes
(over 25%), wetlands, watercourses, intermittent streams and 100-year
floodplains, and all rights-of-way and easements;
      (3)   The location of significant features such as woodlands, treelines,
open fields or meadows, scenic views into or out from the property, watershed
divides and drainage ways, protected wetlands, fences or stone walls, rock
outcrops, and existing structures, roads, tracks and trails.
   (C)   On-site walkabout.  After the Existing Features Plan has been
prepared, the Subdivision Administrator shall schedule a mutually convenient
date to walk the property with the applicant and his/her site designer. The
purpose of this visit is to familiarize the Subdivision Administrator with the
property's special features, and to provide him an informal opportunity to
offer guidance to the applicant regarding the potential house locations, street
alignments, and the tentative location of conservation areas.
   (D)   Pre-submission conference. Prior to the submission of the sketch plan
or preliminary plat, the applicant shall meet with the Subdivision
Administrator to discuss how the severely constraining elements and the
significant features, which were identified in the Existing Features Plan,
could be applied to the design and layout of the proposed subdivision. At the
discretion of the Subdivision Administrator this conference may be combined
with the on-site walkabout.
   (E)   Sketch plan.  
      (1)   After the pre-submission conference, a sketch plan shall be
submitted for all proposed subdivisions. A sketch plan is drawn to illustrate
the initial thoughts about a conceptual layout for house sites, street
alignments, and conservation areas, taking into account the special conditions
identified in the Existing Features Plan. This is the stage where drawings are
tentatively illustrated, before heavy engineering costs are incurred in the
design of any proposed subdivision layout. Prior to the preliminary plat
submission, the applicant shall submit to the Subdivision Administrator 12
copies of the sketch plan of the proposed subdivision containing the following
information:
         (a)   A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in
relation to neighboring tracts, subdivisions, roads, and waterways;
         (b)   The boundaries of the tract and the portion of the tract to be
subdivided;
         (c)   The total acreage to be subdivided;
         (d)   The location of all potential conservation areas, using the
Existing Features Plan. These areas consist of wetlands, floodplains, slopes
over 25%, soils susceptible to slumping, and noteworthy natural, scenic, and
cultural resources;
         (e)   The existing and proposed uses of the land within the
subdivision and the existing uses of land adjoining it;
         (f)   The proposed street layout with approximate pavement and right-
of-way widths;
         (g)   Proposed lot layout and size of lots;
         (h)   The name, address, and telephone number of the owner;
         (i)   The name, if any, of the proposed subdivision;
         (j)   Streets and lots of adjacent developed or platted properties;
         (k)   The zoning classification of the tract and of adjacent
properties;
         (l)   A statement from the Brunswick County Health Department that a
copy of the sketch plan has been submitted to them, if a septic tank system or
other onsite water or wastewater system is to be used in the subdivision.
      (2)   The Subdivision Administrator shall review the sketch plan for
general compliance with the requirements and goals of this chapter and the
zoning ordinance. The Subdivision Administrator shall advise the applicant, or
his authorized agent, of the regulations pertaining to the proposed subdivision
and the procedures to be followed in the preparation and submission of the
preliminary and final plats. One copy of the sketch plan shall be retained by
the Subdivision Administrator and one copy shall be returned to the applicant
or his authorized agent.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.33 PRELIMINARY PLAT FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Submission procedure.
      (1)   For every subdivision within jurisdiction established by §
152.05, which does not qualify for the abbreviated procedure, the subdivider
shall submit a preliminary plat, which shall be approved by the Planning Board
before any construction, or installation of improvements may begin.
      (2)   Fourteen copies of the preliminary plat, including 12 copies and
two original, as well as any additional copies which Planning Board determines
are needed to be sent to other agencies shall be submitted to the Subdivision
Administrator (SA) at least 21 days prior to the next regularly scheduled
Planning Board meeting at which the subdivider desires the Planning Board to
review the Preliminary Plat.
      (3)   Preliminary plats shall meet the specifications of the Brunswick
County Register of Deeds for recording subdivision plats. Plats may be placed
on more than one sheet with appropriate match lines.
      (4)   The filing fee as required in §
152.36 shall accompany submission of the preliminary plat. The fee schedule
shall be set by the Board of Commissioners and available at the Town Hall.
   (B)   Review by other agencies. Concurrent with submission of the
preliminary plat to the Subdivision Administrator, the subdivider shall submit
copies of the preliminary plat and any accompanying material to other officials
and agencies concerned with new development including but not limited to: the
district highway engineer as to proposed streets, highways and drainage
systems; the appropriate Brunswick County and/or state agency as to proposed
water and sewerage systems; the North Carolina Department of Environment, and
Natural Resources, Land Quality Section as to the erosion control requirements;
the Brunswick County Board of Education as to proposed school sites, if any,
and any other agency or official designated by the Planning Board for review
and recommendation. The Subdivision Administrator will advise the subdivider
concerning which agencies are applicable for a given plat.
   (C)   Review procedure.
      (1)   The Technical Review Committee (TRC) shall review the plat for
compliance with regulations and good planning practices and the Subdivision
Administrator shall present the plat and the Committee's recommendations to the
Planning Board.
      (2)   The Technical Review Committee will include the Subdivision
Administrator and other appropriate officials as may be designated by the Town
Board of Commissioners to ensure thorough review.
      (3)   The Planning Board shall review the preliminary plat at or before
its next regularly scheduled meeting, which follows at least 21 days after the
plat is submitted and it receives comments from the appropriate agencies.
Additionally, all preliminary plats for proposed subdivisions with private
street(s) must be approved by Board of Commissioners.
      (4)   The Planning Board shall review the preliminary plat along with the
recommendations of the Subdivision Review Committee and, in writing, recommend
approval, conditional approval with conditions to bring the plat into
compliance, or disapproval with reasons within 45 days of its first
consideration of the plat. Failure of the Planning Board to make a written
recommendation within this time period shall be deemed as approval by the
Planning Board.
      (5)   During its review of the preliminary plat the Planning Board may
appoint an engineer or surveyor to confirm the accuracy of the plat (if agreed
to by the Board of Commissioners). If substantial errors are found, the cost
shall be charged to the subdivider and the plat shall not be recommended for
approval until such errors have been corrected.
      (6)   If the Planning Board disapproves the plat, the reasons therefor
shall be stated, in writing, and submitted, along with the original and four
prints of the plat, to the subdivider who may make the recommended changes and
submit a revised plat for Planning Board approval without paying an additional
filing fee. If the Planning Board approves the preliminary plat conditionally,
the conditions and reasons thereof shall be stated, in writing, and, if
necessary, the Planning Board may require the subdivider to submit a revised
plat. Resubmission of a revised plat does not require and additional filing
fee. Resubmission must be made within 60 days and submitted at least one week
prior to the Board meeting.
      (7)   If the Planning Board approves the preliminary plat, such approval
shall be noted on the three copies of the plat. One print and one original
reproducible drawing of the plat shall be returned to the subdivider, or his/
her agent, and one copy of the print shall be retained by the Subdivision
Administrator.
      (8)   Approval of the preliminary plat is authorization for the
subdivider to proceed with the construction of the necessary improvements in
preparation for the final plat.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.34 FINAL PLAT FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Preparation of final plat and installation of improvements. Upon
approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Board, the subdivider may
proceed with the preparation of the final plat, and the installation of, or
arrangement for, required improvements in accordance with the approved
preliminary plat and the requirements of this chapter. Prior to approval of a
final plat, the subdivider shall have installed the improvements specified in
this chapter or guaranteed their installation as provided herein. No final plat
will be accepted or reviewed by the Planning Board unless accompanied by
written notice by the Subdivision Administrator acknowledging compliance with
the improvement and guarantee standards of this chapter. The final plat shall
constitute only the portion of the preliminary plat, which the subdivider
proposes to record and develop at that time. Such portion shall conform to all
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Improvements guarantees.
      (1)   Agreement and security required. In lieu of requiring the
completion, installation, and dedication of all improvements prior to final
plat approval, the Caswell Beach Board of Commissioners may enter into an
agreement with the subdivider whereby the subdivider shall agree to complete
all required improvements. Once said agreements are signed by both parties and
the security required herein is provided, the final plat may be approved, if
all other requirements of this chapter are met. To secure this agreement, the
subdivider shall provide either one or a combination of the following
guarantees not exceeding 1.25 times the entire cost. Portions of the security
deposit may be released as work progresses. The following range of surety
options are available and may be used by subdividers, subject to approval by
town.
      (2)   Surety performance bond(s). The subdivider shall obtain a
performance bond(s) from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in
North Carolina. The bond(s) shall be payable to the Town of Caswell Beach and
shall be in an amount equal to 1.25 times the entire cost of installing all
required improvements, as estimated by the town. The duration of the bond(s)
shall be until such time as the improvements are accepted by the town.
      (3)   Cash or equivalent security. The subdivider shall deposit cash, a
certified check payable to the town, an irrevocable letter of credit, or other
instrument readily convertible into cash at face value, either with the town or
in escrow with a financial institution designated as an official depository of
the town. The use of any instrument other than cash shall be subject to the
approval of the Board of Commissioners. The amount of deposit shall be equal to
1.25 times the cost of installing all required improvements, as estimated by
the town. If cash or other instrument is deposited in escrow with a financial
institution as provided above, then the subdivider shall file with the town a
copy of an agreement between the financial institution and himself guaranteeing
the following:
         (a)   That said escrow account shall be held in trust until released
by the town and may not be used or pledged by the subdivider in any other
matter for the term of the escrow; and
         (b)   That in the case of a failure on the part of the subdivider to
complete said improvements the financial institution shall, upon notification
by the Board of Commissioners, and submission by the Council to the financial
institution of an engineer's estimate of the amount needed to complete the
improvements, immediately either pay to the town the funds estimated to
complete the improvements, up to the full balance of the escrow account, or
deliver to the town any other instruments fully endorsed or otherwise made
payable in full to the town.
      (4)   Duration. The duration of the performance guarantee shall initially
be one year, unless the developer determines that the scope of work for the
required improvements necessitates a longer duration in which case the Board of
Commissioners shall approve an expiration date beyond one year. In the case of
a bonded obligation, the completion date shall be set one year from the date
the bond is issued, unless the developer determines that the scope of work for
the required improvements necessitates a longer duration in which case the
Board of Commissioners shall approve an expiration date beyond one year.
      (5)   Extension. A developer shall demonstrate reasonable, good-faith
progress toward completion of the required improvements that are secured by the
performance guarantee or any extension. If the improvements are not completed
to the specifications of the town, and the current performance guarantee is
likely to expire prior to completion of the required improvements, the
performance guarantee shall be extended, or a new performance guarantee issued,
for an additional period. An extension under this subdivision shall only be for
a duration necessary to complete the required improvements. If a new
performance guarantee is issued, the amount shall include the total cost of all
incomplete improvements.
      (5)   Default. Upon default, meaning failure on the part of the
subdivider to complete the required improvements in a timely manner as spelled
out in the performance bond or escrow agreement, then the surety, or the
financial institution holding the escrow account shall, if requested by the
Board of Commissioners, pay all or any portion of the bond or escrow fund to
the Town of Caswell Beach up to the amount needed to complete the improvements
based on an engineering estimate. Upon payment the town, at its discretion, may
expend such portion of said funds as it deems necessary to complete all or any
portion of the required improvements.
      (6)   Release of guarantee security. The Board of Commissioners may
authorize the release of a portion of any corresponding percentage of a
security posted as the improvements are completed and approved by the
Subdivision Administrator.
   (C)   Submission procedure.
      (1)   The subdivider shall submit the final plat, so marked, to the
Subdivision Administrator who will forward it to the Planning Board for review.
The final plat shall be prepared by a registered land surveyor currently
licensed and registered in the State of North Carolina by the North Carolina
State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors. The
final plat shall conform to the provisions for plats, subdivisions, and mapping
requirements set forth in G.S. § 47-30 and the Manual of Practice for Land
Surveying in North Carolina.
      (2)   Fourteen copies of the final plat shall be submitted. Twelve of
these shall be paper copies and one shall be an original linen meeting the
standards of this chapter. Material and drawing medium for the original shall
be in accordance with the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying in North
Carolina, where applicable, and the requirements of the Brunswick County
Register of Deeds.
      (3)   The final plat shall meet the specifications in this section and
must be of a size suitable for recording with the Brunswick County Register of
Deeds. It must be at the same scale and meet the same sheet size requirements
as the preliminary plat. Plats may be placed on more than one sheet with
appropriate match lines.
      (4)   The following signed certificates shall appear on all 14 copies of
the final plat:
         (a)   Certificate of Ownership and Dedication.
I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property shown and described
hereon, which is located in the subdivision jurisdiction of the Town of Caswell
Beach and that I hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my free consent,
establish minimum building setback lines, and dedicate all streets, alleys,
walks, parks and other sites and easements to public or private use as noted.
Furthermore, I hereby dedicate all sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water
infrastructure to the Town of Caswell Beach.
                                                                                         
Date                         Owner
                                          
Notary
         (b)   Certificate of Survey and Accuracy. In accordance with the
Manual of Practice for Land Surveying North Carolina on the face of each map
prepared for recordation there shall appear a certificate acknowledged before
an officer authorized to take acknowledgments and executed by the person making
the survey or map including deeds and any recorded data shown thereon. The
certificate shall include a statement of error of closure calculated by
latitudes and departures. Any lines on the map, which were not actually
surveyed, must be clearly indicated on the map and a statement included in the
certificate revealing the source of information. The certificate shall take the
following general form:
State of North Carolina, Brunswick County, Town of Caswell Beach
I hereby certify that this map was (drawn by me) (drawn under my supervision)
from (an actual survey made by me) (an actual survey made under my supervision)
(deed description recorded in Book        , Page       , of the Brunswick
County Registry) (other); that the error of closure as calculated by latitudes
and departures is 1:             ; that the boundaries not surveyed are shown
as broken lines plotted from information found in Book        , Page        ;
and that this plat was prepared in accordance with G.S. § 47-30, as amended.
Witness my original signature, registration number, and seal this       day of
         , 20    .
                                            
Registered Land Surveyor
                                            
Registration Number
(Notarized)
The certificate of the Notary shall read as follows:
North Carolina,                                     County.
I, a Notary Public of the County and State aforesaid, certify that
                                  , a registered land surveyor, personally
appeared before me this day and acknowledged the execution of the foregoing
instrument. Witness my hand and official stamp or seal this            day of
          , 20    .
                                             
Notary
Seal or Stamp                                 Expiration                      
         (c)   Certificate of Approval for Recording.
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to
comply with the Subdivision Regulations of the Town of Caswell Beach, North
Carolina and that this plat has been approved for recording in the office of
the Brunswick County Register of Deeds within sixty (60) days of the date
below.
                                                 
Subdivision Administrator
Caswell Beach, North Carolina
                                                 
   Date
         (d)   Certificate of Approval of the Design and Installation of
Streets, Utilities, and Other Required Improvements.
I hereby certify that all streets, utilities and other required improvements
have been installed in an acceptable manner and according to Town
specifications and standards in the                              or that
guarantees of the installation of the required improvements in an amount and
manner satisfactory to the Town of Caswell Beach has been received and that the
filing fee for this plan, in the amount of $                   has been paid.
                                               
Subdivision Administrator
                                                   
         Date
         (e)   Certificate of Approval for Private Streets.
I hereby certify that I understand that the Town shall assume no liability for
damages to roadway for providing services on private street(s). I understand
that the Town will not accept private street(s) into the public system until
constructed to Town standards. Furthermore, I hereby certify that a Property
Owner's Association has been created to maintain minimum standards for private
street(s).
                                                                                        
Date                         Owner
                                                                                        
Notary                         Notary Expires
   (D)   Review procedure.
      (1)   The Subdivision Review Committee or the Planning Board shall review
the final plat at or before its next regularly scheduled meeting and shall
approve or disapprove the plat with reasons within 45 days of its first
consideration of the plat. During its review of the final plat the Review
Committee or the Planning Board may appoint an engineer or surveyor to confirm
the accuracy of the plat (if agreed to by the Board of Commissioners). If
substantial errors are found, the costs shall be charged to the subdivider and
the plat shall not be recommended for approval until such errors have been
corrected.
      (2)   If the final plat is not approved, the reasons for such disapproval
shall be stated in writing, specifying the provisions of this chapter with
which the final plat does not comply. A copy of this statement, along with the
original and three prints of the plat, will be submitted to the subdivider who
may make the recommended changes and submit a revise plat for approval or may
directly appeal to the Board of Commissioners. Resubmission of a revised plat
does not require an additional filing fee. Resubmission must be made within 60
days and submitted at least one week prior to the board or committee meeting.
      (3)   If the final plat is approved conditionally, the conditions and
reasons thereof shall be stated, in writing, and, if necessary, the Planning
Board may require the subdivider to submit a revised plat. The process for
approving conditions shall be the same as specified for approval of conditions
in the town's zoning ordinance.
      (4)   Whenever a street or right-of-way dedication is involved the Board
of Commissioners must approve the final plat. If approved by the Review
Committee or Planning Board such a plat shall be considered by the Board of
Commissioners at its regularly scheduled meeting.
      (5)   Upon approval of the final plat by the Board of Commissioners,
Review Committee, or Planning Board in the absence of a street or right-of-way
dedication, copies shall be distributed as follows. One original tracing and
one print of the plat shall be filed with the Subdivision Administrator. Two
prints shall be returned to the subdivider, one print shall be retained by the
Subdivision Administrator, one print shall be retained by the Town Clerk for
its records, and one print shall be forwarded to the Register of Deeds to be
used as a check print against the recorded plat. One original tracing shall be
filed with the Register of Deeds by the applicant.
      (6)   The subdivider shall file the approved final plat with the
Brunswick County Register of Deeds within sixty days of Planning Board
approval; otherwise such approval shall be null and void.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.35 CONTENTS OF PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS.
   The preliminary and final plats shall depict or contain the information
indicated in the checklist table provided in
Appendix: Checklist for Preliminary Plat and Final Plat to this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.36 FILING FEE.
   At the time of submission of the preliminary plat for major subdivisions and
at the time of submission of the sketch plan for minor subdivisions, the
subdivider shall pay to the Town Clerk/Finance Officer a nonrefundable service
filing fee as adopted by the Board of Commissioners and available in the Town
Hall. This service fee is used to partially defray the cost to the town of
processing the subdivisions.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.37 VACATION OF PLATS.
   (A)   Any plat or any part of any plat must be vacated by the owner at any
time before the sale of any lot in the subdivision by a written instrument to
which a copy of such plat shall be attached, declaring the same to be vacated.
   (B)   Such an instrument shall be approved by the same agencies as approved
the final plat. The governing body may reject any such instrument, which
abridges or destroys any public right in any of its public uses, improvements,
streets or alleys.
   (C)   Such an instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved and
recorded and filed in the same manner as a final plat; and being duly recorded
or filed shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the
plat so vacated, and to divest all public right in the streets, alleys and
public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in such plat.
   (D)   When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner
provided in divisions (A), (B), and (C) above by all owners of the lots in such
plat joining in the execution of such writing.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.38 RESUBDIVISION PROCEDURE.
   For any replatting or resubdivision of land, the same procedures, rules and
regulations shall apply as prescribed herein for an original subdivision.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
§ 152.39 PURPOSE; INTENT.
   (A)   It is the intent to establish a new planned development (PD) section
for specialized purposes where tracts suitable in location, area, and character
for the uses and structures proposed are to be planned and developed on a
unified basis. Suitability of tracts for the development proposed shall be
determined primarily by reference to the town land use plan but due
consideration shall be given to the existing and prospective character of
surrounding development. All such requests require the statutory procedures for
a zoning map amendment as contained in
Chapter 153, which may be processed concurrently with the preliminary and final
site development plan. No such zoning map amendment shall be approved prior to
the approval of a preliminary site development plan.
   (B)   The intent of this subchapter is to permit flexibility from
conventional development controls of use, setback, height and minimum lot size
requirements of other zoning districts while at the same time provide criteria
for planned development based on performance.
   (C)   These regulations are designed to accomplish the purposes of zoning
and subdivision regulation to an equivalent or higher degree than where such
regulations are designed to control unscheduled development on individual lots
and to promote economical and efficient land use; an improved level of
amenities, such as open space; appropriate and harmonious variety; creative
design; and a better environment.
   (D)   All copies and distribution shall comply with the provisions contained
in §
152.34(C) just like a major subdivision.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.40 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT DEFINED.
   For purposes of these regulations, a planned development is:
   (A)   Land under unified control, to be planned and developed as a whole;
   (B)   In a single development operation or a definitely programmed series of
development operations, including all lands and buildings;
   (C)   For principal and accessory structures and uses substantially related
to the character and purposes of the area;
   (D)   According to detailed plans that include not only streets, utilities,
lots or building sites and the like, but also site plans and floor plans for
all buildings as intended to be located, constructed, used, and related to each
other, and detailed plans for other uses and improvements on the land as
related to the buildings; and
   (E)   With a program for provision, operation, and maintenance of such
areas, facilities and improvements as will be for common use by some or all of
the occupants of, or visitors to, the development but will not be provided,
operated or maintained at general public expense.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.41 SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN; PRELIMINARY AND FINAL.
   A site development plan drawn to scale and shall contain the following
information:
   (A)   The name of the planned development;
   (B)   The exact boundary lines of the planned development fully dimensioned
by lengths and bearings, and the location of intersecting boundary lines of
adjoining lands;
   (C)   Scale denoted both graphically and numerically;
   (D)   The plans for utility layouts, including sewers, storm sewers, water
distribution lines, natural gas, telephone and electric service, illustrating
connections to existing systems or plans for individual water supply systems
and/or sewage disposal systems. Plans must show line sizes, the location of
fire hydrants, blowoffs, manholes, pumps, force mains, and gate valves;
   (E)   Street names;
   (F)   The location, purpose and dimensions of areas to be used for purposes
other than residential;
   (G)   Minimum building setback lines;
   (H)   The names of owners of adjoining properties and any adjoining
subdivisions of record (or proposed and under review);
   (I)   The location and dimensions of all rights-of-way, utility or other
easements, riding trails, natural buffers, pedestrian or bicycle paths, and
areas to be dedicated to public use with the purpose of each stated;
   (J)   Right-of-way lines, and pavement widths of all streets and the
location and width of all adjacent streets and easements;
   (K)   Property lines, buildings or other structures, water courses,
railroads, bridges, culverts, storm drains, both on the land to be subdivided
and on the land immediately adjoining, corporate limits, township boundaries,
and county lines;
   (L)   Sufficient engineering data to determine readily and reproduce on the
ground every straight or curved boundary line, street line, lot line, right-of-
way line, easement line, and setback line, including dimensions, bearings, or
deflection angles, radii, central angles, and tangent distances for the center
line of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary of
curved streets. All dimensions shall be measured to the nearest one-tenth of a
foot and all angles to the nearest minute;
   (M)   The accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments, markers and
control points;
   (N)   The deed restrictions or any other similar covenants proposed for the
planned development, if any;
   (O)   The date of the survey and plat preparation;
   (P)   North arrow and declination;
   (Q)   The name(s) of the township(s), county(ies), and state in which the
development is located;
   (R)   The name and location of any property, within the planned development
or within any contiguous property, that is listed on the U.S. Department of
Interior's National Register of Historic Places; likewise any property that has
been designated by local ordinance as an historic property pursuant to G.S.
Chapter 160D, Article 9, Part 4;
   (S)   The name(s), address(es), and telephone number(s) of the owner(s),
registered surveyor(s), land planner(s), architects), landscape architect(s),
and professional engineer(s) responsible for the subdivision and the
registration number(s) and seal(s) of the professional engineer(s) and
registered surveyor(s);
   (T)   Flood hazard areas according to flood insurance rate maps or flood
hazard boundary maps;
   (U)   Topographic information showing vertical contour every two feet if
deemed necessary by the Planning Board;
   (V)   Show boundaries of areas of environmental concern (CAMA);
   (W)   Total number of dwelling units; total residential floor area; total
number of floors, total height; total open space area; and total number of
parking spaces.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.42 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   The development shall be located in relation to sanitary sewers, water
lines, storm and surface drainage systems, and other utility systems and
installations in such a way that neither extension nor enlargement of such
systems will be required in manner, form, character, location, degree, scale,
or timing resulting in higher net public cost or earlier incursion of public
cost than would develop in forms generally permitted under current zoning for
the area.
   (B)   The development shall be located with respect to necessary public
facilities as to have access to such facilities in the same degree as would
develop under existing zoning and shall be so located, designated, and scaled
that access for public services is equivalent to, and net cost for services is
not greater than access and net cost for public services for development as
permitted under existing zoning.
   (C)   Private facilities. The proposed development shall provide private
facilities, utilities, and/or services approved by appropriate public agencies
as substituting on an equivalent basis and assure their satisfactory continuing
operation, permanently or until similar public utilities, facilities, and/or
services are available and used; or
   (D)   Net public costs.
      (1)   The proposed development shall make provision acceptable to the
city for offsetting any added net public cost or early commitment or public
funds made necessary by such development.
      (2)   In computing net public costs, difference in anticipated public
installation, operation and maintenance costs and difference in anticipated
public revenue from such sources shall be considered. Expenses involved in
making such determinations shall be paid by applicants. Determination shall be
made by the city or by experts acceptable to the city.
   (E)   Minimum parcel size for planned development. The minimum amount of
land (under unified control to be planned and developed as a whole) for a
planned development shall be at least ten acres.
   (F)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Dwellings, single-family and multi-family detached, semi-attached
structures; golf courses, swimming pools and tennis courts.
      (2)   Accessory uses and structures clearly incidental to permitted uses
provided the accessory uses and structures floor space shall not exceed 10% of
the total residential floor space.
      (3)   Structures and uses required for operation of a public utility,
performance or a governmental function or performance of any function necessary
for the operation and maintenance of the planned development and otherwise
permitted under these or general regulations, subject to the requirements
thereof.
   (G)   Setbacks.
      (1)   All structures shall be 35 feet from adjoining property lines.
However, when property lies contiguous to properties of the golf course or the
Carolina Power and Light discharge canal, a structure may be constructed 25
feet from the property line that is adjacent to the course or canal.
      (2)   All structures shall be 25 feet from adjacent structures.
   (H)   Maximum height. Height regulations for structures in this section
shall comply with the provisions contained in § 153.084 of this code.
   (I)   Access to water. All planned development projects adjoining public
trust waters (waters of the Atlantic Ocean) shall make provisions for public
access. Where bulkheads are constructed along the mean high water, boardwalks
or other similar structures may be used to provide access.
   (J)   Conveyance and maintenance of open space.
      (1)   All open space shown on the site development plan shall be recorded
in the County Register of Deeds Office and shall be conveyed by the following
method: by leasing or conveying title including beneficial ownership to a
corporation, association, or other legal entity, the terms of such lease or
other instruments of conveyance must include provisions suitable to the Town
Board for guaranteeing:
         (a)   The continued use of such land for the intended purposes;
         (b)   Continuity of proper maintenance for those portions of the open
space land requiring maintenance;
         (c)   When appropriate, the availability of funds required for such
maintenance;
         (d)   Adequate insurance protection; and
         (e)   Recovery for loss sustained by casualty, condemnation, or
otherwise.
      (2)   Furthermore, the applicant shall file in the County Register of
Deeds Office at the time of site development plan approval, legal documents
which shall produce the above guarantees and, in particular, will provide a
method for restricting the use of open space for the use and enjoyment of the
residents of the planned development.
      (3)   Common open space. A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water
or a combination of both land and water within the site designated for a
planned development, a cluster development, or a one-family attached dwelling
development, designed and intended for the use and enjoyment of residents of
the proposed development, not including streets or off-street parking areas.
Common open space shall be substantially free of structures but may include
such improvements as are in the plan as finally approved and are appropriate
for the benefit of residents.
   (K)   Density.
      (1)   The density of land use occupancy. The occupancy of the usable land
of the town shall not exceed that of one-family dwelling unit for each 10,800
square feet of usable land.
      (2)   Usable land, when calculating density, shall be defined as any
portion of the land deemed capable of supporting and sustaining a habitable
structure and its ancillary requirements such as septic tank and drain field.
      (3)   The following must be excluded from any calculations determining
usable land area:
         (a)   All easements for storm drainage or utilities;
         (b)   Thoroughfare, highway and street beds, including rights-of-way;
         (c)   Sediment basins and water retention ponds;
         (d)   Wetlands as defined by the State Coastal Area Management Act and
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers;
         (e)   Waste water treatment facilities;
         (f)   Areas considered to be environmentally important as either
ecological or historical resource.
      (4)   In cluster subdivisions, sufficient space must be left so that the
density of housing shall not exceed the average density of one habitable unit
for each 10,800 square feet of usable land.
   (L)   Parking. Two parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit.
The parking space shall contain at least 180 square feet.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Ord. passed 2-13-92; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.43 PROCEDURES FOR SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVAL.
   (A)   Review by the Planning Board.
      (1)   The preliminary site development plan shall be reviewed by the
Planning Board within 35 days after the Town Clerk receives the preliminary
site development plan. A filing fee according to the town's schedule of fees
maintained in the office of the Town Clerk will accompany the preliminary site
development plan.
      (2)   The Planning Board shall convene a public hearing to consider the
preliminary site plan. The public hearing shall be held jointly with the Town
Board.
      (3)   The Planning Board Chairman may refer copies to public officials
and agencies concerned with the new development. Comments received from the
various officials and agencies shall be given full consideration. If any
official or agency objects to an applicant's proposal, the Planning Board shall
require the applicant to set forth how the stated objection will be remedied.
The burden of proof shall be with the applicant to satisfactorily demonstrate
that the proposal is sound.
      (4)   The Planning Board shall recommend approval, conditional approval
with corrections, or disapproval to the Town Board.
      (5)   If the preliminary site development plan is recommended for
approval or conditional approval with corrections, the approval and/or
corrections shall be noted on at least three copies of the plan. One copy shall
be transmitted to the Town Clerk who shall retain it for public examination,
one copy shall be returned to the subdivider, and one copy shall be retained by
the Planning Board.
      (6)   If the preliminary site development plan is not recommended for
disapproval, the Planning Board shall specify the reasons for such action in
writing. If the site development plan is disapproved, the developer may make
the recommended changes and submit a revised plan.
      (7)   Planning Board approval shall not constitute acceptance on the part
of the town to operate, maintain or develop any dedicated land, facilities or
services described in the site development plan.
      (8)   If the Planning Board recommends approval or conditional approval
with corrections, the developer may submit the preliminary site plan to the
Town Board.
      (9)   If the Planning Board does not make any recommendations within 15
days after the public hearing, the developer may apply to the Town Board for
approval or disapproval.
   (B)   Action by the Town Board.
      (1)   If the Town Board approves the preliminary site development plan,
approval shall be noted on at least three copies of the plan. One copy shall be
transmitted to the Town Clerk who shall retain it for public examination, one
copy shall be returned to the developer, and one copy shall be retained by the
Planning Board.
      (2)   If the Town Board does not approve the preliminary site development
plan, the reasons for such disapproval shall be specified in writing. The
developer may make the recommended changes and submit a revised plan.
      (3)   Upon approval of the preliminary site development plan by the Town
Board, the developer may proceed with the preparation of the final site
development plan and the installation of or arrangement for required
improvements in accordance with the approved preliminary site development plan.
Prior to approval of the final site development plan, the developer shall have
installed the improvements specified in the preliminary site plan or guaranteed
their installation. The developer shall provide bonds, dedications, guarantees,
agreements, contracts and deed restrictions acceptable to the Town Board of
Commissioners for completion of such development according to approved plans;
and for continuing operation and maintenance of such area, facilities, and
services as are not to be provided, operated, or maintained at general public
expense; and such dedications, contributions or guarantees as are required for
provision of needed public facilities and services; and to bind further
successors in title to any commitments made above.
      (4)   The final site development plan shall constitute only that portion
of the preliminary site development plan which the developer proposes to record
and develop at that time.
      (5)   The Town Board shall review the final site development plan in the
same manner as the preliminary site development plan.
      (6)   No building permits shall be issued until the Town Board has given
approval to the final site development plan.
      (7)   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall have no authority to waive any
requirement contained in this section.
      (8)   All requests for a planned development approval must also be
accompanied by a zoning map amendment petition.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Ord. passed 5-10-90; Am. Ord. passed 1-13-05; Am. Res.
passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
DESIGN STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS; DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS
§ 152.49 GENERAL POLICY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Land subject to flooding as denoted in Caswell Beach's flood
plain maps and land deemed by the Planning Board to be uninhabitable for other
reasons including, but not limited to, slopes in excess of 25%, slumping soils,
wetlands, habitats for endangered species, and historic/archeological sites,
shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may
increase danger to health, life or property, or aggravated the flood hazard.
Such land within a plan shall be set aside for such uses as will not be
endangered by periodic or occasional inundation, or will not produce
unsatisfactory living conditions.
      (2)   Past records of flood levels shall be used to determine sufficient
area from the centerline of streams to provide adequate protection from the
most severe flood of record.
   (B)   Where land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building
lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of future
streets and logical further subdivision.
   (C)   Where a proposed residential subdivision contains or is adjacent to a
major highway, it shall be planned so as to avoid having lots fronting on the
highway in such a manner as to derive their access from said highway,
preferably by providing a marginal access street for these lots or by backing
the lots to the highway.
   (D)   Where a proposed subdivision contains or is adjacent to a railroad
right-of-way, it shall be planned so as to avoid having residential lots front
on a street, which parallels and is adjacent to the railroad right-of-way.
   (E)   Subdivision showing reserve strips controlling access to public ways
will not be approved except when the control and disposition of land comprising
such strips is placed within the town's jurisdiction under conditions meeting
the approval of the Subdivision Administrator.
   (F)   All subdivided land shall be part of a usable and numbered lot or it
shall be reserved as permanent open space. All major subdivisions shall be
required to reserve a minimum of 5% or more of the gross land area as permanent
open space, subject to the review of the Planning Board.
   (G)   If the entire area shown on an approved preliminary plat is not to be
recorded at the same time as one unit, but instead, sections or units of the
entire subdivision are to be recorded at subsequent time intervals, then the
unit boundaries shall be so designated as to permit each unit recorded to
function independently of the unit to follow it in the proposed recording
schedule of the subdivider. Temporary turnarounds shall be constructed by the
developer, as required by the town, at the ends of streets, which are presently
dead-end, but are planned as through streets when the adjacent unit ultimately
recorded.
   (H)   Areas that have been used for disposal of solid waste shall not be
subdivided unless tests by the Brunswick County Health Department, a structural
engineer, and soils expert determine that the land is suitable for the purpose
proposed.
   (I)   The names of the subdivision and street shall not duplicate nor
closely approximate the names of any existing subdivision or streets within
Caswell Beach or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The Board of Commissioners
has final say regarding names.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.50 UTILITIES.
   (A)   Utilities described in this section shall include, but not be limited
to water and sewer lines, electrical distribution systems, and telephone and
cablevision facilities. The utility companies shall be provided with copies of
the preliminary plat by the subdivider and shall be expected to work with the
subdivider in designing the utilities plan for the subdivision. Underground
installation of utility lines is required unless the Subdivision Administrator
determines that circumstances exist that make this requirement impractical. In
no case shall a developer be required to bury a power line existing above
ground and outside of property to be subdivided.
   (B)   Where public sewer is not available.  All lots in subdivisions not
connected to sanitary sewer systems shall have a suitable source of sanitary
sewage disposal which complies with the regulations of the appropriate
agencies.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.51 STREETS; GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Street layout.
      (1)   In any new subdivision the street layout shall conform to the
arrangement, width and location indicated by an official plan or map for the
town. In areas for which such plans have not been completed, the streets shall
be designed and located in proper relation to existing and proposed streets, to
the topography, to such natural features as streams and tree growth, to public
convenience and safety, and to the proposed use of land to be served by such
streets.
      (2)   Residential collector and local streets and roads shall be laid out
in such a way that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. Streets
shall be designed or walkways dedicated to assure convenient access to parks,
playgrounds, schools, or other places of public assembly.
      (3)   The proposed street layout shall be made according to good land
planning practice for the type development proposed and shall be coordinated
with the street system of the surrounding areas. The arrangements of streets in
new subdivision shall make provision for the continuation of the principal
existing streets in adjoining subdivisions or, when adjoining property is not
subdivided, their proper projection insofar as they may be necessary for
vehicular circulation in the future. The street and alley arrangement must be
so designated as to cause no hardship to owners of adjoining property when they
plat their own land and seek to provide for convenient access to it. When a new
subdivision adjoins subdivided land, the new streets shall be carried to the
boundaries of the tract proposed to be subdivided, except where it is
determined by the Planning Board that certain streets may not be required to be
so extended.
      (4)   Proposed streets should be adjusted to the contour of the land so
as to produce usable lots and streets shall be kept to a minimum.
   (B)   Intersections.
      (1)   Intersection of local streets with major streets shall be kept to a
minimum.
      (2)   An approved permit is required for connection to any existing state
system road. This permit is required prior to any construction on the street or
road. The application is available at the office of the nearest district
engineer of the NC Division of Highways.
      (3)   All connections of private streets to public streets must be
approved by the NCDOT or Board of Commissioners prior to preliminary plat
approval.
   (C)   Cul-de-sacs.
      (1)   As a feature of subdivision design, cul-de-sacs should be
discouraged and kept to a minimum. Cul-de-sacs should not be used to avoid
connection with an existing street or to avoid the extension of an important
street, unless an exception is granted by the Planning Board.
      (2)   Permanent dead-end streets shall not exceed 400 feet in length
unless necessitated by topography or property accessibility and in no case
shall be permitted to be over 900 feet. Measurement shall be from the point
where the centerline of the dead-end street intersects with the centerline of a
through street to the center of the turnaround of the cul-de-sacs.
   (D)   Half-streets.
      (1)   The dedication of half-streets of less than 50 feet at the
perimeter of a new subdivision shall be prohibited. If circumstances render
this impracticable, adequate provision for the concurrent dedication of the
remaining half of the street must be furnished by the subdivider. Where there
exists a half-street in an adjoining subdivision, the remaining half shall be
provided by the proposed development.
      (2)   However, in circumstances where more than 50 feet of right-of-way
is required, a partial width right-of-way, not less than 50 feet in width, may
be dedicated when adjoining undeveloped property is owned or controlled by the
subdivides provided that the width of the partial dedication is such as to
permit the installation of such facilities as may be necessary to serve
abutting lots. When the adjoining property is subdivided, the remainder of the
full required right-of-way shall be dedicated.
   (E)   Alleys. 
      (1)   Alleys may be required in all blocks along the rear line of
business property, in multiple-family residential or industrial blocks, if, in
the opinion of the Planning Board, alleys are needed to service these areas.
      (2)   All dead-end alleys shall be provided with a turnaround in
accordance with town standards.
      (3)   Sharp changes in alignment and grade shall be avoided. All alleys
shall be designed in accordance with North Carolina Department of
Transportation standards.
      (4)   No alley shall have access from a major street or highway, but
shall have its access points confined to minor, lightly traveled streets.
   (F)   Street names and signs.
      (1)   Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment with other
existing and named streets, shall bear the assigned name of the existing
streets.
      (2)   In assigning new names, duplication of existing names shall be
avoided and in no case shall the proposed name be phonetically similar to
existing names in Caswell Beach and the extra territorial jurisdiction
irrespective of the use of a suffix such as a street, road, drive, place,
court, etc. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Board of
Commissioners.
      (3)   The subdivider shall be required to provide and erect metal street
name signs to town or county standards, as appropriate, at all intersections
and at any other point within the subdivision deemed necessary by the town.
Subdividers shall assume the total cost of all new signs in addition to any
installation costs involved.
   (G)   Street dedication. 
      (1)   All public streets inside the corporate limits of the Town of
Caswell Beach shall be dedicated to the town and all public streets in the
extraterritorial area shall be constructed to the standards necessary for
acceptance into the state highway system or the standards in this chapter,
whichever is stricter in regard to each particular item, and may be added to
the state system, if eligible. If such a public street is not eligible for
acceptance into the state system, due to an inadequate number of lots or
residences, it shall, nevertheless, be dedicated to the public.
      (2)   All public streets shall be built to the standards of this chapter
and all other applicable standards of the Town of Caswell Beach and/or the
North Carolina Department of Transportation.
   (H)   Street lights. All subdivisions within the corporate limits of the
Town of Caswell Beach shall have streetlights installed, according to town
code.
   (I)   Street trees. Developers are encouraged to plant native deciduous
shade trees along both sides of all streets in new subdivisions. Such trees
should be planted within the right-of-way areas and be spaced no more than 40
feet apart.
   (J)   Disclosure statement.  All streets shown on the final plat shall be
designated in accordance with G.S. § 136-102.6 and designation as public shall
be conclusively presumed an offer of dedication to the public. Where streets
are dedicated to the public but not accepted into a municipal or the state
system before lots are sold, a statement explaining the status of the street
shall be included with the final plat.
   (K)   Access to adjacent properties. Where, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, it is necessary to provide for street access to an adjoining property,
proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of such
property and a temporary turnaround provided. In areas subdivided and recorded
prior to the adoption of this chapter (i.e. lots of record) which do not have
direct access to a public road or highway, a private drive or roadway may
provide access for further division meeting the definition of a minor
subdivision if and only if a permanent easement for such drive or roadway, with
a minimum right-of-way width of 20 feet, is recorded with the Register of Deeds
and depicted as such on the final plat.
   (L)   Nonresidential streets. The subdivider of a nonresidential subdivision
shall provide public streets in accordance with the North Carolina Roads,
Minimum Construction Standards and the standards of this chapter, whichever are
stricter in regard to each particular item.
   (M)   Private streets. Private streets may be allowed within the
jurisdiction of this chapter only if they meet the following criteria:
      (1)   All private streets shall be designated as such on the preliminary
and final plats.
      (2)   No more than five lots may be accessed by a private street.
      (3)   Private streets shall meet or exceed the minimum standards for
streets approved by the NCDOT and carry the same warranties set forth in this
chapter.
      (4)   Vehicle turnarounds must be provided at the end of all dead end
streets. Vehicle turnarounds must accommodate emergency vehicles including but
not limited to ambulance and fire safety equipment.
      (5)   (a)   A right-of-way maintenance agreement, satisfactory to the
Council, must be recorded by a property owner's association in the office of
the Register of Deeds to ensure proper maintenance. The agreement shall specify
lot owners' responsibilities for maintenance of private streets and drainage
systems, and shall provide for assessments to finance all maintenance
activities. In addition, all property transfer instruments must contain
reference to that agreement, as well as a statement indicating that the private
street does not meet public standards for maintenance and will not be
considered for maintenance unless improved by the property owner's association
to those standards. This agreement shall also specify that unless the street is
privately maintained in condition for safe passage of public service and
emergency vehicles, the town may provide such maintenance, with charges
therefore becoming a lien on the properties served, dividing among them
proportionate to their assessed tax valuation.
         (b)   A legally responsible organization such as a property owner's
association shall be established to maintain a private street(s). Documents to
assure private responsibility of future maintenance and repair by property
owner's association shall be provided to the town prior to preliminary plat
approval.
   (N)   Gated/controlled subdivisions. All gated or controlled access
subdivisions within the jurisdiction of this chapter must provide continuous
accessibility to subdivision for provision of public service and emergency
vehicles.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.52 STREETS; DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   In general the design of all public and private streets and roads
within the jurisdiction of this chapter shall be in accordance with the
accepted policies of the North Carolina Department of Transportation, Division
of Highways, as described in its publication Subdivision Road Minimum
Construction Standards.
   (B)   Sidewalks. The subdivider shall be required to construct sidewalks on
both sides of the streets. Sidewalks shall be constructed to the NCDOT standard
for sidewalks.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.53 LOTS.
   (A)   All lots shall conform to the area and bulk requirements set forth in
the town zoning ordinance. Whenever there is a discrepancy between the minimum
standards or dimensions noted herein and those contained in the zoning
ordinance, building codes or other official regulations, the highest or most
restrictive standards shall apply. Conformance to zoning requirements means,
among other things, that the smallest lot in the subdivision must meet all
dimensional requirements of the zoning ordinance. It is not sufficient merely
for the average lot to meet zoning requirement.
   (B)   General standards for lots shall be as follows:
      (1)   Lot size, shapes and location shall be made with due regard to
topographic conditions, contemplated use and the surrounding area.
      (2)   Every lot shall front or abut on a public street for a minimum
distance of 50 feet.
      (3)   Corner lots for residential use shall have an extra width of ten
feet to permit adequate building setback from side streets.
      (4)   Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except
where necessary to separate residential development from through traffic or
nonresidential uses.
      (5)   Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to
street lines.
      (6)   Flag-shaped lots shall only be permitted in those cases where the
minimum area, width, depth and street frontage requirements of the zone in
which the property is located is complied with.
      (7)   Lots shall meet any applicable requirements of the Brunswick County
Health Department.
   (C)   All lots which are located within the territorial jurisdiction of the
town for which public water and/or sewer is available shall connect to such
public water and sewer. Where public water and/or sewer service is not
provided, the following requirements shall apply:
      (1)   Where public water but not public sewer is provided, said lot shall
have an area of not less than 15,000 square feet; a mean lot width of not less
than 100 feet; and a mean lot depth of not less than 125 feet;
      (2)   Where neither public water nor public sewer is provided, said lot
shall have an area of not less than 20,000 square feet; a mean lot width of not
less than 120 feet; and a mean lot depth of not less than 150 feet.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.54 EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Utility easements. Easements centered on rear or side lot lines shall
be provided for utilities where necessary and shall be at least 12 feet in
width, or wider as required by the companies or agencies involved, e.g.
telephone, gas, or electric power. A ten-foot wide utility easement shall be
reserved for future public utilities along each side of all private streets.
   (B)   Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse,
drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement
or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such
watercourse, and such further width or construction, or both, as will be
adequate for the purpose. Parallel streets or frontage roads may be required in
connection therewith.
   (C)   Public maintenance. Lakes, ponds, creeks, flood plains and similar
areas will be accepted for maintenance by the town only if sufficient land is
dedicated as a public recreation area or park or if such area constitutes a
necessary part of the drainage control system. Such areas must be approved by
the Planning Board before approval of the final plat.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.55 BUFFER STRIPS.
   It is recommended that in residential districts a buffer strip of at least
50 feet in depth, in addition to the normal lot depth required, be provided
adjacent to all railroads, limited access highways and commercial developments.
This strip shall be part of the platted lots, but shall have the following
restriction lettered on the face of the plat: "This strip reserved for the
planting of evergreen shrubs and/or trees by the owner; the building of
structures hereon is prohibited."; or in the case of commonly-owned property,
shall be deeded to the homeowners' association.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.56 STORM WATER DRAINAGE.
   The subdivider shall provide a surface water drainage system constructed to
Town of Caswell Beach Storm Water Management Plan and to North Carolina
Department of Transportation standards as reflected in the Handbook for the
Design of Highway Surface Drainage Structures, or the current equivalent,
subject to review by the Town Engineer.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
IMPROVEMENTS
§ 152.65 IMPROVEMENT COSTS.
   Prior to approval of the final plat, the following improvements shall be
installed, bonded for or otherwise guaranteed according to §
152.31. The subdivider or developer shall assume the entire cost of all
improvements, whether they be sewer line, water line extensions or street
paving, listed in this section. Any professional service required in this
chapter as a condition of approval of a subdivision plat, such as soil
percolation tests, shall be also paid for by the subdivider.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.66 GENERAL IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   No construction or installation of improvements shall commence in a proposed
major subdivision until the preliminary plat has been approved, or until the
final plat has been approved in a minor subdivision, and all plans and
specifications have been approved by the appropriate authorities. All proposed
subdivision located within the territorial jurisdiction of the town shall
comply with the following improvement requirements:
   (A)   Permanent monuments and markers. Permanent monuments shall be placed
at all block corners or at the tangent points of curves connecting intersecting
street lines, at the points of curvature and tangency in curved street lines,
at all corners in the exterior boundary of the subdivision and at such other
points as may be necessary to make the retracing of the lines as shown upon the
final plat thereof reasonably convenient. The location of all such monuments
shall be clearly designated on said final plat. All lot corners shall be marked
by permanent markers. Unless otherwise specified by this chapter, the Manual of
Practice for Land Surveying, as adopted by the North Carolina State Board of
Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors, shall apply when
conducting surveys for subdivisions, in placing monuments and markers, etc.
   (B)   Required improvements. In addition to survey monuments and markers,
other improvements must be completed prior to final plat approval, or their
completion provided for as described in division (C) below. These required
improvements include the construction of streets, storm drainage facilities,
and public water and sewer lines; the planting of street trees; and the
installation of street name signs.
   (C)   Construction guarantee. In lieu of completed improvements no final
plat shall be approved or accepted for recording by the Register of Deeds until
the required improvements have been constructed in a satisfactory manner and
approved by the Subdivision Administrator or, in lieu of such prior
construction, the Board of Commissioners may accept a bond with surety and
condition satisfactory to the town, cash, a certified letter of credit from a
local bank, in an amount equal to 125% of the estimated cost of the
installation of the required improvements, whereby improvements may be made and
utilities installed without cost to the town or county in the event of default
by the subdivider, owner, or contractor. The owner of a subdivision shall
require the contractor constructing streets, curbs, gutters, drainage
facilities, water and sewer lines to give bond guaranteeing the work against
defects for a period of one year from the date of completion of such
construction.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
ADMINISTRATIVE AND LEGAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.75 SUBDIVISION ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Town Manager or his/her designee is hereby appointed to serve as
Subdivision Administrator.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.76 APPLICATION OF STANDARDS.
   Only those standards explicitly set forth in the chapter as criteria for
decision may be used in making individual plat approval decisions. If judgment
is required in approval, only that criteria set forth in the special and
conditional uses section of the town's zoning code shall be used as a guideline
in making those decisions.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.77 VARIANCE.
   The Zoning Board of Adjustment, after reviewing the recommendation of the
Planning Board and after holding a quasi- judicial hearing, may authorize a
variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, unnecessary hardships may
result from strict compliance and only to the extent that is absolutely
necessary and not to an extent which would violate the intent of this chapter.
In granting any variance, the Zoning Board of Adjustment shall make the
findings required below, taking into account the nature of the proposed
subdivision, the existing use of land in the vicinity, the number of persons to
reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the possible effect of the
proposed subdivision upon traffic conditions in the vicinity. Notice of
hearings conducted pursuant to this section shall be mailed to the person or
entity whose application or request is the subject of the hearing; to the owner
of the property that is the subject of the hearing if the owner did not
initiate the hearing and to the owners of all parcels of land abutting the
parcel of land that is the subject of the hearing. In the absence of evidence
to the contrary, the local government may rely on the county tax listing to
determine owners of property entitled to mailed notice. The notice must be
deposited in the mail at least ten days, but not more than 25 days, prior to
the date of the hearing. Within that same time period, the Subdivision
Administrator shall also prominently post a notice of the hearing on the site
that is the subject of the hearing or on an adjacent street or highway right-
of-way. The Board may continue an evidentiary hearing that has been convened
without further advertisement. If an evidentiary hearing is set for a given
date and a quorum of the Board is not then present, the hearing shall be
continued until the next regular Board meeting without further advertisement.
No variance shall be granted unless the Zoning Board of Adjustment finds all of
the following conditions to exist:
   (A)   Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of the
chapter. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of the
variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property.
   (B)   The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from
personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are
common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for
granting a variance.
   (C)   The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or the
property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that
circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be
regarded as a self-created hardship.
   (D)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and
intent of the chapter, such that public safety is secured, and substantial
justice is achieved.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 2014-001-O, passed 4-10-
14; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.78 SEPARABILITY.
   Should any section or provisions of this chapter be decided by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof other
than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 152.79 VESTED RIGHTS.
   A landowner submitting a preliminary or final plat for approval may declare
he is seeking to acquire a vested right pursuant to G.S. § 160D-108 and the
Caswell Beach zoning ordinance by completing the appropriate form and following
the procedure described in the zoning ordinance.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.80 ADOPTION.
   This chapter was duly adopted by the Board of Commissioners of Caswell
Beach, North Carolina on the 8th day of September, 1983 and amendments adopted
on the 8th day of April, 2010.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations. After adoption of this chapter, any person who, being the
owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the territorial
jurisdiction of this chapter, thereafter subdivides his land in violation of
this chapter or transfers or sells land by reference to, exhibition of, or any
other use of a plat showing a subdivision of the land before the plat has been
properly approved under the terms of this chapter and recorded in the office of
the Brunswick County Register of Deeds, shall be guilty of a violation and
guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor. In addition, enforcement remedies specified in
G.S. § 160D-807 for zoning enforcement shall hereby be authorized as applicable
for enforcement of these violations, including denial of building permits. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document
used in the process of selling or transferring land shall not exempt the
transaction from this penalty. The notice of violation shall be delivered to
the holder of the development approval and to the landowner of the property
involved, if the landowner is not the holder of the development approval, by
personal delivery, electronic delivery, or first-class mail and may be provided
by similar means to the occupant of the property or the person undertaking the
work or activity. The notice of violation may be posted on the property. The
person providing the notice of violation shall certify to the town that the
notice was provided, and the certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the
absence of fraud.
   (B)   Criminal penalties. The violation of any provision of this chapter
shall subject the offender to criminal prosecution and, upon conviction, to
fine and/or imprisonment set to the maximum allowed by G.S. § 14.4.
   (C)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Any violation of any provision of this chapter shall subject the
violator to a civil penalty in the sum of $500 per violation.
      (2)   A citation for said civil penalty shall be issued by the Caswell
Beach Police Department.
      (3)   Each citation for a civil penalty must be paid within 72 hours of
issuance.
      (4)   The town, through its attorney or other official designated by the
Board of Commissioners, may enjoin illegal subdivision transfer, or sale of
land by action for injunction or ensure compliance through an order of
abatement. If the violator fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or
order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, he/she may be cited
for contempt and the town may execute the order of abatement. The town shall
have a lien on the property for the cost of executing an order of abatement.
   (D)   Continuing violation. Each day's continuing violation of this chapter
after notification of such violation shall be a separate and distinct offense
and subject to additional fine or civil penalty.
   (E)   Equitable remedies.  Notwithstanding division (C) above, this chapter
may be enforced by appropriate equitable remedies issuing from a court of
competent jurisdiction.
   (F)   Combination of remedies.  Nothing in this section shall be construed
to limit the use of remedies available to the town. The Town of Caswell Beach
may seek to enforce this chapter by using any one, all, or a combination of
remedies.
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
APPENDIX: CHECKLIST FOR PRELIMINARY PLAT AND FINAL PLAT
Information Preliminary Plat Final Plat
Information                                         Preliminary Plat Final Plat
The block containing:
Property designation                                X                X
Location (including township, county and state)     X                X
Date or dates survey was conducted and plat         X                X
prepared
A scale of drawing in feet per inch listing in      X                X
words or figures
A bar graph                                         X                X
Name, address, registration number and seal of the  X                X
registered land surveyor
The name of the subdivider                          X                X
A sketch vicinity map showing the relationship
between the proposed subdivision and surrounding    X                X
area
Corporate limits, township boundaries, county lines X                X
in the subdivision tract
The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all
owners, mortagees, land planners, architects, and   X                X
professional engineers responsible for the
subdivision
The registration numbers and seals of the           X                X
professional engineers
North arrow and orientation                         X                X
The boundaries of the tract or portion thereof to
be subdivided, distinctly and accurately            X                X
represented with all bearings and distances shown
The exact boundary lines of the tract to be
subdivided, fully dimensioned by lengths and        X                X
bearings, and the location of the existing boundary
lines of adjoining lands
The names of owners of adjoining properties         X                X
The names of any adjoining subdivision of record or X                X
proposed and under review
Minimum building setback lines                      X                X
The zoning classification of the tract to be        X                X
subdivided and adjoining properties
Existing property lines on the tract to be          X                X
subdivided and on adjoining properties
 
Information Preliminary Plat Final Plat
Information                                                    Preliminary Final
                                                               Plat        Plat
The block containing: 
Existing buildings or other structures, watercourses,
railroads, bridges, culverts, storm drains, both on the land   X           X
to be subdivided and immediately adjoining
Proposed lot lines, consecutively numbered lot and block       X           X
numbers, and appropriate dimension
Wooded areas, marshes, swamps, rock outcrops, ponds or lakes,
streams or streambeds and any other natural features affecting X           X
the site
The exact location of the flood hazard, floodway and floodway  X           X
fringe areas
Copy of protective covenants, any proposed deed restrictions   X           X
and property owner's association documents, if any
The following data concerning streets:
Proposed streets, proposed thoroughfares in accordance with § X           X
152.08
Rights-of-way, location and dimensions                         X           X
Pavement widths                                                X           X
Approximate grades                                             X           X
Design engineering for data for all corners and curves         X           X
Typical street cross section                                   X           X
Street names                                                   X           X
Street maintenance agreement in accordance with § 152.51(G),              X
(J)
If any street is proposed to intersect with a state maintained
road and evidence that the subdivider has obtained approval                X
from the NCDOT
Type of street dedication; all streets must be designated
either "public" or "private." Where public streets are
involved which will be dedicated to the town, the subdivider
must submit all street plans to the town approval. Where
public streets are involved which will not be dedicated to the
town, the subdivider must submit the following documents to
the North Carolina Department of Transportation, District
Highway Office for review: a complete site layout, including   X           X
any future expansion anticipated; horizontal alignment
indicated by percent grade, PI station and vertical curve
length on site plan layout (the district engineer may require
the plotting of the ground profile and grade line for roads
where special conditions or problems exist); typical section
indicating the pavement design, width and slope, width and
details for either the curb and gutter or the shoulder and
ditch proposed; drainage facilities and drainage areas
 
Information Preliminary Plat Final Plat
Information                                         Preliminary Plat Final Plat
The location and dimensions of all:
Utility and other easements                         X                X
Riding trails                                       X                X
Natural buffers                                     X                X
Pedestrian or bicycle paths                         X                X
Parks and recreation areas with specific type       X                X
indicated
School sites                                        X                X
Areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use    X                X
Areas to be used for purposes other than            X                X
residential with the purpose of each stated
The future ownership (dedication or reservation for
public use to government body, for owners to duly
constituted homeowner's association, or for tenants                  X
remaining in the subdivider's ownership) of
recreation and open space lands
Sanitary sewers                                     X                X
Storm sewers                                        X                X
Water distribution lines                            X                X
Natural gas lines                                   X                X
Telephone lines                                     X                X
Electric lines                                      X                X
Plans for individual water supply and sewage        X                X
Profiles based upon mean sea level datum for                         X
sanitary sewers and storm sewers
Site calculation including:
Acreage in total tract to be subdivided             X                X
Acreage in parks and recreation areas and other     X                X
nonresidential uses
Total number of parcels created                     X                X
Acreage in the smallest lot in the subdivision      X                X
Linear feet in streets                              X                X
 
Information Preliminary Plat Final Plat
Information                                                         Preliminary Final
                                                                    Plat        Plat
Site calculations including:
The name and location of any property or buildings within the
proposed subdivision or within any contiguous property that is      X           X
located on the U.S. Department of Interior's National Register of
Historic Places
Sufficient engineering data to determine readily and reproduce on
the ground every straight or curved line, street line, lot line,
right-of-way line, easement line, and set back line, including
dimensions, bearings or deflection angles, radii, central angles                X
and tangent distance for the centerline of curved streets. All
dimensions shall be measured to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and
all angles to the nearest minute
The accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments, markers               X
and control points
A copy of the erosion control plan shall be submitted to the        X           X
appropriate authority, if such a plan is required
Where streets are dedicated to the public but not accepted into the
town or state system before lots are sold, a statement explaining               X
the status of the street in accordance with § 152.51(J)
Certificates of approval, ownership and dedication, survey and
accuracy, and Division of Highway's district engineer (if                       X
applicable)
 
(Ord. passed 9-8-83; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
CHAPTER 153: ZONING
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Authority; purpose
   
153.002   Definitions
   
153.003   Jurisdiction
   
153.004   Compliance required
   
153.005   Conflicts of interest
Zoning Districts; Boundaries
   
153.015   Classes and purposes of districts
   
153.016   District boundaries; zoning map
Permitted Uses and Special Conditions
   
153.025   Table of permitted uses
   
153.026   Application of special conditions to designated special uses
according to numerical codes
   
153.027   Accessory structures (1)
   
153.028   Mobile home park (2)
   
153.029   Multi-family residential (3)
   
153.030   Home business (4)
   
153.031   Storage of flammable and combustible liquid (5)
   
153.032   Governmental services requiring structures and public utility
stations; transmission (6)
   
153.033   Conservation (7)
   
153.034   Real estate services sales/management office as part of a major
development (8)
   
153.035   Tennis courts (9)
   
153.036   Club houses (10)
   
153.037   Storage facilities (11)
   
153.038   Swimming pool (12)
   
153.039   Model home (13)
   
153.040   Placement of modular homes; requirements (14)
Nonconforming Uses
   
153.050   Purpose; intent
   
153.051   Nonconforming lots
   
153.052   Nonconforming uses
   
153.053   Nonconforming structures
   
153.054   Repairs and maintenance
   
153.055   Nonconforming signs
   
153.056   Nonconformances created by changes in zoning boundaries or
regulations
   
153.057   Fences
Open Space, Lot, and Structure Requirements
   
153.080   Encroaching upon open space and build-to-line prohibited
   
153.081   One principal building per lot
   
153.082   Locations of building lines on irregularly-shaped lots
   
153.083   Continuation of nonconformance
   
153.084   Schedule of area, height and setback requirements
   
153.085   Airport height control ordinance adopted
   
153.086   Schedule of maximum built-upon area and bulk size
   
153.087   Build-to-line
Off-Street Parking
   
153.095   Required area for each parking space
   
153.096   Drainage, construction and maintenance
   
153.097   Parking stalls and interior driveways
   
153.098   Minimum number of spaces
Signs and Billboards
   
153.110   Purpose; intent
   
153.111   Compliance with chapter and regulatory codes required
   
153.112   Signs not to constitute traffic hazards
   
153.113   Signs on utility poles, trees and the like prohibited
   
153.114   Maintenance of signs
   
153.115   Illumination
   
153.116   Nonconforming signs
   
153.117   Exempted signs
   
153.118   Permit; application procedure
   
153.119   Signs not requiring permit; setback requirements
   
153.120   Signs requiring permit
   
153.121   Principal use signs
   
153.122   Outdoor advertising signs (billboards)
   
153.123   Notice of violation
Statutory Vested Right
   
153.135   Purpose
   
153.136   Definitions
   
153.137   Establishment of zoning vested right
   
153.138   Approval procedure and approval authority
   
153.139   Duration
   
153.140   Termination
   
153.141   Voluntary annexations
   
153.142   Limitations
   
153.143   Permit choice
Board of Adjustment
   
153.155   Board to be governed by state law and zoning code
   
153.156   Composition of Board
   
153.157   Alternate members
   
153.158   Rules of conduct
   
153.159   Meetings
   
153.160   Appeals; hearings; request for special use permit and variance;
decisions
   
153.161   Amendments
Administration and Enforcement
   
153.170   Zoning Administrator to enforce and administer
   
153.171   Building permit; application
   
153.172   Certificate of occupancy
   
153.173   Remedies
   
153.174   Amendment procedure
   
153.175   Conflicting regulations
   
153.176   Permit revocation
Cross reference:
   Planned developments, see §§
152.39 through
152.43
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 AUTHORITY; PURPOSE.
   Pursuant to the authority conferred by G.S. Chapter 160A, and for the
purposes of lessening congestion in the streets; to secure safety from fire,
panic, and other dangers; to promote health and the general welfare; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue
concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provisions of
transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements,
to control development/redevelopment taking into account design parameters of
the town sewer system, ensuring that sewer system design capacity is not
exceeded, to preserve and protect the environment, and to maintain the unique
residential character of the town, in accordance with the town’s CAMA Land Use
Plan and Strategic Plan, the Town Board of Commissioners does ordain and enact
into law the following subchapters and sections.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 2013-08-O, passed 5-9-13;
Am. Ord. 2014-001-O, passed 4-10-14)
§ 153.002 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. A subordinate building or portion of the main building,
the use of which is purely incidental to that of the main building.
   ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION. A decision made in the implementation,
administration, or enforcement of development regulations that involve the
determination of facts and the application of objective standards set forth in
this chapter.
   ALLEY. A public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access
to abutting property.
   BASEMENT. A story partly underground but having at least one-half of its
height above the average level of the adjoining ground. A BASEMENT shall be
counted as a story for the purpose of height measurements if the vertical
distance between the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground is
more than five feet, or if used for business purposes, or if used for dwelling
purposes by other than a servant of his family.
   BEACH CLUBS (PRIVATE COMMUNITY CENTERS). Non-residential, public or private
structures that exist to provide club facilities and access to public beach
areas and to the Atlantic Ocean. Beach clubs are limited as a use in Caswell
Beach subject to provisions set forth in §
153.015(I). Beach clubs shall be limited as set forth herein.
      (1)    The use and development of private beach clubs or public community
centers in areas that are zoned for Residential (R), Conservation, Commercial
Recreation District (CR), and Non-Commercial Recreation District (NCR) are
prohibited.
      (2)   A prohibited club:
         (a)   Is not principally intended to be a structure for use as a
residential dwelling unit;
         (b)   Is principally utilized by non-occupants of the structure;
         (c)   Typically is not occupied by owner or long-term renter;
         (d)   Typically is not occupied overnight, but might be in a hybrid
arrangement. A residential rental, providing few rooms for overnight guests;
         (e)   Typically has a large number of day guests;
         (f)   Typically has a large number of day guests in proportion to the
number of overnight guests who may occupy the structure;
         (g)   The volume of day guests typically (contrasted with
occasionally), during active seasonal periods, requires parking for more than
six vehicles; and
         (h)   Requires parking by transient invitees on a regular basis in
excess of that needed for residents who might be occupying the structure.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the rebuilding or
refurbishing of existing clubhouses in the Arboretum, Caswell Dunes, Ocean
Greens, or the Oak Island Golf Course. Nothing herein shall be construed to
prohibit the building of a clubhouse as part of a new or existing planned unit
development that is totally within the limits of the town and is specifically
designed for exclusive use by planned unit development residential occupants
and their guests.
   BUILDING. Includes the word structure.
   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF. The vertical distance of buildings as measured from the
mean of the finished grade along the front of the building to the midpoint
between eaves and ridges or the highest point of any architectural design
element (to include belfries, cupolas, widow walks, observation decks,
steeples, etc.) extending above the ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs, or
to the highest point of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof. The
vertical distance shall not exceed the higher of:
      (1)   Twenty-six feet above the regulatory flood protection elevation; or
      (2)   Thirty-five feet above the mean elevation. See §
153.029.
   BUILT-UPON AREA. That portion of a development project that is covered by
impervious or partially impervious surface including, but not limited to,
buildings; pavement and gravel areas such as roads, parking lots, and paths;
and recreation facilities such as tennis courts. BUILT-UPON AREA does not
include a wooden slatted deck, the water area of a swimming pool, or pervious
or partially pervious paving material to the extent that the paving material
absorbs water or allows water to infiltrate through the paving material.
   BULK SIZE. The total heated/air conditioned square feet of space in a
residential structure.
   CELLAR. A story having more than one-half of its height below the average
level of the adjoining grounds. A CELLAR shall not be counted as a story for
the purposes of height measurements.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any land-disturbing activity that increases the amount of
built-upon area or that otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation
into the soil.
   DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL. An administrative or quasi-judicial approval made
pursuant to this chapter that is written and that is required prior to
commencing development or undertaking a specific activity, project, or
development proposal. Development approvals include, but are not limited to,
zoning permits, site plan approvals, special use permits, and variances. The
term also includes all other regulatory approvals required by regulations
adopted pursuant to this chapter, including plat approvals, permits issued,
development agreements entered into, and building permits issued.
   DEVELOPMENT REGULATION. A zoning regulation, subdivision regulation, erosion
and sedimentation control regulation, flood damage prevention regulation,
stormwater control regulation, wireless telecommunication facility regulation,
State Building Code enforcement, or any other regulation adopted pursuant to
this chapter. All such development regulations shall be adopted by ordinance in
accordance with G.S. § 160D-601.
   DRIVEWAY. A path for cars, leading from a street or road to a garage, house,
and the like.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE. A building or portions thereof used or designed as a
residence for two or more families living independently of each other and doing
their own cooking therein.
   DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY. A detached permanent building designed for or
occupied exclusively by one family. A detached permanent building including one
or more heated and/or air conditioned bedrooms, and/or one or more floors above
the ground flood and/or plumbing shall be  considered a single family dwelling
if it is located in a district zoned for single family. Only one single family
dwelling is permitted per lot in a district zoned for single family.
   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a premise and living as a single
housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding house,
lodging house, guest house, or hotel.
   GARAGE, PRIVATE. A garage used for storage purposes only and having a
capacity of not more than three automobiles or not more than one automobile per
family housed in the building to which such garage is accessory, whichever is
the greater.
   GUEST HOUSE. Any dwelling occupied by owner or operator in which rooms are
rented for guests and for lodging of transients for compensation.
   HOME, MANUFACTURED. A structural unit(s) designed and built to be towed on
its own chassis, axles and wheels, whether or not axles and/or wheels are
removable and/or intended for removal; therefore not requiring permanent
foundation due to the presence of chassis or other permanent steel frame,
excluding support for leveling and stability; and designed to be capable of
serving as a permanent residence, office, classroom, church hall, commercial,
or industrial facility. The term MANUFACTURED HOME shall include the term
MOBILE HOME. The term MANUFACTURED HOME shall not include the terms travel
trailers, motor homes, travel and/or motorized coaches, pick-up coaches,
camping trailers, recreational vehicles, pop-up campers, prefabricated and
modular structures and/or home.
      (1)   MANUFACTURED HOME (TYPE I). A single section manufactured home less
than 15 feet in width.
      (2)   MANUFACTURED HOME (TYPE II). A multi-section manufactured home
greater than or equal to 15 feet in width. Width for manufactured homes-type 2
shall be determined by mean width when all sections are in a final assembly
arrangement.
   HOME, MOBILE. A portable manufactured housing unit designed for
transportation on its own chassis and placement on a temporary or semi-
permanent foundation having a measurement of over 32 feet in length and over
eight feet in width.
   HOME, SECTIONAL. A dwelling made of two or more units factory fabricated and
transported to the house site where they are put on a foundation and joined to
make a single house.
   HOME BUSINESS. Any business for gain or support conducted only by members of
a family residing on the premises, provided that no special space is designed
or arranged for such business, and provided that no article is sold or offered
for sale except such as may be produced by members of the immediate family
residing on the premises. No business shall be permitted that requires parking
for individuals in excess of that needed for the immediate residents. Beauty
and hair stylists are expressly excluded from this definition. Piano and music
lessons may be permitted. See §
153.030.
   HOTEL and MOTEL. A building designed for occupancy for transients and having
16 or more rooms or suites of rooms for rent to such transients. Such hotel or
motel shall contain an on-site office for the purpose of renting rooms and such
other operational functions normal to a hotel or motel. Single rooms shall
contain no more than 500 square feet including one bathroom. Suites shall
consist of no more than two rooms not to exceed a total of 600 square feet with
one bathroom. Suites may consist of two or more units in combination; however,
when this is the case, each unit shall be counted separately for density and
parking requirements.
   LOT. A parcel of land occupied by one main building or use, with its
accessories and including the open spaces accessory to it. No area shall be
counted as accessory to more than one main building or use, and no area
necessary for compliance with the open space requirements for one main building
or use shall be included or counted in the calculation of the open space
accessory to any other main building or use. A LOT for purposes of this chapter
may be composed of one or more legally recorded LOTS or portions thereof, as
may be necessary in order to meet the requirements set forth herein. The term
LOT includes the word plot or parcel.
      (1)   LOT, CORNER. A lot or portion of a lot at the junction of and
abutting upon two or more streets.
      (2)   LOT, DEPTH OF. The mean horizontal distance between the front and
rear lot lines.
      (3)   LOT, INTERIOR. A lot other than a corner lot.
      (4)   LOT, LINES. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
      (5)   LOT, REVERSED CORNER. A corner lot which does not front on the same
street as the interior lots on the same side, as distinguished from the same
end of the block.
      (6)   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having frontage on two parallel or
approximately parallel streets.
   MAP, ZONING MAP, or CASWELL BEACH ZONING MAP. The official zoning map of the
town.
   MAXIMUM BUILT-UPON AREA. The built-upon area on a lot shall not exceed the
area determined by using the percentages in the table in §
153.086, Schedule of Maximum Built-upon Area and Bulk Size.
   MODULAR HOME, BUILDING OR STRUCTURE. A factory fabricated building comprised
of transportable module unit(s) designed to be incorporated at a building site
into a permanent structure for residential use; furthermore, said units shall
be only those having no integrated chassis, axle, wheels or other assemblies
for the purpose of transport by means of its own integrated components whether
or not a separate vehicle is required for towing or otherwise powering the unit
in transport; furthermore, the units shall be only those having no integrated
means of disassembly for the purpose of transport to a subsequent location for
re-use; furthermore, the units shall be only those bearing the official
identifying labels, badges, decals, seals and/or other legally mandated
insignia required of modular units sold in the State of North Carolina;
furthermore, the units shall be only those conforming to state and/or federal
requirements regarding design and/or construction; furthermore, the units shall
be only those sold new and manufactured by only those persons, corporations,
partnerships and/or firms licensed to sell new and/or manufacture modular
structures in the State of North Carolina; furthermore, the units shall be only
those requiring site-built permanent foundations as required by the building
code adopted by the Town of Caswell Beach, North Carolina. The term MODULAR
HOME, BUILDING or STRUCTURE shall not include the term MOBILE HOME or
MANUFACTURED HOME. The term MODULAR HOME, BUILDING or STRUCTURE, shall include
the terms PRE-FABRICATED HOME, BUILDING or STRUCTURE.
   NON-CONFORMING, USE. A building or land occupied by a use that does not
conform with the use regulations of the district in which it is situated.
   PERSON. A firm, association, organization, partnership, corporation, trust
and company as well as an individual.
   QUASI-JUDICIAL DECISION. A decision involving the finding of facts regarding
a specific application of a development regulation and that requires the
exercise of discretion when applying the standards of the regulation. The term
includes, but is not limited to, decisions involving variances, special use
permits, and appeals of administrative determinations.
   QUASI-JUDICIAL HEARING. An evidentiary hearing to gather competent,
material, and substantial evidence in order to make findings for a quasi-
judicial decision required by a development regulation adopted under this
chapter.
   SIGNS. Any form of visual publicity, visible from any public highway,
directing attention to an individual activity, business, service, commodity or
product and conveyed by means of words, figures, numerals, lettering, emblems,
devices, designs, trademarks or trade names or other pictorial matter designed
to convey such information and displayed by means of bills, panels, posters,
paints, or other devices erected on an open framework, or attached or otherwise
applied to posts, stakes, poles, trees, buildings or other structures or
supports.
   STORY. That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above, the
space between such floor and the ceiling next above it.
   STORY, ATTIC. Any story situated wholly or partly in the roof, so
designated, arranged or built as to be used for storage or habitation. If an
attic has seven foot clear height for greater than 50% of the width of the
floor below, then the space shall be considered as a story when determining
building height.
   STREET. A public or private thoroughfare which affords the principal means
of access to abutting properties.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or created, the use of which requires more
or less permanent location on the ground, or attached to something having more
or less permanent location on the ground, provided, however, that fences shall
be governed by the regulations established in §
153.057.
   THOROUGHFARE. A street or passage through which one can travel excluding
driveways.
   USED or OCCUPIED as applied to any land or building shall be construed to
include the words intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied.
   YARD, FRONT. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building,
extending the full width of the lot situated between the front line of the lot
and the front line of the building projected to the side of the lot. The depth
of the FRONT YARD shall be measured between the front line of the building and
the front line of the lot. Covered porches, whether enclosed or unenclosed,
shall be considered as a part of the main building and shall not project into
the required unoccupied space. A FRONT YARD of water front property for
purposes of this chapter shall be considered as that part of property facing
the first public street parallel to the water front.
   YARD, SIDE. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a main building,
situated between the SIDE LINE of the building and the adjacent SIDE LINE of
the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of
the rear yard. If there be no front yard, the front boundary of the SIDE YARD
shall be the front line of the lot and if there be no rear yard, the rear
boundary of the SIDE YARD shall be the rear line of the lot.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-10-97; Am. Res. passed 12-13- 07; Am.
Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Res. passed 11-8-12; Am. Ord. 2013- 08-O, passed 5-9-
13; Am. Ord. 2014-008-O, passed 11-13-14; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.003 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall apply to all territory within the corporate limits of the
town.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 153.004 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   No building shall be erected, reconstructed, or structurally altered nor
shall any building or land be used, except in compliance with all the
regulations established by this chapter for the district in which the building
or land is located.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Ord. passed 10-13-94; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.005 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   (A)   Board of Commissioners. A Board member shall not vote on any
legislative decision regarding a development regulation adopted pursuant to
this chapter where the outcome of the matter being considered is reasonably
likely to have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact
on the member. A Board member shall not vote on any zoning amendment if the
landowner of the property subject to a rezoning petition or the applicant for a
text amendment is a person with whom the member has a close familial, business,
or other associational relationship.
   (B)   Appointed boards. Members of appointed boards shall not vote on any
advisory or legislative decision regarding a development regulation adopted
pursuant to this chapter where the outcome of the matter being considered is
reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable
financial impact on the member. An appointed board member shall not vote on any
zoning amendment if the landowner of the property subject to a rezoning
petition or the applicant for a text amendment is a person with whom the member
has a close familial, business, or other associational relationship.
   (C)   Administrative staff. No staff member shall make a final decision on
an administrative decision required by this chapter if the outcome of that
decision would have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial
impact on the staff member or if the applicant or other person subject to that
decision is a person with whom the staff member has a close familial, business,
or other associational relationship. If a staff member has a conflict of
interest under this section, the decision shall be assigned to the supervisor
of the staff person. No staff member shall be financially interested or
employed by a business that is financially interested in a development subject
to regulation under this chapter unless the staff member is the owner of the
land or building involved. No staff member or other individual or an employee
of a company contracting with the town to provide staff support shall engage in
any work that is inconsistent with his or her duties or with the interest of
the town, as determined by the Board of Commissioners.
   (D)   Quasi-judicial decisions. A member of any board exercising quasi-
judicial functions pursuant to this chapter shall not participate in or vote on
any quasi-judicial matter in a manner that would violate affected persons'
constitutional rights to an impartial decision maker. Impermissible violations
of due process include, but are not limited to, a member having a fixed opinion
prior to hearing the matter that is not susceptible to change, undisclosed ex
parte communications, a close familial, business, or other associational
relationship with an affected person, or a financial interest in the outcome of
the matter.
   (E)   Resolution of objection. If an objection is raised to a board member's
participation at or prior to the hearing or vote on a particular matter and
that member does not recuse himself or herself, the remaining members of the
board shall by majority vote rule on the objection.
   (F)   Familial relationship. For purposes of this section, a "close familial
relationship" means a spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, or
grandchild. The term includes the step, half, and in-law relationships.
(Ord. passed - -)
ZONING DISTRICTS; BOUNDARIES
§ 153.015 CLASSES AND PURPOSES OF DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Single-family residential district (R-20SF). This district is intended
for single-family housing at a specific density; such as 20,000 square feet per
residence. The regulations are designed to maintain a suitable environment for
family living.
   (B)   Single-family residential districts (R-20, R-12, R-8). These districts
are intended primarily for single-family houses at various densities of
population. Certain non-residential uses of public or semi-public nature are
permitted. The regulations for these districts are designed to maintain a
suitable environment for family living. Densities of development are controlled
by minimum lot area requirements, which are different with each district. The
minimum lot area requirements, in thousands of square feet, is indicated by the
numerical identification of each district.
   (C)   Multi-family residential district (R-20MF). The purpose of the R-20MF
multi-family district is to provide for low density apartment development in
areas which would be unsuited for multi-family use on a higher density. By
having high dimensional standards and requiring site plan approval, maximum
control of development can be achieved through this district.
   (D)   R-MH Mobile homes district. The purpose of this district is to provide
for the development of properly located and planned facilities for mobile
homes. It is recognized that mobile homes should be located in mobile home
parks and subdivisions only and that such areas must be carefully located and
designed to meet the needs of the residents and to achieve a satisfactory
relationship to adjoining and nearby property.
   (E)   Resort residential condominium district. This district is designed
primarily as a district for resort-style condominiums serving visitors and
tourists, composed of multi-family dwellings, parking and accessory uses such
as sales and rental offices and recreation amenities.
   (F)   Business district. Reserved.
   (G)   Conservation. This district is intended to preserve and protect
fragile estuarine cosystem from adverse affects created by incompatible uses.
   (H)   Commercial recreation district (CR).
      (1)   This district is established to maintain and protect the existing
golf course and related uses. The principal use of the land is for recreational
pursuits which are in keeping with the town's low density single-family
residential development. It is also the intent to limit the uses to those that
presently exist.
         (a)   Golf course;
         (b)   Golf club house and pro shop;
         (c)   Swimming pool;
         (d)   Tennis courts;
         (e)   Accessory buildings for golf course maintenance;
         (f)   Restaurants with lounge.
      (2)   Any new uses (not listed in subdivision (H)(1)) will require the
zoning amendment procedure.
   (I)   Non-commercial recreation district (NCR).  The purpose of this
district is to provide and maintain public access to the designated park land
and the beach.
      (1)   It is the intent of this section to limit the use to those that
presently exist:
         (a)   Education;
         (b)   Preservation and maintenance, including historic preservation;
         (c)   Beach access;
         (d)   Parking;
         (e)   Fund raising in support of the above uses, including the sale of
souvenir items.
      (2)   Any new uses not listed in subdivision (I)(1) shall require
amendment of this section.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 11-12-98; Am. Res. passed 1-8-04; Am. Res.
passed 1-8-04; Am. Ord. passed 1-13-05; Am. Res. passed 2-14-08; Am. Res.
passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 2014-003-O, passed 6-12-14; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.016 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES; ZONING MAP.
   The boundaries of each zoning district are established as shown on the map
titled “The Town of Caswell Beach Zoning Map” which accompanies and is hereby
declared to be a part of this chapter. Unless otherwise shown on the map, the
boundaries of the districts are street centerlines or lot lines as they existed
at the time of the establishment of the boundary in question. Where uncertainty
exists as to the boundaries of any district shown on the map, the following
rules shall apply:
   (A)   Where a district boundary appears to divide a lot, the location of
such boundary, unless the boundary is indicated by dimensions, shall be
determined by the use of the scale appearing on the map. In the event that a
district boundary line on the zoning map divides a platted lot held in one
ownership on the date of passage of this chapter, each part of the lot so
divided shall be used in conformity with the zoning district in which the part
is located.
   (B)   Regardless of the existence of copies of the official zoning map which
may from time to time be published, the official zoning map shall be the final
authority as to the current zoning status of land, buildings or other
structures within the corporate limits of the town. The official zoning map
shall be kept in the office of the Town Clerk and made available to the public
in read only format. All amendments to said map shall be entered onto the
official map with date and reference along with certification by the Town Clerk
under his or her seal. The zoning map, both current and prior adopted versions,
shall be on file in the office of the Town Clerk. The zoning map(s) may be in
paper or digital format.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
PERMITTED USES AND SPECIAL CONDITIONS
§ 153.025 TABLE OF PERMITTED USES.
   Note: Uses expressed are not all inclusive, but are general. Uses requested
that are not expressed in the table should be categorized under an expressed
use that most closely matches what is being.
   To determine the zoning district in which a particular use is permitted:
   (A)   Find the use in the left column;
   (B)   Read across the chart until either a number or “x” appears in one of
the columns;
   (C)   If a number appears, the use must be approved in accordance with the
special use permit process in the zone represented by that column, but only if
special conditions are met (see §§
153.027 through
153.040 for special conditions). Accessory uses and structures and in-ground
swimming pools are permitted by right subject to the conditions provided, a
special use permit is not required.
   (D)   If “x” appears in the column, the use is permitted in the zone
represented by that column without being subject to any of the special
conditions listed.
   (E)   A blank space means that the use is not permitted in the zone
represented by the column.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
   (F)   Table of permitted uses.
Use R-20MF R-20SF R-20 R-12 R-8 CR Conservation NCR RRCD
Use                        R-20MF R-20SF R-20 R-12 R-8 CR Conservation NCR RRCD
Accessory uses and         1      1      1    1    1   x  7            1   1
structures
Single-family dwelling     x      x      x    x    x                       x
Two-family dwelling               x
(duplex)
Mobile home on single lot
Mobile home park                         2
Condominiums               x                                               x
Multi-family apartments    x             3
(more than two families)
Churches                                 x    x    x
Beach clubs
(prohibited in all
districts)
Home business              4      4      4    4    4                       4
Flammable and combustible  5      5      5    5    5      5                5
liquids storage
Parks leisure and          x      x      x    x    x      7            1
ornamental
Golf course                       x                    x
Utilities                                6    6    6      7                6
Eating places                                          x
Real estate services       8      8                                        8
Governmental services not  x      x      x    x    x   x  x            x   x
involving a structure
Governmental services                    x    x    x                       x
requiring structures
Hotels, tourist courts,
motels
Medical and other health
services
Public parking facility                                                1   x
Storage facility           11     11     11   11   11                      11
In-ground swimming pool    12     12     12   12   12                      12
Model home                 13     13                                       13
Education                                                              1
Passive recreation                                                     1
Fund raising in support of                                             1
permitted uses
 
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Ord. passed 10-13-94; Am. Res. passed 1-8- 04; Am.
Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 2014-003-O, passed 6-12-14; Am. Ord. passed - -;
Am. Ord. passed 5-9-24)
§ 153.026 APPLICATION OF SPECIAL CONDITIONS TO DESIGNATED SPECIAL USES
ACCORDING TO NUMERICAL CODES.
   (A)   Conditions shall be mutually agreed upon between the BOC and the
applicant, consented to in writing, and shall be limited to standards that are
site specific, that will ensure conformance with relevant codes and adopted
land use plans for the town, and that will address the impacts reasonably
expected to be generated by the development and use of the site. Reasonable and
appropriate conditions and safeguards may be imposed upon these permits. Where
appropriate, such conditions may include requirements that street and utility
rights-of-way be dedicated to the public and that provision be made for
recreational space and facilities. Conditions and safeguards imposed under this
division shall not include requirements for which the town does not have
authority under statute to regulate nor requirements for which the courts have
held to be unenforceable if imposed directly by the town, including, without
limitation, taxes, impact fees, building design elements within the scope of
G.S. § 160D-702(b), driveway-related improvements in excess of those allowed in
G.S. § 136-18(29) and G.S. § 160A-307, or other unauthorized limitations on the
development or use of land. Special use approval shall be the responsibility of
the town BOC following a quasi-judicial hearing, consideration of the facts
surrounding the request, and their determination by majority vote as to the
reasonableness and consistency of the proposal to the town’s adopted land use
planning documents. The BOC shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the
request for a special use permit. In reviewing a request for a special use
permit, the BOC, with due consideration of adjacent properties and uses in the
affected district, shall make findings of fact that the following requirements
are fulfilled:
      (1)   The use requested is listed among the special uses in the district
for which application is made; or is similar in character to those listed in
that district;
      (2)   The special use will not impair the integrity or character of the
surrounding or adjoining districts, nor adversely affect the safety, health, or
welfare of the community or of the immediate neighbors of the property; and
      (3)   The requested special use will be in conformity with the approved
land use plan;
      (4)   Adequate utilities, roads, driveways, parking, stormwater control,
sanitation, and other necessary facilities have been or are being provided;
      (5)   That the use will not endanger the public health or safety if
located where proposed and developed according to the plan as submitted;
      (6)   That the use will not substantially injure the value of adjoining
or abutting property;
      (7)   That the location and character of the use, if developed according
to the plan submitted and approved, with be in harmony with the area in which
it is to be located; and
      (8)   Whether additional limitations or restrictions are necessary in
order to protect properties. Said restrictions may include: setback
limitations, fencing and screening of structures, height restrictions,
continued maintenance of the structure, restrictions on signage, and aesthetic
considerations.
   (B)   Larger developments may be approved with conditions permitting multi-
phase construction, but development in these phases shall be limited to the
plans and specifications presented and approved at the time of the original
submission. All subsequent amendments or changes shall require full approval
process like a new project or subdivision.
   (C)   The special conditions that follow in §§
153.027 through
153.040 of this subchapter, shall be met by the designated uses listed in the
permitted use table set forth in §
153.025 of this subchapter according to the numerical codes provided in
parentheses within the following section headings.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.027 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES (1).
   Accessory structures must meet the same minimum setback requirements as
principle structures and must be located street-ward of the build-to-line on
all properties immediately adjacent to the ocean or marsh as provided in §
153.087. A special use permit is not required for an accessory structure or
use, unless otherwise specified by this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord.
passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.028 MOBILE HOME PARK (2).
   (A)   An application for R-MH mobile home district must be submitted
accompanied by a schematic plan and supplementary text showing the following:
      (1)   Name of mobile home park or subdivision; names and addresses of
owners and designer.
      (2)   Date, north arrow and scale.
      (3)   Property boundary and area.
      (4)   Topography at four foot contour intervals (existing and primary
proposed).
      (5)   Adjacent streets.
      (6)   All proposed land uses.
      (7)   Proposed buildings (Show outline and number of floors).
      (8)   Proposed mobile home lots or space.
      (9)   Proposed streets and private drives, parking areas and the total
number of parking spaces to be provided.
      (10)   Recreation areas and other areas.
      (11)   Where water supply or sewage disposal system will be other than by
connection to public facilities, the petitioner shall secure and submit a
statement from the County Health Department that the proposed systems will meet
the needs for the population contemplated.
   (B)   Lot requirements for mobile home subdivisions in the R-MH District
shall be in accordance with the requirements for the R-20 District.
   (C)   Development requirements for mobile home parks within the R-MH
District shall be as specified below.
      (1)   The minimum area of any site to be developed as a mobile home park
shall be five acres, including rights-of-way and utility easements.
      (2)   There shall be no less than ten mobile home spaces available at
first occupancy.
      (3)   A mobile home park shall abut a publicly dedicated street for a
minimum distance of 60 feet.
      (4)   The minimum setback from a public street shall be 40 feet. There
shall be no parking permitted within the required setback.
      (5)   All buildings, structures, and mobile home stands shall be located
at least 30 feet from any exterior property line not a street right-of-way
line.
      (6)   A mobile home park shall be equipped with private drives paved to a
width of at least 20 feet, measured from edge of pavement to edge of pavement,
and graded to a width of at least 30 feet for two-way traffic, and paved to a
width of ten feet and graded to a width of 20 feet for one-way traffic.
      (7)   The mobile home park shall be designed and graded in such a manner
as to allow for the adequate runoff of storm water. Storm drains shall be
provided with sufficient inlets located at points of surface water accumulation
to adequately intersect surface flow.
      (8)   A mobile home park shall be equipped with electricity, water and
sanitary waste disposal facilities to the extent that convenient, safe and
sanitary connections may be made with each mobile home in the park, in
accordance with existing statutes and local ordinances.
      (9)   Screening shall be utilized on all sides of a mobile home park.
Consideration shall be given to topography, large trees, vegetation, site
design and land uses in the evaluation of the extent of required screening.
Whenever screening is required, either a durable masonry wall, fence or berm,
natural planting and landscaping, designed to be compatible with the character
of adjoining properties shall be provided. Walls and fences shall be at least
five feet in height but not greater than six feet in height, measured from the
ground along the common lot line of adjoining properties. Hedges or comparable
natural plantings shall be planted at an initial height of at least three feet
and shall be of such variety that an average height of at least six feet could
be expected within no later than two years from the time of planting.
      (10)   Recreation areas shall be provided to meet the anticipated needs
of the residents of the mobile home park. Provision of separate adult and tot
lot recreation areas is encouraged. Not less than 8% of the gross site area
shall be devoted to recreational uses. Recreation area includes space for
community buildings and community use facilities, adult and child play areas,
swimming pools, and drying yards. The design of recreation areas shall be
appropriate for the intended use and location of the activity.
      (11)   Site planning and improvements shall provide for the following:
         (a)   Site planning should adapt to individual site conditions. An
informal park type of site planning which conforms to terrain, existing trees
and shrubs is preferred. The mobile home space should be fitted to the terrain
with a minimum of disturbance of the land. Existing trees and other natural
site features shall be preserved to the extent practical. Variations in the
street pattern, block shapes and location of mobile home stands should be
employed. Excessive repetition of the principal elements of the plan is not
acceptable.
         (b)   Adequate protection shall be provided against any undesirable
off-site views or any adverse influence from adjoining streets and areas, and
protection of off-site residential areas from undesirable views and adverse
influences from areas within the park. Consideration shall be given to the
location and arrangement of mobile homes and of buildings, recreation and
parking areas, the nature and extent of screening, setbacks, street design, and
open space in the evaluation of the site plan and its relation to surrounding
areas.
   (D)   In approving an application for R-MH mobile home district, the Town
Board shall find:
      (1)   That the proposed site and development plan provide for adequate
access to the public street system without causing undue congestion or placing
excessive traffic loads and local streets.
      (2)   That the size and shape of the site is adaptable to good mobile
home park design and that development of the site for mobile home uses will not
unduly obstruct development of adjoining property.
      (3)   That implementation of the development plan will not disrupt unduly
any natural features of the site such as topography, streams or tree cover.
      (4)   That the development plan provides effective screening of the park
from adjoining single- family residential areas so as to minimize adverse
effects on these areas.
   (E)   Site development within the R-MH District shall conform to the
schematic plan and associated requirements approved by the Town Board.
Modification of the development plan and associated requirements may be made by
the Town Board subsequent to their initial approval upon application thereof by
the owner of property.
   (F)   Following Town Board approval of an R-MH mobile home district, the
property for which approval was granted shall be labeled R-MH on the official
zoning map.
   (G)   If development in the R-MH District is not started within one year of
the date of approval, the Town Board may consider rezoning the site to its
previous classification.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.029 MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (3).
   (A)   An application for multi-family uses shall be accompanied by schematic
plans showing:
      (1)   Proposed locations of buildings and their general exterior
dimensions.
      (2)   Proposed use of all land within the area requested for rezoning.
      (3)   Dimensions between all buildings and from buildings to property
lines.
      (4)   Traffic, parking and circulation plan, showing proposed locations
and arrangement of parking spaces and ingress and egress to and from adjacent
streets.
      (5)   Proposed location and material of any screening walls, fences or
plantings.
      (6)   Proposed exterior design of buildings.
      (7)   Schedule of number and size of apartments within the project.
      (8)   Proposed time schedule and staging, if any, for construction of the
project.
   (B)   Development requirements within the R-20MF multi-family district shall
be as specified in the following subsections:
      (1)   The minimum area requirement shall be 20,000 square feet for the
first dwelling unit in the project and 5,000 square feet for each additional
dwelling unit. (See §
152.42(K))
      (2)   The minimum setback from street, and minimum side and rear yards
shall be 40 feet.
      (3)   The minimum unobstructed open space shall be 70% of total lot area.
      (4)   The maximum height of structures shall not exceed the higher of:
         (a)   Twenty-six feet above the regulatory flood protection elevation;
or
         (b)   Thirty-five feet above the mean elevation.
      (5)   Every building shall be separated on every side, from any other
building within the building group by a distance of at least 25 feet.
      (6)   Parking of motor vehicles shall not be permitted within the
required setback.
   (C)   In approving an application for R-20MF multi-family districts, the
Town Board shall find that the proposed development will be compatible with
general neighborhood development plans, will not place excessive traffic load
on local streets and that the site can be developed according to a site plan
that will minimize adverse effects on any adjacent single-family residential
areas.
   (D)   Site development within the R-20MF multi-family district shall conform
to the schematic plan and associated requirements approved by the Town Board.
Modification of the development plan and associated requirements may be made by
the Town Board subsequent to their initial approval upon application thereof by
the owner of the property.
   (E)   Following Town Board approval of an R-20MF multi-family district, the
property for which approval was granted shall be labeled “R-20MF M.D.” on the
official zoning map.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 12-13-07; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.030 HOME BUSINESS (4).
   (A)   The use shall be clearly incidental to the residential use of the
dwelling and shall not change the essential residential character of the
dwelling.
   (B)   Use of the dwelling for the home business shall be limited to 25% of
one floor of the principal building. No special space may be designed or
arranged for the business.
   (C)   No one other than a resident of the premises shall be employed in
connection with the home business.
   (D)   No display of products shall be visible from the street.
   (E)   A home business may not be conducted if it requires parking by
transient clients or invitees on a regular basis in excess of that needed for
residents.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.031 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUID (5).
   Overground storage of any flammable or combustible liquid in excess of 500
gallons is not permitted in any zoning district. The permitted storage may only
be used for heating purposes.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.032 GOVERNMENTAL SERVICES REQUIRING STRUCTURES AND PUBLIC UTILITY
STATIONS; TRANSMISSION (6).
   (A)   Governmental services requiring structures shall be subject to strict
architectural review to ensure compatibility to adjacent properties and the
district they are in. All such structures shall only be permitted as special
uses as set forth in §
153.026 unless use is permitted in the table in §
153.025.
   (B)   Public utility stations or substations shall be permitted only if the
use is surrounded by suitable fencing to protect the public. Utility
transmitting or relay stations or towers are permitted provided that no such
station or tower shall be permitted on a site less than one acre in area and
that no site shall have a horizontal dimension less than twice the height of
the tower. In addition, no radio or other transmission tower which would cause
interference to local radio or television reception, or which would endanger
the public or neighboring property, shall be permitted. In residential
districts, all buildings shall be in character with surrounding residences.
Minor structures, such as hydrants, telephone or light poles, pole transmitters
or transformers, or similar equipment, shall not be subject to these
regulations.
   (C)   Public utility transmission lines shall be permitted only if a right-
of-way of sufficient width shall permit the safe construction and maintenance
of the line and prevent any hazard to surrounding property. On a one or two
circuit transmission line, the distance from the tower base to the nearest
boundary of the transmissions line right-of-way shall be no less than 25 feet.
On a three or four circuit transmission line, the distance shall be no less
than 50 feet. The Town Board may require suitable fencing or landscaping of a
tower base when in the opinion of the Board it is necessary to protect the
public or conserve the values of the surrounding property. Telephone, electric
light and power lines carrying less than 33,000 volts and usually located along
public highways, or to local underground conduits, cables, gas, sewer and water
mains or pipes are not subject to these special conditions.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 2014-003-O, passed 6-12-
14; Am. Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.033 CONSERVATION (7).
   The uses set forth in the permitted use table and marked with numerical code
7 are permitted provided the proposed development meets all applicable federal,
state and local laws, such as:
   (A)   Sand Dunes Protection Ordinance.
   (B)   Implementation and Enforcement Plan.
   (C)   Flood Plain Ordinance.
   (D)   
Chapter 98: Protection and Maintenance of Areas Zone Conservation.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.034 REAL ESTATE SERVICES SALES/MANAGEMENT OFFICE AS PART OF A MAJOR
DEVELOPMENT (8).
   (A)   The building that will house the sales/management office must be
located on the parcel of land indicated in the master plan, and its location
must be shown in the master plan. The developer/owner desiring the use of a
sales/management office must own property of no less than 20 acres in order to
qualify for an office of this nature. Only one building for this use will be
permitted in each development.
   (B)   The lot upon which the sales/management office is located shall be
landscaped to conform to the general landscaping of the total development, and
plantings of sufficient height and density shall be provided along any abutting
residential properties to provide visual screening.
   (C)   Property may not be used for the closing of any real estate
transactions.
   (D)   Any sales/management office related to construction or development
cannot remain after technical improvements are complete and after sale and
recording of 80% of the property shown on the recorded Planned Unit Development
(PUD) or Subdivision Plat. In any event, no sales/management office may remain
more than 18 months from the recordation of the original subdivision plat,
provided, however, that a request for continuing the use may be submitted to
the Town Board for extensions.
   (E)   All structures must comply with the town's zoning ordinance as they
affect set back requirements.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.035 TENNIS COURTS (9).
   (A)   Must be set back 20 feet from all roads and adjoining property lines.
   (B)   Must be enclosed by a fence.
   (C)   All lights must be screened so as to avoid glare into adjoining
properties.
   (D)   The courts should have a buffer of appropriate shrubbery planted
around them so as to mask the fencing.
   (E)   If not located on a private lot, must be located on a parcel of land
established in the master plan of the subdivision or planned unit development
for leisure and/or park and recreational use.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.036 CLUB HOUSES (10).
   (A)   Permitted only as specified in §
153.015 in conjunction with an in-town HOA/POA.
   (B)   Beach clubs as defined by this chapter are prohibited in all
districts.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.037 STORAGE FACILITIES (11).
   (A)   For construction requiring a permit and resulting in a certificate of
occupancy, storage facilities, including portable on demand storage (PODS),
shipping containers, or similar facilities for the storage of equipment,
supplies, and materials may temporarily be located on property that is owned by
the individual or corporation seeking permission to use same. The owner shall
secure a permit from the Zoning Administrator prior to placing a trailer on
their property. The permit shall not allow the facility to remain in excess of
six months. Once the certificate of occupancy is issued, the facility must be
removed within two weeks. Permission can be given to extend the duration of use
for a period of six months subject to review and approval by the Zoning
Administrator.
   (B)   For renovations, storm damage repairs, or other short term
construction not resulting in a certificate of occupancy: temporary storage
units including PODS, shipping containers or similar facilities are permitted
for up to 90 days with extensions granted for cause by the Zoning
Administrator.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.038 SWIMMING POOL (12).
   (A)   Must comply with zoning set back requirements for structures.
   (B)   If located in a planned unit development, the pool must be placed on
property designated for leisure or parks and recreation.
   (C)   Must be surrounded by a security fence that can provide a secured
enclosure of at least four feet in height, or such height as is required by NC
Building Code, whichever is greater. On properties adjacent to the ocean or
marsh, pool security fences shall be either clear, colorless, transparent glass
type construction or picket or baluster type construction. Pickets or balusters
shall be sized and spaced to provide a minimum of 50% transparency measured
between the vertical supports or pilings. Lattice style fences are not
permitted.
   (D)   To minimize disruption to the dunes and destruction of the natural
vegetation of the dunes, pools on ocean front properties including all related
surrounding structure shall be located so as not to extend beyond a line 40
feet seaward of the principal structure.
   (E)   All swimming pools proposed within a VE special flood hazard zone
shall be subject to the requirements of §
151.46.
   (F)   Pools must be located in the rear yard.
   (G)   Pools must be in-ground. Pool and related deck must not extend more
than six inches above surrounding ground surface.
   (H)   Swimming pools are not permitted in front or side yards.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Ord. passed 10-13-94; Am. Res. passed 4-8- 10; Am.
Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. passed 9-9-21; Am. Ord. passed -
-; Am. Ord. passed 5-9-24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.039 MODEL HOME (13).
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, a MODEL HOME is defined as a
completed and furnished home/unit set aside for the sole purpose of showing to
potential customers. No more than one occupied model home may be maintained in
a development zoned R-20SF or R-20MF. Additional units may be maintained in a
development zoned R-20MF.
   (B)   Model homes/units are allowed according to the following requirements:
      (1)   The model/unit must be owned/leased and operated by the developer
of the property, or by a single executive sales/marketing agency contracted by
the developer.
      (2)   The model/unit may be manned by sales agents, but no substantial
office activity may take place on the premises. Substantial office activity is
indicated by the closing of sales, the presence of secretarial staff, or by
deliveries of supplies and equipment, and the like. Under no circumstances will
the model/unit be used as surrogate places of business to conduct real estate
business not associated with the specific development in which they are
located. An unmanned unit shall be defined as a finished unit that is furnished
and may be shown, however it may not be occupied by sales agents, nor may any
real estate office activity take place therein.
      (3)   The model/unit may be indicated by a sign in accordance with
§§ 153.110 through
153.123 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.040 PLACEMENT OF MODULAR HOMES; REQUIREMENTS (14).
   Dwelling units which meet the definition of a modular home as defined in §
153.002 are permitted in zoning districts R-20MF, R-20, R-12, R-8, RRCD and CR,
provided the units comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   The home must be constructed to meet coastal and flood plain
construction standards of the State Building Code and the town's zoning,
subdivision, and building standards.
   (B)   No roof will have less than a four in 12 pitch and will have a roof
covering that meets Section 26 of the North Carolina Uniform Residential
Building Code, Volume I. All roof structures shall provide an eave projection
of no less than 16 inches.
   (C)   The home must provide a minimum distance of seven feet, six inches
from the top of the foundation to the bottom of the eave.
   (D)   The home is to be placed on a permanent foundation as required by the
State Building Code for permanent dwellings.
   (E)   The home must be placed on the lot so that its front entrance faces
the front of the lot and all setback requirements are met.
   (F)   If placed on pilings, an engineer or architect will be required to
insure compliance with Section 37 of the North Carolina Uniform Residential
Building Code Volume land relevant CAMA/Flood Zone requirements.
(Res. passed 4-10-97; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
NONCONFORMING USES
§ 153.050 PURPOSE; INTENT.
   (A)   If, within the districts established by this chapter, or by amendments
that may later be adopted, there exist lots, structures, and use of land and
structures which were lawful before this chapter was passed or amended, but
which would be prohibited under the terms of this chapter, it is the intent of
this chapter to permit these pre-existing nonconformances to be grandfathered
and continue until they are either removed, destroyed or brought into
compliance (except signs, which are provided for in this chapter and
residential uses as permitted by § 153.053). These uses are declared by this
chapter to be incompatible with permitted uses in the districts in which they
are located. It is the intent of this section to encourage conformance without
prohibiting the reconstruction of a nonconforming residential structure within
the structure’s original footprint destroyed by fire, explosion, tornado,
earthquake, hurricane or similar uncontrollable cause.
   (B)   It is further the intent of this chapter that nonconformances shall
not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, or used as grounds for adding other
structures, or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 2013-08-O, passed 5-9-13)
§ 153.051 NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   (A)   In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted,
notwithstanding limitations imposed by the other provisions of this chapter, a
single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on any
single lot which was recorded prior to the date it became legally non-
conforming. Such lot must be in separate ownership. This provision shall apply
even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or both,
that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard dimensions
and other requirements not involving area or width, or both, of lot, shall
conform to the regulations for the district in which such lot is located.
Variance of area, width, and yard requirements shall be obtained only through
action of the Board of Adjustment.
   (B)   If two or more lots or combination of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage in single ownership are of record at the time of passage or
amendment of this chapter, and if all or part of the lots do not meet at least
80% of the requirements for lot width and area, for the zone in which they are
located, as established by this chapter, the land involved shall be considered
to be an undivided parcel, for the purpose of this chapter, and no portion of
the parcel shall be used or sold which does not meet width and area
requirements established by this chapter, nor shall any division of the parcel
be made which leaves remaining any lot with width or area below the
requirements stated in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.052 NONCONFORMING USES.
   The lawful use of building or premises existing at the time of the adoption
of this chapter may be continued although such use does not conform with the
provisions of this chapter, and such a building may be reconstructed or
structurally altered and non-conforming uses therein changed subject to the
following regulations:
   (A)   The order of classification of uses from highest to lowest districts
for the purpose of this section shall be Residential 20, Residential 12, and
Residential 8.
   (B)   A non-conforming use may not be enlarged or extended, but extension of
a use to any portion of a building, which portion is at the time of the
adoption of this chapter primarily arranged or designed for such non-conforming
use, shall not be deemed to be an extension of a non-conforming use.
   (C)   The structural alterations made in a non-conforming building shall
not, during its life, exceed 50% of its assessed value, nor shall the building
be enlarged unless the use therein is changed to a conforming use, provided,
however, that non-conforming building damaged by fire, explosion, tornado,
earthquake, hurricane or similar uncontrollable cause, to an extent of not more
than 60% of its assessed value, may be repaired or rebuilt within one year of
the date of such damage, but not thereafter.
   (D)   If a non-conforming use is discontinued, any further use of the
building and premises shall be in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter. A reasonable interim, not to exceed 180 days, between tenants or
occupants shall not be construed to mean discontinuance.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.053 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter that could not be built under the terms of this
chapter by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, or
other characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot, such
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions:
   (A)   No such structure may be enlarged or altered in a way which increases
its non-conformity.
   (B)   Should such a structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall hereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
   (C)   Should such a nonconforming structure used for residential purposes be
destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, tornado, earthquake, hurricane or
similar uncontrollable cause, it must be permitted to be repaired or rebuilt
within one year of the date of the damage, but not thereafter.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 2013-08-O, passed 5-9-13)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.054 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Repairs to nonconforming structures are limited to not more than 60%
of its assessed value, and may be repaired or rebuilt within one year of the
date of such damage, but not thereafter.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening
or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be
unsafe by any town official charged with protecting the public safety upon
order of such official.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.055 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   All signs that do not comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be
replaced with new conforming signs and/or shall be removed.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.056 NONCONFORMANCES CREATED BY CHANGES IN ZONING BOUNDARIES OR
REGULATIONS.
   Any non-conformance created by a change in district boundaries or ordinance
regulations after the date of passage of this chapter shall also be governed by
the provisions of this section.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.057 FENCES.
   (A)   Permits for fences shall be secured from the Building Inspector prior
to construction. Fences shall be allowed in all zoning districts except
conservation. In conservation areas the fence must have an environmental
purpose such as sand dune protection.
   (B)   Fences may be constructed in the rear yard. Rear yard shall be
determined by locating the backmost corner of the primary structure and at and
along a 90° angle to the side property lines. The fence may extend from this
point with and along the perimeter of the side and rear lot lines. A fence
surrounding the rear yard may be six feet in height but must be constructed in
a fashion to satisfy the 110 m.p.h. wind velocity criteria.
   (C)   A fence may be installed on the perimeter of the front yard at a
height of no more than 42 inches.
   (D)   A fence may not impede vision on a corner lot over a height of three
feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets within the
triangular area bounded on two sides by the two street centerlines and on the
third side by a straight line connecting points on the street centerlines
located one- half the street right-of-way width plus 40 feet measured from the
intersection of the centerlines.
   (E)   Individuals seeking a permit shall ensure that all fences shall be
within the property lines.
(Ord. passed 10-13-94; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
OPEN SPACE, LOT, AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
§ 153.080 ENCROACHING UPON OPEN SPACE AND BUILD-TO-LINE PROHIBITED.
   The minimum yards and off-street parking and loading space required by this
chapter shall not be encroached upon. This applies to each and every building
hereafter erected or structurally altered. These open spaces shall not be
considered as meeting the open space requirements for any other building. In
addition, no structure shall be placed beyond the established build-to-line
established in accordance with §
153.087. Where the provisions established by §
153.087 are more restrictive than those established by setbacks, §
153.087 shall apply.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 153.081 ONE PRINCIPAL BUILDING PER LOT.
   Not more than one principal building shall be constructed on any one lot.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 153.082 LOCATIONS OF BUILDING LINES ON IRREGULARLY-SHAPED LOTS.
   These locations shall be determined by the Town Building Inspector on a
case-by-case basis while achieving the spacing and location of buildings on
individual lots consistent with the intent of the district regulations in which
the site is located. Dimensional requirements of § 153.084 shall be adhered to.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 9-8-05; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 153.083 CONTINUATION OF NONCONFORMANCE.
   Except as restricted in §
153.081, residential dwellings may be built on any lot which was recorded prior
to the enactment of this chapter even though it may not meet the lot width and
area requirements established by this chapter. Any lot or structure being used
lawfully before this chapter was enacted may continue to be used in the same
manner after the date of adoption of this chapter even though such use is not
now permitted under the terms of this chapter. Specific regulations concerning
nonconformance are given in §§
153.050 through
153.056 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 153.084 SCHEDULE OF AREA, HEIGHT AND SETBACK.
         Minimum
         Lot Area
Zoning   Per       Required Setback Line
District Principal Minimum Dimensions in     Maximum Height  Minimum Lot Size
         Use in    Feet**
         Square
         Feet
                         Side  Side          In feet In      Area in Width in
                  Front (one  (total Rear** (See    stories square  feet
                         only) two)          Note 1)         feet
R-20SF   20,000    30    8     16     25            2       20,000  40 street
                                                                     side
R-20     20,000    30    8     16     25*           2       20,000  100
R-12     12,000    30    8     16     25*           2       12,000  75
R-8      8,000     30    8     16     25*           2       8,000   50
Business                                       2               
RRCD              40                                           
R-20MH   20,000    40    30    60     30            2       20,000  N/A
R-20MF   20,000    40    40    80     40            2       20,000  N/A
CR                70    50    100    50            2               
NCR      N/A       N/A   N/A   N/A    N/A    N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
* In zoning districts denominated as R-20, R-12, R-8, when the designated lot
is located on the north side of State Road 1100 and is a non-conforming lot
due to the fact that the subdivision plat map was recorded prior to the date
on which the municipality became incorporated and the square footage of the
lot is less than the minimum lot size designated in the schedule, there shall
be no rear set back.
** Placement of structures on properties immediately adjacent to the ocean or
to the marsh is further controlled by the Build-to-Line §
153.087.
Note (1) The maximum height of structures shall not exceed the higher of:
(a) 26 feet above the regulatory flood elevation; or
(b) 35 feet above the mean elevation.
 
(Ord. passed 6-7-78; Am. Ord, passed 10-13-94; Am. Res. passed 3-9-95; Am. Res.
passed 12-13-07; Am. Ord. passed 4-8-10; Am. Res. passed 5-10-12; Am. Ord.
passed - -)
§ 153.085 AIRPORT HEIGHT CONTROL ORDINANCE ADOPTED.
   The Town Council hereby adopts by reference the Airport Height Control
Ordinance that was adopted by the County of Brunswick on June 7, 1999, as if
set out herein in its entirety, for all land areas affected by the ordinance
within its territorial jurisdiction. The administration and enforcement of the
ordinance shall be in accordance with the administration and enforcement of the
town's zoning ordinance.
(Res. 3-9-00; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 153.086 SCHEDULE OF MAXIMUM BUILT-UPON AREA AND BULK SIZE.
                                                         Maximum Bulk Size of
                Minimum Lot Area Per Maximum Built-upon  Single Family
Zoning District Principal Use In     Area as % of Actual Residential Structures
                Square Feet          Lot Size*           in Square Feet (See
                                                         Bulk Size Definition)
                                                         Maximum Bulk Size of
                Minimum Lot Area Per Maximum Built-upon  Single Family
Zoning District Principal Use In     Area as % of Actual Residential Structures
                Square Feet          Lot Size*           in Square Feet (See
                                                         Bulk Size Definition)
R-20SF          20,000               30%                 5,400**
R-20            20,000               30%                 5,400**
R-12            12,000               36%                 5,400**
R-8             8,000                36%                 5,400**
Business                                                
RRCD            NA                   NA                  NA
R-20MH          20,000               20%                 NA
R-20MF          20,000               20%                 NA
CR              NA                   NA                  NA
NCR             NA                   NA                  NA
* Note: The schedule of maximum built-upon area and bulk size is not intended
to render nonconforming any use or structure in existence at the time of
adoption. Nothing in §
153.086 shall prohibit the repair or rebuilding of a structure or use based
solely upon the lot coverage or bulk size requirements imposed, should such a
structure be destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, tornado, earthquake,
hurricane or similar uncontrollable cause. Should a structure suffer such
damage or destruction it must be permitted to be repaired or rebuilt in the
same footprint that was occupied prior to the damage within one year of the
date of such damage, but not thereafter.
** Note: In determining compliance with the requirements of §
153.086, compliance with maximum built-upon area is the first consideration.
Therefore, a structure of 5,400 square feet bulk size is permitted only if the
resultant total built-upon area associated with the construction of the
residence including all other impervious or partially impervious surfaces
complies with the maximum built-upon area limitations set out in §
153.086.
 
(Ord. 2013-08-O, passed 5-9-13; Am. Ord. 2014-008-O, passed 11-13-14)
§ 153.087 BUILD-TO-LINE.
   (A)   Existing configuration of land.
      (1)   The existing configuration of the land and its natural vegetation
shall not be altered from the principal natural features of the town landscape.
All construction and placement of structures, including but not necessarily
limited to housing, exterior decks, walkways, docks, and viewing and seating
platforms detached from housing, and landscape planting shall be governed by an
intent to limit intrusions into the natural features and beauty of the town's
landscape.
      (2)   The natural features referred to in division (A)(1) will be taken
to mean:
         (a)   The ocean located generally to the south of the beach area.
         (b)   The foredune of this area immediately behind the beach strand
and to the vegetation of this foredune.
         (c)   The tidal marsh generally to the north of the town, and marsh
and the land to be used for human habitation.
   (B)   Ocean-front properties.
      (1)   Ocean-front properties. The build-to-line is a straight line drawn
between the points farthest from the street lot line on the immediately
adjacent structures. The line is drawn between that point on each of the
immediately adjacent structures that is farthest from the street lot line when
measured perpendicularly to the roadway. Should there be no immediately
adjacent structure or structures, the above-mentioned straight line shall be
made between the nearest adjacent structures, taking into consideration the
curve of the road in front of the property.
      (2)   Marsh-side properties. The build-to-line is a straight line drawn
between the points farthest from the street lot line on the immediately
adjacent structures. The line is drawn between that point on each of the
immediately adjacent structures that is farthest from the street lot line when
measured perpendicularly to the roadway. Should there be no immediately
adjacent structure or structures, the above-mentioned straight line shall be
made between the nearest adjacent structures taking into consideration the
curve of the road in front of the property.
      (3)   Determination of the ocean-ward or marsh-ward points of adjacent
properties farthest from the street lot line and production of the build-to-
line. Using the entirety of each adjacent structure with all attached above-
ground level features, the surveyor preparing the proposed building plan shall
identify, by survey measurement, the point on each structure that is farthest
from the street lot line. The surveyor will prepare a certified line between
those points, that will establish the build-to-line. Existing fences and
walkways over the dunes shall not be used in the survey measurement. Elevated
stairs leading from the principal structure to a walkway are, in their
entirety, considered part of the structure. Stairs leading from the principal
structure or attached porch/deck to the ground are, in their entirety,
considered part of the structure and shall be considered in the build-to-line
measurement. For purposes of identifying the build-to-line, transitions from
residential structure to walkway wider than six feet shall be considered part
of the structure.
   (C)   Applicability.
      (1)   All above-ground construction and placement of structures,
including but not necessarily limited to housing, exterior decks, walkways,
docks and viewing and seating platforms detached from housing shall be subject
to the build-to-line provisions established by this section. No decking,
stairs, or at-grade improvements exceeding six inches in height shall be
permitted ocean-ward or marsh-ward of the build-to-line except as provided in
division (D), Exemptions.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, structures include buildings,
screened enclosures, fences, and/or man-made facilities or infrastructure that
is principally above ground.
   (D)   Exemptions. The following shall be permitted beyond the build-to-line
subject to the standards provided.
      (1)   Walkways, viewing platforms, docks, stairs to the beach, and
similar appurtenances.
         (a)   Walkways (including associated stairs) connecting the principal
structure to beach and marsh walkways and detached seating and viewing
platforms shall occur as close as possible to the natural, undisturbed contour
of the terrain, but no lower than provided for by CAMA rules, so as to minimize
intrusion into the natural features and beauty of the town's landscape. Stairs
leading from a walkway to a ground level feature, which may include an in-
ground pool, beach, marsh, or similar, are permitted.
         (b)   To minimize intrusion into the health and natural beauty of the
dunes, residential walkways must follow, within reason, the shortest straight-
line path from the structure to the beach. The maximum allowed width for a
walkway from a residential structure is six feet. The walking surface of the
walkway deck shall be no greater than 18 inches above the highest point of the
natural, undisturbed peak of the terrain under the proposed path of the
structure.
         (c)   A viewing platform, with a total footprint not to exceed 200
square feet may be attached to the walkway. The platform shall be immediately
adjacent to the walkway with a transition from walkway to deck not to exceed
four feet. The walking surface of the platform may not be elevated above the
walking surface of the walkway.
         (d)   1.   Hand railings or guard railings on residential walkways
shall be no higher than required by the NC Building Code. Where elevation
requires fall protection, walkway railings must provide at least 50% open
space, measured between the vertical pilings. Where code mandates fall
protection due to elevation, vertical or horizontal balusters shall be used in
a manner conforming to NC Building Code and shall be sized and spaced to
provide at least 50% open space, measured between the vertical pilings. Lattice
type closure on railings is not permitted.
            2.   For example, a guard rail constructed with a top rail five
inches tall, with one and one-half inch vertical or horizontal balusters spaced
three and four-fifths inches apart, and a bottom runner that is three and one-
half inches tall will provide more than 54% open space.
         (e)   Under no circumstances shall a detached platform, walkway, or
dock, be roofed, enclosed or have a second story.
      (2)   Swimming pool fences. Pool security fences mandated by NC Building
Code may be placed on the perimeter of the pool at the minimum height required
by code. Such fences shall be at minimum 70% transparent.
      (3)   Construction of minor ornamental features. On marsh side
properties, construction of minor ornamental features with horizontal
dimensions no greater than six feet and height no greater than three feet are
permitted. Such features may include, but are not limited to, fire pits,
benches, and seating.
   (E)   Build-to-line when replacing, enlarging, or elevating an existing
structure.
      (1)   When an existing structure is removed, the build-to-line must be
established for any new construction, redevelopment, or placement of a
structure on that site relative to adjacent properties. The new principal
structure and all accessory structures shall be subject to the provisions of
this section.
      (2)   Elevating an existing structure or adding another floor to an
existing structure shall be subject to the build-to-line. Such elevation or
addition shall only be permitted if the existing structure and new construction
are street-ward of the build-to-line.
      (3)   Should a structure be destroyed by fire, explosion, tornado,
earthquake, hurricane, or similar uncontrollable cause, it may be replaced in
the same footprint provided the height, elevation, and building footprint of
the replacement are no different than existed before the structure was
destroyed. If height, elevation, or building footprint are different, the
build-to-line must be established and adhered to relative to adjacent
structures.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord. passed 5-9-24)
OFF-STREET PARKING
§ 153.095 REQUIRED AREA FOR EACH PARKING SPACE.
   Each automobile parking space shall contain not less than 200 square feet
nor less than the minimum width for stalls as specified under
§ 153.097.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.096 DRAINAGE, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE.
   Stormwater shall be controlled in the manner set forth in the town
stormwater regulations,
Chapter 154 of this code.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.097 PARKING STALLS AND INTERIOR DRIVEWAYS.
 
Type of Parking Width of Stall  Depth of Stall Minimum Driveway Width
90°            10 feet         20 feet        23 feet
60°            9 feet          25 feet        18 feet
45°            8 feet 6 inches 30 feet        12 feet
Where there is no parking, interior driveways shall be at least ten feet for
one-way traffic and 20 feet wide for two-way traffic.
 
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.098 MINIMUM NUMBER OF SPACES.
   For any use, or class of uses, not specifically mentioned in this section,
the requirements for off-street parking facilities for a similar use or class
of uses specifically mentioned shall apply. For the purposes of this section,
the number of employees shall be computed on the basis of the largest number of
persons to be employed on the largest shift.
 
   (A)   Residential uses         Two spaces for each dwelling unit
   (B)   Church or other place of One space for each four seats in main
worship                                 auditorium
                                        One space for each 150 square feet used
   (C)   Club or lodge            for assembly or dancing plus auditorium
                                        requirements listed in division (B) of
                                        this section
                                        One space for each three persons able
   (D)   Outdoor recreation area  to use such facility at its maximum
                                        capacity plus one space for each two
                                        employees
                                        Four spaces for each hole plus
   (E)   Golf course              requirements for any other use
                                        associated with the golf course
   (F)   Eating places            One space for each three seats plus one
                                        space for each employee
 
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Ord. passed 4-13-89; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
§ 153.110 PURPOSE; INTENT.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to permit signs of a commercial,
industrial, and residential nature in districts which have uses with
appropriate need for signs and to regulate the size and placement of signs
intended to be seen from a public right-of-way.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 153.111 COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER AND REGULATORY CODES REQUIRED.
   All signs within the jurisdictional area shall be covered by these
regulations and shall be erected, constructed, and maintained in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter, the State Building Code, and the National
Electrical Code. Only those signs that are specified shall be created within
the jurisdictional areas of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.112 SIGNS NOT TO CONSTITUTE TRAFFIC HAZARDS.
   No sign shall be erected or continued that:
   (A)   Obstructs the sight distance at intersections or along a public right-
of-way;
   (B)   Would tend by its location, color or nature to be confused with or
obstruct the view of traffic signs or signals, or would be confused with a
flashing light of an emergency vehicle; or
   (C)   Which might be confused with traffic directional signs and signs such
as stop, go, slow, danger, and the like.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.113 SIGNS ON UTILITY POLES, TREES AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   No sign shall be attached to or painted on any telephone pole, light pole,
telegraph pole, or other man-made objects not intended to support a sign, or
any tree, rock, or other natural objects.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.114 MAINTENANCE OF SIGNS.
   Whenever a sign becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the safety of a
building or the public, the Building Inspector shall order that such sign be
made safe or removed. A period of ten days following receipt of the order by
the person, firm, or corporation owning or using the sign shall be allowed for
compliance.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.115 ILLUMINATION.
   No internally illuminated or flashing signs shall be permitted at any
residential or non-governmental property. Illumination devices such as, but not
limited to, flood or spotlights shall be placed and shielded so as to prevent
the rays of illumination from being cast upon neighboring properties/buildings
and/or vehicles approaching from either direction. All lighting shall be so
directed as required to protect nesting turtles.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Res. passed 3-14-24) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 153.116 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   All signs or advertising structures located in districts where they would
not be permitted as a new use under the terms of these regulations are hereby
declared to be nonconforming uses. Nonconforming signs shall be removed within
three years of the adoption of this chapter. However, signs that are
nonconforming as a result of improper illumination shall be made to conform to
the requirements of this chapter within one year.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.117 EXEMPTED SIGNS.
   Non-illuminated signs listed below are excluded from these regulations.
   (A)   Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only property
numbers, post office box numbers, names of occupants or premises, or other
identification of premises not having commercial connotations.
   (B)   Flags and insignias of any government except where displayed in
connection with commercial promotion.
   (C)   Legal notices, identification, information, directional signs erected
or required by governmental bodies.
   (D)   Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, except
letters, trademarks, moving lights or moving parts.
   (E)   Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on private property,
but bearing no advertising matter.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 153.118 PERMIT; APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   No permit shall be issued for any sign which does not comply with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Applications for permits to erect, hang, place, paint, or alter the
structure of a sign shall be submitted on forms obtainable from the Building
Inspector. Each application, shall be accompanied by a plan showing the
following:
      (1)   Area of the sign;
      (2)   Size, character, general layout, and designs proposed for painted
displays.
      (3)   The method and type of illumination, if any.
      (4)   The location proposed for such signs in relation to property lines,
zoning district boundaries, right-of-way lines, and existing signs.
      (5)   If conditions warrant it, the Building Inspector may require such
additional information as will enable him to determine if such sign is to be
erected in conformance with the requirements of this chapter.
      (6)   Payment of fee to obtain building permit.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 153.119 SIGNS NOT REQUIRING PERMIT; SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Permitted signs. The following signs may be erected, hung, or placed
without a permit from the Building Inspector but shall not be illuminated
unless otherwise specified:
      (1)   Temporary real estate sign. One temporary real estate sign, not
exceeding ten square feet in area, shall be permitted per residential lot. One
temporary real estate sign, not exceeding 32 square feet in area, shall be
permitted for commercial or industrial property and/or for tracts of land five
acres or more in area. Where the property on which the sign is to be placed
faces more than one street, one such sign shall be allowed on each street
frontage.
      (2)   Temporary construction sign. One temporary construction site sign
not exceeding 32 square feet erected on the site during the period of
construction to announce the name of the owner or developer, contractors,
architect, land planner, landscape architect, engineer, and/or mortgage banker.
      (3)   Direction or information sign. Director or information signs of a
public or quasi-public nature shall not exceed 32 square feet in area. Such
signs shall only be used for the purpose of stating or calling attention to:
         (a)   The name or location of the town, hospital, community center,
public or private school, church, synagogue, or other place of worship (this
type sign may be illuminated).
         (b)   The name of a place of meeting of an official or civic body, or
fraternal organization (this type sign may be illuminated).
         (c)   An event of public interest such as public hearing, rezoning
announcement, general election, church or public meeting, local or county fair,
and other similar community activities and campaigns.
         (d)   Soil conservation, 4-H, and similar projects.
         (e)   Zoning and subdivision jurisdiction boundaries.
         (f)   Name of a subdivision or other building project (sign may
include name of project, real estate agency, architect, engineer, mortgage
banker, and the like).
      (4)   Rental signs no larger than four square feet attached to the rented
structure.
   (B)   Setback requirements. Signs which do not require a permit shall be set
back at least ten feet from any public right-of-way line or property line and
shall be set back at least 50 feet from any road intersection.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.120 SIGNS REQUIRING PERMIT.
   Only those signs listed in §
153.119 are exempt. All others shall require a permit.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.121 PRINCIPAL USE SIGNS.
   (A)   On premise principal use signs for the express purpose of identifying
the use thereon may be permitted only in the commercial recreation district.
   (B)   Each principal use sign shall require a permit.
   (C)   Principal use signs may be illuminated as specified in §
153.115.
   (D)   Principal use signs shall be set back at least ten feet from any
right-of-way line or property line and shall not obstruct the vision of a
street intersection for a distance of 50 feet from the right-of-way of the
intersection.
   (E)   No principal use sign shall be permitted that exceeds 32 square feet
of sign area.
   (F)   No principal use sign shall exceed 20 feet in height measured from the
finished grade of the lot to the top of the sign structure.
   (G)   The combined total sign area of all principal use signs on the
premises shall not exceed 32 square feet or six square feet of sign area per
linear foot of street frontage in single ownership, whichever is less.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 153.122 OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGNS (BILLBOARDS).
   Outdoor advertising signs shall not be permitted in any zoning district.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
   The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of G.S. § 160D-
108 pursuant to which a statutory zoning vested right is established upon the
approval of a site-specific vesting plan.
(Ord. passed 3-12-92; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.136 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Board of Commissioners, Board of Adjustment,
Planning Board or other board or official designated by ordinance or this
chapter as being authorized to grant the specific zoning or land use permit or
approval that constitutes a site- specific vesting plan.
   MULTI-PHASED DEVELOPMENT. A development containing 25 acres or more that is
both of the following: (1) submitted for development permit approval to occur
in more than one phase; and (2) subject to a master development plan with
committed elements showing the type and intensity of use of each phase.
   SITE SPECIFIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN. A plan of land development submitted to the
town for purposes of obtaining one of the following zoning or land use permits
or approvals: Planned Unit Development (PUD) subdivision plat; conditional or
specific use permit.
   ZONING VESTED RIGHT. A right pursuant to G.S. Ch. 160D to undertake and
complete the development and use of property under the terms and conditions of
an approved site-specific vesting plan.
(Ord. passed 3-12-92; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 2014-001-O, passed 4-10-
14; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.137 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING VESTED RIGHT.
   (A)   A zoning vested right shall be deemed established upon the valid
approval, or conditional approval, by the Board of Commissioners, Planning
Board or Board of Adjustment, as applicable, of a site-specific vesting plan,
following notice and public hearing.
   (B)   The approving authority may approve a site-specific vesting plan upon
such terms and conditions as may reasonably be necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare and that follow the requirements set forth in the
zoning and subdivision ordinances of the town.
   (C)   Notwithstanding paragraph (A) or (B), approval of a site- specific
vesting plan with the condition that a variance be obtained shall not confer a
zoning vested right unless and until the necessary variances are obtained.
   (D)   A site-specific vesting plan shall be deemed approved upon the
effective date of the approval authority’s action or ordinances relating
thereto.
   (E)   The establishment of a zoning vested right shall not preclude the
application of overlay zoning that imposes additional requirements but does not
affect the allowable type or intensity of use, or ordinances or regulations
that are general in nature and are applicable to all property subject to land
use regulations by the city, including, but not limited to building, fire,
plumbing, electrical and mechanical codes. Construction shall comply with the
building code in effect on the date of the first inspection, and not the code
in effect on the date the vested right is secured. Otherwise applicable new or
amended regulations shall become effective with respect to property that is
subject to a site-specific vesting plan upon the expiration or termination of
the vested right in accordance with this chapter.
   (F)   A zoning vested right is not a personal right, but shall attach to and
run with the applicable property. After approval of a site-specific vesting
plan, all successors to the original landowner shall be entitled to exercise
such right while applicable.
(Ord. passed 3-12-92; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.138 APPROVAL PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, an application for site-
specific vesting plan approval shall be processed in accordance with the
procedures established by ordinance and shall be considered by the designated
approval authority for the specific type of zoning or land use permit or
approval for which application is made.
   (B)   In order to obtain a zoning vested right hereunder, the applicant must
set forth in writing at the time of the application that the applicant seeks a
zoning vested right. All applications for zoning vested rights shall be
considered by the Board of Commissioners, Planning Board or Board of Adjustment
following a notice and public hearing as provided in G.S. Ch. 160D-601
irrespective of whether or not prior approval procedures required such notice
and hearing.
   (C)   In order for a zoning vested right to be established upon approval of
a site-specific vesting plan, the applicant must indicate at the time of
application, on a form to be provided by the city, that a zoning vested right
is being sought.
   (D)   Each map, plat, site plan or other document evidencing a site-specific
vesting plan shall contain the following notation: “Approval of this plan
established a zoning vested right under G.S. § 160D-108. Unless terminated at
an earlier date, the zoning vested right shall be valid until (date).”
   (E)   Following approval or conditional approval of a site- specific vesting
plan, nothing in this chapter shall exempt such a plan from subsequent reviews
and approvals to ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of the
original approval, provided that such reviews and approvals are not
inconsistent with the original approval.
   (F)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the revocation of the original
approval or other remedies for failure to comply with applicable terms and
conditions of the approval or the zoning ordinance. Any revocation of a
development approval shall be in accordance with the same process that was
followed for approval.
(Ord. passed 3-12-92; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 2014-001-O, passed 4-10-
14; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.139 DURATION.
   (A)   A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this chapter shall
remain vested for a period of two years unless specifically and unambiguously
provided otherwise pursuant to division (B) of this section. This vesting shall
not be extended by any amendments or modification to a site-specific vesting
plan unless expressly provided by the approval authority at the time the
amendment or modification is approved.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A), the approval authority
may provide that rights shall be vested for a period exceeding two years but
not exceeding five years where warranted in light of all relevant
circumstances, including, but not limited to, the size of the development, the
level of investment, the need for or desirability of the development, economic
cycles, and market conditions. These determinations shall be in the sound
discretion of the approval authority at the time the site-specific vesting plan
is approved. A multi-phased development is vested for the entire development
with the land development regulations then in place at the time a site plan
approval is granted for the initial phase of the multi-phased development. A
right which has been vested as provided for in this division remains vested for
a period of seven years from the time a site plan approval is granted for the
initial phase of the multi-phased development.
   (C)   Upon issuance of a building permit, the expiration provisions of G.S.
§ 160D-1111 shall apply, except that a building permit shall not expire or be
revoked because of the running of time while a zoning vested right under this
section is outstanding.
(Ord. passed 3-12-92; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 2014-001-O, passed 4-10-
14; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.140 TERMINATION.
   A zoning right that has been vested as provided in this chapter shall
terminate:
   (A)   At the end of the applicable vesting period with respect to buildings
and uses for which no valid building permit applications have been filled;
   (B)   With the written consent of the affected landowner;
   (C)   Upon findings by the Board of Commissioners, by ordinance after notice
and a public hearing, that natural or man-made hazards on or in the immediate
vicinity of the property, if uncorrected, would pose a serious threat to the
public health, safety, and welfare if the project were to proceed as
contemplated in the site-specific vesting plan;
   (D)   Upon payment to the affected landowner of compensation for all costs,
expenses, and other losses incurred by the landowner, including, but not
limited to, all fees paid in consideration of financing, and all architectural,
planning, marketing, legal, and other consultant’s fees incurred after approval
by the town, together with interest thereon at the legal rate until paid.
Compensation shall not include any diminutive in the value of the property
which is caused by such action;
   (E)   Upon findings by the Board of Commissioners, by ordinance after notice
and a hearing, that the landowner or his representative intentionally supplied
inaccurate information or made material misrepresentations which made a
difference in the approval by the approval authority of the site-specific
vesting plan; or
   (F)   Upon the enactment or promulgation of a state or federal law or
regulation that precludes development as contemplated in the site-specific
vesting plan, in which case the approval authority may modify the affected
provisions, upon a finding that the change in state or federal law has
fundamental effect on the plan, by ordinance after notice and a hearing.
(Ord. passed 3-12-92; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.141 VOLUNTARY ANNEXATIONS.
   A petition for annexation filed with the town shall contain a signed
statement declaring whether or not any zoning vested right with respect to the
properties subject to the petition has been established under G.S.§ 160D-108. A
statement that declares that no zoning vested right has been established under
G.S.§ 160D-108, or the failure to sign a statement declaring whether or not a
zoning vested right has been established, shall be binding on the landowner and
any such zoning vested right shall be terminated.
(Ord. passed 3-12-92; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 2014-001-O, passed 4-10-
14; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.142 LIMITATIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter is intended or shall be deemed to create any vested
right other than those established pursuant to G.S. § 160D-108.
(Ord. passed 3-12-92; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 2014-001-O, passed 4-10-
14; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.143 PERMIT CHOICE.
   If a land development regulation is amended between the time a development
permit application was submitted and a development permit decision is made or
if a land development regulation is amended after a development permit decision
has been challenged and found to be wrongfully denied or illegal, G.S. § 143-
755 applies.
(Ord. passed - -)
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 153.155 BOARD TO BE GOVERNED BY STATE LAW AND ZONING CODE.
   The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall be governed by the terms of G.S. Ch.
160D and by the zoning code of the town. The Board shall follow statutory
quasi-judicial procedures in determining any quasi-judicial decision in
accordance with § 160D-406.
(Ord. passed 8-25-94; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 2014-001-O, passed 4-10-
14; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.156 COMPOSITION OF BOARD.
   (A)   Chairman. A Chairman shall be appointed by the Mayor in accordance
with the zoning code. His term of office shall be one year and until his
successor is appointed beginning on July 1, and he shall be eligible for re-
appointment. The Chairman shall decide on all points of order and procedure,
subject to these rules, unless directed otherwise by a majority of the Board in
session at the time. The Chairman shall appoint any committees found necessary
to investigate any matters before the Board.
   (B)   Vice Chairman. A Vice Chairman shall be elected by the Board from
among its regular members in the same manner and for the same term as the
Chairman. He shall serve as acting Chairman in the Chairman's absence, and at
such times he shall have the same powers and duties as the Chairman.
   (C)   Secretary-Clerk. A Secretary-Clerk shall be appointed by the Chairman
of the Board, either from within its membership or from outside, to hold office
during the terms of the Chairman and/or until a successor secretary has been
appointed. The Secretary shall be eligible for reappointment. The Secretary,
subject to the direction of the Chairman and the Board, shall keep all records,
shall conduct all correspondence of the Board, shall arrange for all public
notices required to be given, shall notify members of pending meetings and
their agenda, shall notify parties to cases before the Board of its decision on
such cases and shall generally supervise the clerical work of the Board. The
Secretary shall keep the minutes of every Board meeting in a permanent volume.
The minutes shall show the record of all important facts pertaining to each
meeting and hearing, every resolution acted on by the Board, and all votes of
members of the Board on any resolution of or on the final determination of any
question, indicating the names of members who are absent or fail to vote. If
the secretary is chosen from outside the Board's membership, he shall not be
eligible to vote on any matter.
   (D)   Board members. The Board shall consist of five members who shall be
residents of the town, appointed by the Mayor and Board of Commissioners. The
term of the office of the members of the Board shall be for three years.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term only. Members shall be removed
for cause by the Board of Commissioners upon written charges and after public
hearing. The members of the Board shall receive no compensation for their
services.
(Ord. passed 8-25-94; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.157 ALTERNATE MEMBERS.
   (A)   Alternate members of the Board shall be appointed for three year terms
at the time for appointment of regular members, provided, however, that in the
case of the first appointment of alternate members, the appointment shall be
for terms which shall expire at the next time when the term of any regular
member expires. Alternate members shall be called on to attend only those
meetings and hearings at which one or more regular members are absent or are
unable to participate in hearing a case because of financial or other interest.
Regular members, on receiving notice of a special meeting that they cannot
attend or on learning that they will be unable to participate in a particular
case, shall give prompt notice to the Board Secretary that they are unable to
attend or to participate. On receiving such notice, the Secretary shall, by the
most expeditious means, notify an alternate member to attend. Assignments shall
be rotated among the alternate members. At any meeting that they are called on
to attend, alternate members shall have the powers and duties as regular
members.
   (B)   Except at the election of officers, at no times shall more than five
members participate officially in any meeting or hearing.
(Ord. passed 8-25-94; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 153.158 RULES OF CONDUCT.
   (A)   Members of the Board may be removed for cause, including violation of
the rules stated in divisions (B) through (F).
   (B)   Faithful attendance at all Board meetings and conscientious
performance of the duties required of Board members shall considered a
prerequisite of continuing membership on the Board.
   (C)   No Board member shall take part in the hearing, consideration, or
determination of any case in which they have a direct substantial financial
interest.
   (D)   No Board member shall discuss any case with any parties thereto before
the public hearing on the case, provided, however, that members may receive
and/or seek information pertaining to the case from any other member of the
Board, its Secretary, or Clerk before the hearing.
   (E)   No Board member shall vote on any matter that decides an application
or appeal unless he has attended the public hearing on that application or
appeal.
   (F)   Members of the Board shall not express individual opinions on the
proper judgement of any case with any parties thereto before that case is
determined. Violation of this rule shall be cause for dismissal from the Board.
   (G)   No member shall participate in or vote on any matter where they have a
fixed opinion on a case prior to the hearing.
(Ord. passed 8-25-94; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 153.159 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Regular meetings. Meetings of the Board may be held on the fourth
Thursday of the month at the Town Hall, 6:30 p.m., provided that meetings may
be held at any other convenient place in the town if the Chairman so directs
before the meeting so long as the meeting notice requirements established by
statute are followed.
   (B)   Special meetings. The Chairman may call special meetings of the Board
at any time when there is business or cases to be decided by the BOA. At least
48 hours written notice of the time and place of special meetings shall be
given, by either the Secretary or the Chairman, to each member of the Board.
   (C)   Cancellation of meetings. If there are no appeals, applications for
variances, or other business from the Board, or if so many regular and
alternate members notify the Secretary that they cannot attend that a quorum
will not be available, the Chairman may dispense with a regular meeting by
giving written or oral notice to all members not less than 24 hours before the
time set for the meeting.
   (D)   Quorum. A quorum shall consist of five BOA members, including
alternates serving in lieu of regular members who are absent, excused or
recused.
   (E)   Voting. All regular members may vote on any issue unless they have
disqualified themselves for one or more of the reasons listed in §
153.158. The required vote to decide variance applications shall be four-fifths
as provided in §
153.160. In all others matters the vote of a majority of the members present
and voting shall decide issues before the Board. Vacant seats due to absences
and those members recused from voting shall not be considered in the
calculation of required votes if there are no qualified alternates.
   (F)   Conduct of meetings. All meetings shall be open to the public. The
order of business at regular meetings shall be as follows.
      (1)   Call to order;
      (2)   Approval of minutes of the previous meeting;
      (3)   Hearing of cases;
      (4)   Reports of committees;
      (5)   Unfinished business;
      (6)   New business:
      (7)   Consideration and determination of cases heard.
(Ord. passed 8-25-94; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 2014-001-O, passed 4-10-
14; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.160 APPEALS; HEARINGS; REQUEST FOR VARIANCE OR SPECIAL USE PERMIT;
DECISIONS.
   (A)   Types of appeals. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide all
appeals from and review any order, requirements, decision, or determination
made by the Zoning Administrator. The officer making the determination shall
give written notice to the owner of the property that is the subject of the
determination and to the party who sought the determination, if different from
the owner. The written notice shall be delivered by personal delivery,
electronic mail, or by first-class mail. The notice shall be delivered to the
last address listed for the owner of the affected property on the county tax
abstract and to the address provided in the application or request for a
determination if the party seeking the determination is different from the
owner. The official who made the decision (or his/her successor if no longer
employed) shall appear as a witness in the appeal. It shall also hear and
decide all matters referred to it or on which the zoning code requires it to
pass. In deciding appeals the Board may hear both those based on an allegedly
improper or erroneous interpretation of the code and those based on alleged
hardship resulting from strict interpretation of the code. An appeal of a
notice of violation or other enforcement order stays enforcement of the action
appealed from and accrual of any fines assessed during the pendency of the
appeal to the Board of Adjustment and any subsequent appeal in accordance with
G.S. § 160D-1402 or during the pendency of any civil proceeding authorized by
law or appeals therefrom, unless the official who made the decision certifies
to the board after notice of appeal has been filed that, because of the facts
stated in an affidavit, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property
or, because the violation is transitory in nature, a stay would seriously
interfere with enforcement of the development regulation. In that case,
enforcement proceedings are not stayed except by a restraining order, which may
be granted by a court. If enforcement proceedings are not stayed, the appellant
may file with the official a request for an expedited hearing of the appeal,
and the Board shall meet to hear the appeal within 15 days after such a request
is filed. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, appeals of
decisions granting a development approval or otherwise affirming that a
proposed use of property is consistent with the development regulation does not
stay the further review of an application for development approvals to use the
property; in these situations, the appellant or town may request and the Board
may grant a stay of a final decision of development approval applications,
including building permits affected by the issue being appealed.
   (B)   Procedure for filing appeals. No appeal shall be heard by the Board of
Adjustment unless a complete application for an appeal hearing is filed within
30 days after the interested party or parties receive notice of the final
order, requirement, decision, or determination by the Zoning Administrator. Any
other person with standing to appeal has 30 days from receipt from any source
of actual or constructive notice of the determination within which to file an
appeal. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, notice given pursuant to
G.S. § 160D-403(b) by first-class mail is deemed received on the third business
day following deposit of the notice for mailing with the United States Postal
Service. The applicant must file his application for a hearing with the Town
Clerk, who shall act as clerk for the Board in receiving this notice. All
applications shall be made on the form furnished for that purpose, and all
information required thereon shall be completed before an appeal may be
considered as having been filed. All applications shall be accompanied by a
filing fee according to the town’s schedule of fees maintained in the office of
the Town Clerk.
   (C)   Quasi-judicial hearing.
      (1)   Time. After a complete application for a quasi-judicial decision is
received by the Town Clerk, the Board Chairman shall schedule the time for a
hearing, which shall be a regular or special meeting within 45 days from the
receipt of a complete application. For special use permits, once a complete
application has been received, the application shall be placed on the agenda
for the next regularly scheduled BOC meeting following 45 days from receipt of
the complete application. The BOC shall follow the quasi-judication hearing
process as described herein for the special use permit application.
      (2)   Quasi-judicial hearing notice.
         (a)   The notice of the quasi-judicial evidentiary hearing shall be
mailed to the person or entity whose appeal, application, or request is the
subject of the hearing; to the owner of the property that is the subject of the
hearing if the owner did not initiate the hearing; to the owners of all parcels
of land abutting the parcel of land that is the subject of the hearing; and to
any other persons as the Building Inspector shall direct. In the absence of
evidence to the contrary, the town may rely on the county tax listing to
determine owners of property entitled to mailed notice. The notice must be
deposited in the mail at least ten days, but not more than 25 days, prior to
the date of the hearing. The Board may continue an evidentiary hearing that has
been convened without further advertisement. If an evidentiary hearing is set
for a given date and a quorum of the Board is not then present, the hearing
shall be continued until the next regular Board meeting without further
advertisement.
         (b)   Such notice shall state the location of the building or lot, the
general nature of the question involved in the appeal, and the date, time and
place of the hearing.
         (c)   In addition, a notice shall be placed on the door of the Town
Hall, and adjacent neighbors shall be notified. ADJACENT shall be defined as
the owner of that parcel of land in question shown on the county tax listing,
and the owners of all parcels of land abutting that parcel of land as shown on
the county tax listing and parcels within 100 feet.
         (d)   The site subject to the hearing shall be posted at least ten
days, but not more than 25 days, prior to the date of the hearing. The posted
notice shall provide reasonable notice to interested persons. The notice shall
be posted on the site that is subject of the hearing or an adjacent street or
highway right-of-way.
      (3)   Conduct of the hearing.
         (a)   Any party may appear in person, by agent, or by attorney at the
hearing. The order of business for each hearing shall be as follows.
            1.   The Chairman or such person as he shall direct, shall give a
preliminary statement of the case noting that the proceedings are quasi-
judicial and therefore shall be conducted in the manner of a court of law with
sworn testimony presented as evidence. All who wish to speak shall first be
placed under oath and the opposing party may cross examine them as set forth in
(b) below;
            2.   The applicant shall present the evidence and arguments in
support of his application;
            3.   Persons opposed to granting the application shall present the
evidence and arguments against the application;
            4.   Both sides shall be permitted to present rebuttals to opposing
evidence and arguments;
            5.   The Chairman shall summarize the evidence that has been
presented, giving the parties opportunity to make objections or corrections.
         (b)   Witnesses may be called and factual evidence may be submitted,
but the Board shall not be limited to consideration of such evidence as would
be admissible in a court of law when evidence is not reasonably available under
such rules to show relevant facts. In such cases facts may be shown by the most
reliable and substantial evidence available. The Board may view the premises
before the hearing, but the facts indicated by such inspection shall be
disclosed at the hearing and made part of the record.
         (c)   All witnesses before the Board, including the applicant(s),
shall be placed under oath, and the opposing party may cross-examine them.
Officials of the court (attorneys) not wishing to be sworn must understand
their testimony must be treated not as evidence on which to base a decision but
merely as arguments.
      (4)   Rehearings. An application for a rehearing may be made in the same
manner as an application for an original hearing. Evidence in support of the
application shall initially be limited to what is necessary to enable the Board
to determine whether there has been a substantial change in the facts,
evidence, or conditions in the case. The Board shall deny the application for
rehearing it, from the record, it finds that there has been no substantial
change in facts, evidence, or conditions. If the Board finds that a change has
occurred, it shall thereupon treat the request in the same manner as any other
application.
   (D)   Decisions.
      (1)   Time. Written decisions by the Board including findings of fact
shall be made and presented to the applicant no later than 30 days from the
time of the hearing.
      (2)   Form.
         (a)   The Board’s final decision shall be shown in record of the case
as entered in the Board’s minutes and signed by the Secretary and the Chairman
on approval of the minutes by the Board. Such record shall show the reasons for
the determinations, with a summary of the evidence introduced, the conclusions
of law, and the findings of fact made by the Board. No variance shall be
granted for a specific use. When a variance is granted, the record shall state
in detail any exceptional difficulty to unnecessary hardship upon which the
appeal was based and which the Board finds to exist. The decision may reverse
or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination appealed from. When a special use permit is granted, the record
shall state in detail any facts that support findings required to be made
before such permit is issued.
         (b)   The Chair or his or her designee shall rule on objections and
motions to quash subpoenas. Objections regarding jurisdictional and evidentiary
issues, including, but not limited to, the timeliness of an appeal or the
standing of a party, may be made to the Board. The Board Chair shall rule on
any objections, and the Chair's rulings may be appealed to the full Board.
These rulings are also subject to judicial review pursuant to G.S. § 160D-1402
         (c)   The record shall state in detail what, if any, conditions and
safeguards the Board imposes in connection with granting of a variance or
special use permit. A separate record of decision in each case shall be
prepared, filed in the Town Clerk’s office and furnished to the parties as
specified in subsection (5) of this division.
      (3)   Expiration of permits. Unless otherwise specified, any order or
decision of the Board granting a special use permit shall expire if the
applicant does not obtain a building permit or certificate of occupancy for
such use within 12 months from the date of the decision.
      (4)   Voting at hearings. The concurring vote of four- fifths of the
Board members shall be necessary to grant a variance from the ordinance
provisions. All other decisions shall be made by a majority vote. However,
vacant seats and disqualified members are not considered in calculating four-
fifths votes if there are no qualified alternates.
      (5)   A variance may only be issued when the following findings of fact
are made by the Board of Adjustment. The burden of proving these conditions
exist is on the applicant.
         (a)   Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of
the ordinance. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of
the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property.
         (b)   The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from
personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are
common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for
granting a variance.
         (c)   The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant
or the property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that
circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be
regarded as a self-created hardship.
         (d)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose,
and intent of the ordinance, such that public safety is secured, and
substantial justice is achieved.
      (6)   Notice and public records of decisions. The Secretary shall give
written notice of the decision in the case to the appellant and/or applicant
and to every aggrieved party who has filed a written request for such notice
with the Secretary or the Chairman of the Board when the hearing is held. Such
notice may be delivered either by personal service or by registered mail or
certified mail, or return receipt requested. A copy of the decision shall also
be filed in the Town Clerk’s office. The decision shall be a public record,
available for inspection at all reasonable times.
(Ord. passed 8-25-94; Am. Ord. passed 1-13-05; Am. Res. passed 4-8- 10; Am.
Ord. 2014-001-O, passed 4-10-14; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.161 AMENDMENTS.
   The foregoing rules of procedure for the BOA may not be amended except by
proceedings set forth in G.S. Ch. 160D.
(Ord. passed 8-25-94; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. 2014-001-O, passed 4-10-
14; Am. Ord. passed - -)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 153.170 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR TO ENFORCE AND ADMINISTER.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized and it shall be his duty
to enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter. Appeal from the
decisions of the Zoning Administrator may be made to the Board of Adjustment.
   (B)   Any development approval granted by the Zoning Administrator shall be
in writing. The town may issue development approvals in print or electronic
form. Any development approval issued exclusively in electronic form shall be
protected from further editing once issued. Applications for development
approvals may be made by the landowner, a lessee or person holding an option or
contract to purchase or lease land, or an authorized agent of the landowner.
Unless provided otherwise by law, all rights, privileges, benefits, burdens,
and obligations created by development approvals made pursuant to this chapter
attach to and run with the land. Unless otherwise specified by this chapter or
statute, development approvals shall expire one year after issuance, unless
work authorized by the permit has substantially commenced.
   (C)   For the purpose of making inspections, the Zoning Administrator is
hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all
dwellings, dwelling units, rooming houses, rooming units and the premises
associated therewith. In exercising this power, staff are authorized to enter
any premises within the jurisdiction of the town at all reasonable hours for
the purposes of inspection or other enforcement action, upon presentation of
proper credentials; provided, however, that the appropriate consent has been
given for inspection of areas not open to the public or that an appropriate
inspection warrant has been secured.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
Cross-reference:
   Planning Board, powers and duties, see §
32.03
§ 153.171 BUILDING PERMIT; APPLICATION.
   (A)   No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, extended or
enlarged or structurally altered until the Building Inspector has issued a
building permit for such work.
   (B)   Each application to the Building Inspector for a building permit shall
be accompanied by a plat drawn to scale showing accurate dimensions of the lot
to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of any existing
buildings and of the buildings and accessory buildings to be erected, the
existing or intended use of each building or part of the building, the number
of families or housekeeping units the building is designed to accommodate and
such other information with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may be
necessary to determine and provide for enforcement of this chapter. A careful
record of such applications and plats shall be kept in the office of the
Building Inspector. Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the
work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six months of its date
of issue or if work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of
one year.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Building permit provisions, see
§§ 150.030 through
150.039
§ 153.172 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
   No land shall be used or occupied except for agricultural purposes and no
building hereafter structurally altered or erected shall be used or changed and
used until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building
Inspector stating that the building or the proposed use thereof complies with
the provisions of this chapter. A like certificate shall be issued for the
purpose of maintaining, renewing, changing or extending a non-conforming use. A
certificate of occupancy, either for the whole or part of the building, shall
be applied for coincidental with the application for a building permit and
shall be issued within ten days after the erection or structural alteration of
such building or part thereof when it shall have been completed in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. A record of all certificates shall be kept
on file in the office of the Building Inspector and copies shall be furnished,
on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the
building erected. No permit for excavation for, or erection of any building, or
part of a building, or for repairs to, or alterations of a building shall be
issued until after a statement of its intended use has been filed by the
applicant.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
Penalty, see § 10.99
Cross-reference:
   Inspection procedure for certificate of occupancy, see
§ 150.020
§ 153.173 REMEDIES.
   In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained or building, structure or land is
used in violation of this chapter, the Building Inspector or any appropriate
authority, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or
other appropriate action or proceeding to restrain, correct or abate the
violation, to prevent the occupancy of such building, structure or land, or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the premises. Any
notice of violation shall be delivered to the holder of the development
approval and to the landowner of the property involved, if the landowner is not
the holder of the development approval, by personal delivery, electronic
delivery, or first-class mail and may be provided by similar means to the
occupant of the property or the person undertaking the work or activity. The
notice of violation may be posted on the property. The person providing the
notice of violation shall certify to the town that the notice was provided, and
the certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.174 AMENDMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   This chapter, including the official zoning map, may be amended from
time to time, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been
referred first to the Planning Board. After thorough review, including public
forums if deemed necessary, the Planning Board shall submit to the Board of
Commissioners a written statement as to whether the proposed amendment is
consistent with the town’s comprehensive long range planning document. When
conducting a review of proposed zoning text or map amendments pursuant to this
section, the Planning Board shall advise and comment on whether the proposed
action is consistent with any comprehensive plan that has been adopted and any
other officially adopted plan that is applicable. The Planning Board shall
provide a written recommendation to the Board of Commissioners that addresses
plan consistency, but a comment by the Planning Board that a proposed amendment
is inconsistent with the comprehensive plan shall not preclude consideration or
approval of the proposed amendment by the Board of Commissioners. If a zoning
map amendment qualifies as a "large-scale rezoning" under G.S. § 160D-602(b),
the Planning Board statement describing plan consistency may address the
overall rezoning and describe how the analysis and policies in the relevant
adopted plans were considered in the recommendation made.
   (B)   Hearing and notice requirements. A public hearing shall be held by the
Board of Commissioners before adoption of any proposed amendment to this
chapter. A notice of such public hearing shall be given once a week for two
successive calendar weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the town,
the notice to be published the first time not less than ten days nor more than
25 days prior to the date established for such public hearing. Whenever there
is a zoning map amendment, the owner of that parcel of land shown on the county
tax listing, and the owners of all parcels of land abutting that parcel of land
as shown on the county tax listing and parcels within 100 feet of the subject
property, shall be mailed notice of a public hearing on the proposed amendment
by first class mail at the last address listed for such owners on the county
tax abstracts. For the purpose of this section, properties are abutting even if
separated by a street, railroad, or other transportation corridor. The notice
must be deposited in the mail at least ten but not more than 25 days prior to
the date of the public hearing. The person mailing such notices shall certify
to the Board of Commissioners that fact and such certificate shall be deemed
conclusive in the absence of fraud. At the same time the first notice is sent
out, a sign shall be posted on the affected property stating:
      (1)   The date of the hearing;
      (2)   The purpose of the hearing; and
      (3)   Where to get more information regarding the action.
   (C)   When a zoning map amendment is proposed, the town shall prominently
post a notice of the public hearing on the site proposed for rezoning or on an
adjacent public street or highway right-of-way at least ten but more than 25
days prior to the date of the hearing. When multiple parcels are included
within a proposed zoning map amendment, a posting on each individual parcel is
not required, but the town shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable
notice to interested persons.
   (D)   (1)   If the adoption or modification of the ordinance would result in
changes to the zoning map or would change or affect the permitted uses of land
located five miles or less from the perimeter boundary of a military base, the
Board of Commissioners shall provide written notice of the proposed changes by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the Commander of the military base
not less than ten days nor more than 25 days before the date fixed for the
public hearing. If the military provides comments or analysis regarding the
compatibility of the proposed ordinance or amendment with military operations
at the base, the Board of Commissioners shall take the comments and analysis
into consideration before making a final determination on the ordinance.
      (2)   If the adoption or modification of the ordinance would result in
changes to the zoning map or would change or affect the permitted uses of land
within the jurisdiction of Caswell Beach, the Board of Commissioners shall
provide written notice of the proposed changes by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the manager of the Cape Fear Regional Jetport not less
than ten days nor more than 25 days before the date fixed for the public
hearing. If the manager of the Jetport provides comments or analysis regarding
the compatibility of the proposed ordinance or amendment with operations at the
airport, the Board of Commissioners shall take the comments and analysis into
consideration before making a final determination on the ordinance.
   (E)   No amendment to zoning regulations or a zoning map that down-zones
property shall be initiated nor is it enforceable without the written consent
of all property owners whose property is the subject of the down-zoning
amendment, unless the down-zoning amendment is initiated by the town. For
purposes of this section, "down-zoning" means a zoning ordinance that affects
an area of land in one of the following ways: (1) by decreasing the development
density of the land to be less dense than was allowed under its previous usage;
or (2) by reducing the permitted uses of the land that are specified in a
zoning ordinance or land development regulation to fewer uses than were allowed
under its previous usage.
   (F)   A fee will be charged for each application for business use or
application for rezoning of any property within the zoning jurisdiction of the
town. A schedule of fees shall be maintained in the office of the Town Clerk.
   (G)   Proposed changes or amendments to this chapter may be initiated by the
Board of Commissioners, the Planning Board, the Board of Adjustment or by one
or more interested persons.
   (H)   An application for any change or amendment shall contain a statement
of the present regulation, the proposed amendment to it and the name and
address of the party requesting the change. An application for any change or
amendment of a district boundary shall contain a legal description of the
property to be affected by the change in the name and address of the party
requesting the change.
   (I)   No amendment shall become effective except by favorable vote of three-
fourths of all members of the Board of Commissioners.
   (J)   When adopting or rejecting any zoning text or map amendment, the Board
of Commissioners shall approve a brief statement describing whether its action
is consistent or inconsistent with an adopted comprehensive plan. The
requirement for a plan consistency statement may also be met by a clear
indication in the minutes of the Board of Commissioners meeting that at the
time of action on the amendment the Board was aware of and considered the
Planning Board's recommendations and any relevant portions of an adopted
comprehensive plan. If a zoning map amendment is adopted and the action was
deemed inconsistent with the adopted plan, the zoning amendment shall have the
effect of also amending any future land-use map in the approved plan, and no
additional request or application for a plan amendment shall be required. When
adopting or rejecting any petition for a zoning map amendment, an additional
statement analyzing the reasonableness of the proposed rezoning shall be
approved by the Board of Commissioners. This statement of reasonableness may
consider, among other factors, (i) the size, physical conditions, and other
attributes of the area proposed to be rezoned; (ii) the benefits and detriments
to the landowners, the neighbors, and the surrounding community; (iii) the
relationship between the current actual and permissible development on the
tract and adjoining areas and the development that would be permissible under
the proposed amendment; (iv) why the action taken is in the public interest;
and (v) any changed conditions warranting the amendment. If a zoning map
amendment qualifies as a "large-scale rezoning" under G.S. § 160D-602(b), the
Board of Commissioners statement on reasonableness may address the overall
rezoning. The statement of reasonableness and the plan consistency statement
required by this section may be approved as a single statement.
   (K)   If a zoning map amendment qualifies as a "large-scale rezoning" under
G.S. § 160D-602(b), the statement describing plan consistency may address the
overall rezoning and describe how the analysis and policies in the relevant
adopted plans were considered in the recommendation made. If a zoning map
amendment is adopted and the action was deemed inconsistent with the adopted
comprehensive plan, the zoning amendment shall have the effect of also amending
the future land-use map in the approved plan, and no additional request or
application for a plan amendment shall be required.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 11-11-04; Am. Ord. passed 1-13- 05; Am.
Res. passed 4-8-10; Am. Res. passed 12-13-12; Am. Ord. 2014-001-O, passed 4-10-
14; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 153.175 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   In interpreting and applying the provisions of the chapter, the provisions
shall be held to the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
safety, health, convenience, propriety or general welfare. It is not intended
by this chapter to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenants,
or other agreements between parties, provided, however, that where this chapter
imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises or upon the
height of buildings, or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or
required by other ordinances, rules, regulations or by easements, covenants or
agreements, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.
(Ord. passed 6-8-78; Am. Res. passed 4-8-10)
§ 153.176 PERMIT REVOCATION.
   Any permit or development approval issued under this chapter may be revoked
by the permit-issuing authority by the same process as was used for the
approval, this shall include any notice and hearing requirements for a special
use permit. Before permits other than special use may be revoked, the Zoning
Administrator shall give the permit recipient ten days' notice of intent to
revoke the permit and shall inform the recipient of the alleged reasons for the
revocation and of his/her right to request an informal hearing on the
allegations. If the permit is revoked, the Zoning Administrator shall provide
to the permittee a written statement of the decision and the reasons therefor.
Appeals may be made to the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. passed - -)
CHAPTER 154: STORMWATER REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Definitions
Stormwater Management
   
154.05   Short title
   
154.06   Goals and purposes
   
154.07   Findings of fact
   
154.08   Objectives
   
154.09   Applicability
   
154.10   Stormwater management standards
   
154.11   Stormwater management plan
   
154.12   Procedures and fees
   
154.13   Reserved
   
154.14   Maintenance
   
154.15   Variances
Illicit Stormwater Discharge
   
154.25   Short title
   
154.26   Findings of fact
   
154.27   Objectives
   
154.28   Applicability
   
154.29   Responsibility for Administration
   
154.30   Ultimate responsibility
   
154.31   Watercourse protection
   
154.32   Requirements to prevent, control and reduce stormwater pollutants by
the use of Best Management Practices
   
154.33   Permitted discharge activity
   
154.34   Discharge prohibitions
   
154.35   Monitoring of discharge
   
154.36   Suspension of stormwater drain access
   
154.37   Notification of spills or release
   
154.38   Notice of violation
   
154.39   Appeal of notice of violation
   
154.40   Enforcement measures after appeal
   
154.41   Injunctive relief
   
154.42   Reserved
   
154.43   Violations deemed a public nuisance
   
154.44   Criminal prosecution
   
154.45   Remedies not exclusive
 
   
154.99   Enforcement and penalties
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVERSE EFFECT.  Any modifications, alteration or effects on a feature or
characteristic of waterbodies, watercourses, or wetlands that are or may be
potentially harmful to human health, welfare, safety or property.
   AREAS OF ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERN (AEC). Critical areas such as estuarine
waters, coastal wetlands and public trust waters, designated by the N.C.
Coastal Resources Commission as needing protection.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (EMT). Activities or structural improvements that
help reduce the quantity and improve the quality of storm water runoff. BMPs
include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and other practices to
control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage
from raw material storage.
   BUFFER.  An area of vegetation between a water body and developed land that
serves as a filter for upland runoff, reducing the amount of pollution that
enters the water.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR. See “Code Enforcement Officer”.
   BUILT-UPON AREA.  Portion of property covered by impervious or semi-pervious
cover.
   BUSH HOGGING.  A form of clearing where undergrowth and brush is removed by
mechanical means which does not otherwise disturb the soil.
   CAMA. Coastal Area Management Act, passed by the North Carolina General
Assembly in 1974, lays the framework for the N.C. Coastal Management Program by
establishing guidelines for development in designated areas of environmental
concern. CAMA also created the Coastal Resources Commission and Coastal
Resources Advisory Council. The Coastal Resources Commission carves out a
permit program to guide development in AECs.
   CAMA PERMIT. One of the principal ways CAMA protects North Carolina’s
natural resources is through the coastal management permitting program. Major
permits are required for any development proposed in a designated area of
environmental concern. Minor permits may be issued locally if there is a
documented local permitting official.
   CLEAN WATER ACT.  A federal act enacted by Congress to establish uniform
national standards to restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and
biological integrity of our nation’s waters. Cited as the “Federal Water
Pollution Control Act” (as amended) 33 U.S.C. § 1251.
   CLEARING. The cutting and removal of trees and brush from the land. For
purposes of this subchapter, CLEARING shall not include mowing of man made
lawns, cutting, trimming, or transplanting small vegetation, or the removal of
dead vegetation, dead tree limbs or dead trees.
   COASTAL RESOURCES COMMISSION (CRC). Fifteen-member board appointed by the
governor that has responsibility for policy and regulation concerning coastal
management.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  The Town Building Inspector who is charged under
G.S. § 160D-1104 with certain responsibilities including the provisions of this
subchapter in coordination with the Stormwater Administrator.
   DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES (DENR). The state government
department that oversees the operations of the Divisions of Water Quality,
Coastal Management, Marine Fisheries, Land Resources, Parks and Recreation and
Air Quality.
   DETENTION. The collection and storage of surface water for subsequent
gradual discharge.
   DEVELOPER.  Any person who engages in development either as the owner or as
the agent of an owner of property.
   DEVELOPMENT.  Any type of construction, associated land-clearing and land
alteration.
   DISCHARGE.  The volume of water (and suspended sediment) that passes a given
location within a given period of time.
   DIVISION OF COASTAL MANAGEMENT (DCM).  The state agency responsible for
implementing and enforcing the Coastal Area Management Act. The DCM serves as
staff to the Coastal Resources Commission.
   DIVISION OF WATER QUALITY (DWQ). The staff to the Environmental Management
Commission or EMC. Staff enforces rules for wetlands, groundwater and surface
water permits.
   DRAINAGE SYSTEM.  The path through which water flows from one location to
another and includes all waterbodies, watercourses and wetlands.
   EASEMENT. A voluntary, legally binding agreement in which the land owner
sells or donates some or all of his or her rights to develop or use the land.
   EMERGENCY. A situation or condition requiring immediate action. For purposes
of this subchapter, this situation or condition must threaten life or create an
immediate health hazard. Inundation of buildings or structures by flood waters
is not in itself an emergency. Road flooding that makes emergency vehicle
passage impossible is an emergency.
   ENGINEERED PLAN. A plan prepared by a professional engineer licensed by the
state of North Carolina to design and oversee the installation of stormwater
management systems.
   ENTITIES.  Those parts of the town, exclusive of the neighborhoods, where
stormwater management controls may be appropriate. For purposes of this
subchapter, it includes the Oak Island Golf Course, the Progress Energy
facility, the Coast Guard Station, State Route 1100, and other areas where
development type activity could be performed via easements, such as public
utilities.
   EROSION.  The wearing or washing away of soil by the action of wind and
water.
   ESTUARY/ESTUARINE. That part of a river, stream or body of water having
unimpeded connection with the open sea, where sea water is measurably diluted
with freshwater derived from land drainage.
   EXCAVATION.  The process where soil (earth, stone or other materials) at a
development site is disturbed and moved.
   FECAL COLIFORM.  Non-pathogenic bacteria found in the waste of warm-blooded
animals and used as an indicator of the possibility of pathogenic viruses,
bacteria, and protozoans in the water.
   FILLING.  The addition of soil or sand to a development site for purposes of
changing the site’s soil composition or contour.
   FLOOD.  The temporary rise in the level of any waterbody, watercourse or
wetland which results in the inundation of areas not normally covered by water.
   GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM (GIS). Computer hardware and software that is
used for compilation, storage, analysis and display of geographic and
associated tabular data. This system can be used to produce maps that overlay
various environmental and physical features.
   GRADING. The cutting and or filing of the land surface through the movement
of earth, stone, soil or sand for purposes of changing a development site
contour to a desired slope or elevation.
   GROUND ABSORPTION. See “Impervious Surfaces”.
   GROUNDWATER.  The water that occurs beneath the earth’s surface between
saturated soil and rock and that supplies wells and springs.
   GRUBBING.  The removal and disposal of stumps and roots of vegetation.
   IMPERVIOUS.  The condition of being impenetrable by water.
   IMPERVIOUS SURFACE. A surface, such as pavement or a structure, that
prevents water from infiltrating the underlying soil.
   INFILTRATION.  The penetration of water through the ground surface into the
subsurface soil or the penetration of water from the soil into a pipe.
   INTERCEPTION. The process whereby the amount of rainfall that reaches the
ground is reduced due to rainfall absorption by vegetation, principally trees.
   LANDSCAPE CONSTRUCTION. Development that does not disturb the land so that
watercourses are affected but does influence the amount and direction of
stormwater runoff. For purpose of this subchapter, it is distinguished from
stormwater management. All landscaping shall be consistent with and in all
respects comply fully with the Town of Caswell Beach landscape construction
requirements contained in §
150.072.
   MANNING COEFFICIENT. Channel roughness factor “n” used in the Manning
Formula. This formula is used to determine the rate of flow (mean velocity) in
natural watercourses (open channel) with the “n” factor being a key
determinant. Nominal coefficients values range from one, which is a very smooth
channel (n = .012) to 24, which is very rough channel (n = .15).
   MINOR PERMIT. A minor CAMA development permit is required for small
projects, such as a single-family home. Minor permits are issued on a local
level, usually by an employee of a county or town who is under contract to the
Division of Coastal Management as a Local Permit Officer.
   NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES). An EPA administered
program established in 1972 by the Clean Water Act to control point source
discharges. Phase II, signed into law in December 1999, requires designated
small municipal separate stormwater sewer systems (MS4) to be permitted.
   NEIGHBORHOOD. An artificial subdivision of the town. For purposes of this
subchapter, it includes the Arboretum, Caswell Dunes, Ocean Greens, and the Oak
Island Beach Villas.
   NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION. Pollution that enters the natural environment
through runoff with no discrete point discharge.
   OCEAN HAZARD AREAS. Ocean beaches, areas near inlets, and areas behind the
dunes (the size of the area behind the dunes depends on the erosion rates and
flood potential at the site).
   OUTFALL. The point where wastewater or drainage discharges from a sewer
pipe, ditch or other conveyance to a receiving body of water.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial, to include any
individual, firm, corporation, agency, business, estate, trust, partnership,
association, two or more persons having a joint or common interest or any other
legal entity.
   PROFESSIONAL LICENSED ENGINEER. A person who, by reason of special knowledge
and use of the mathematical, physical and engineering sciences and the
principles and methods of engineering analysis and design, acquired by
engineering education and engineering experience, is qualified to practice
engineering, and who has been certified as such by the North Carolina State
Board of Examiners for Engineers.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The person who is vested with the fee ownership, dominion or
title of a property. This term may also be applicable to a tenant, if
chargeable under his or her lease for the maintenance of the property, and any
agent of the owner or tenant including a developer.
   REDEVELOPMENT. Any new development activity on an already developed site
that has no net increase in the existing built upon area or that provides equal
or greater stormwater controls than the previous development.
   RETENTION. The collection and storage of stormwater runoff without
subsequent discharge to surface waters.
   RUNOFF. Water from any source that is not absorbed in the immediate location
of its contact with the ground and moves away from its point of origin,
draining off the land into bodies of water.
   SEDIMENT. Fine particles of mud, clay, silt and organic material that are
carried or suspended in water or have settled in a water body and have been
washed from land to water usually after rain.
   SITE. Any tract, lot or parcel of land or combination of these that are in
one ownership, or are contiguous and in diverse ownership where development is
to be performed as part of a unit, subdivision or project.
   STORMWATER.  Water that is generated by rainfall, causes runoff and often is
muted into drainage systems.
   STORMWATER ADMINISTRATOR.  The official appointed by the Board of
Commissioners as responsible for stormwater management in the town.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT. Functions associated with planning, designing,
constructing, maintaining, financing and regulating the facilities that
collect, store, control and/or convey stormwater.
   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT/LANDSCAPE CONSTRUCTION PLAN (SM/LC FLAN).  A plan or
sketch submitted to the town’s building inspector as part of a permit
application per the provisions of this subchapter. This plan must show the
location of intended development and existing vegetation as well as vegetation
that will be added in the way of the landscaping. The planned stabilization of
any unplanted areas to prevent wind/water erosion will also be shown.
   STORMWATER PLAN. A plan prepared by an engineer licensed by the State of
North Carolina to design stormwater management and mitigation plans that meet
or exceed the most current industry standard best management practices. For the
purposes of this policy, anytime the term STORMWATER PLAN is used it shall have
the meaning set forth above.
   STORMWATER SYSTEM. All man-made structures or natural features within the
town that serve to provide for conveyance of runoff water resulting from
natural storm events. Components of the stormwater system include but are not
limited to swales, ditches, pipes, channels, creeks, ponds, weirs, culverts,
and inlet structures. In quantitative control terms, a system of vegetative and
structural measures which control the increased volume and rate of surface
runoff caused by man-made changes to the land and which have the effect of
maintaining the predevelopment patterns of flood magnitude and frequency. In
qualitative control terms, a system of vegetative, structural and other
measures which control or treat pollutants carried by surface runoff.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined
together in some definite manner but shall not include fences or signs.
   TREE.  Any woody perennial plant such as a large shade or pine tree which
usually has one or more main stems or trunk.
   TWENTY-FIVE YEAR FREQUENCY STORM.  The storm of the largest intensity
expected to occur on the average every 25 years and of a duration that will
produce the peak rate of runoff for the watershed of interest.
   UNITED STATES ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS.  Federal regulatory agency that
adopts regulations that implement EPA guidelines. Federal laws provide the
basic minimum guidelines for regulation.
   UNITED STATES ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA). Federal regulatory
agency that adopts regulations that are general guidelines for the disposal of
dredge-and-fill material.
   VARIANCE. A special exception from the strict letter of the law determined
on a case-by-case basis determined by findings of fact and conclusions of law
demonstrating that the request is not due to the result of the applicant’s own
actions, but rather, is the result of circumstances beyond their control.
   VEGETATION. All plant growth to include trees, shrubs, vines, ferns, mosses
and grasses.
   VEGETATIVE FILTER. An area of natural or planted vegetation through which
stormwater flows in a diffuse manner so that runoff does not become channelized
and that provides for control of stormwater runoff through infiltration or
filtering of pollutants.
   WATERBODY. Any natural or artificial pond, marsh, lake, reservoir or other
area which ordinarily or intermittently contains water and has a discernible
shoreline.
   WATERCOURSE.  A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   WATERSHED. Geographic region where water drains to a particular river,
stream or body of water. Usually a confluence of streams, creeks or drainage
canals.
   WETLAND. Saltwater or freshwater areas that are either permanently,
seasonally or irregularly flooded. These areas contain the proper balance of
physical, chemical and biological conditions needed to break down or neutralize
many pollutants. Tidal flats, swamps, bogs and marshes are all common wetland
areas.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05; Am. Res. passed 10-13-11; Am. Ord. passed - -)
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 154.05 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Stormwater Management subchapter for
Caswell Beach, North Carolina.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05)
§ 154.06 GOALS AND PURPOSES.
   The preservation of water quality and protection against flooding are
central environmental goals of the town. In order to meet these important
goals, the town adopts this stormwater management subchapter for the following
purposes:
   (A)   To regulate new development, redevelopment, and other construction
activities within the jurisdiction of the town, consistent with federal, state
and local requirements, and the town’s environmental goals.
   (B)   To provide the structure for which the authority of the town to
administer and enforce stormwater quantity and quality regulations will be
exercised.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05)
§ 154.07 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   The Board of Commissioners finds that development without control of
drainage has a significant impact upon the health, safety and welfare of the
community. More specifically:
   (A)   Uncontrolled stormwater runoff can carry pollutants into receiving
water bodies, degrade water quality and result in closures of shellfish waters.
   (B)   Uncontrolled stormwater runoff can increase nutrients such as
phosphorous and nitrogen, thereby accelerating eutrophication of receiving
waters, adversely affecting flora and fauna.
   (C)   Improperly channeling water increases the velocity of runoff thereby
increasing erosion and sedimentation.
   (D)   Construction requiring the alteration of natural topography and
removal of vegetation tends to cause a loss of natural recharge areas and
increase erosion.
   (E)   Siltation of water bodies resulting from increased erosion decreases
their capacity to hold and transport water interferes with navigation, and
harms flora and fauna.
   (F)   Impervious surfaces increases the volume and rate of stormwater runoff
and allow less water to percolate into the soil, thereby decreasing groundwater
recharge.
   (G)   Improperly managed stormwater runoff can increase the incidence of
flooding and the level of floods which occur, endangering property and human
life.
   (H)   Improperly managed stormwater runoff can interfere with the
maintenance of optimum salinity in estuarine areas, thereby disrupting
biological productivity.
   (I)   The economy of the town as well as the health, safety and welfare of
its citizens is dependent upon the preservation of healthy beaches, clean
navigable waterways, abundant fishing and shellfishing resources, and a healthy
ecosystem that attracts visitors to the town.
   (J)   Many future problems can be avoided or substantially mitigated if land
is developed in accordance with sound stormwater runoff management practices.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05)
§ 154.08 OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   In order to protect, maintain, and enhance both the immediate and the
long-term health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the town, this
subchapter has the following objectives:
      (1)   Promote productive and enjoyable harmony between human activities
and nature.
      (2)   Protect, restore and maintain the chemical, physical and biological
integrity of the waters in and around the town.
      (3)   Prevent individuals and business organizations from causing harm to
the community by activities which adversely affect water resources.
      (4)   Encourage the construction of drainage systems which aesthetically
and functionally approximate natural systems.
      (5)   Encourage the protection of natural systems and the use of them in
ways which do not impair their beneficial functioning.
      (6)   Encourage the use of drainage systems which minimize the
consumption of electrical energy or petroleum fuels to move water, remove
pollutants, or maintain the systems.
      (7)   Minimize the transport of pollutants to area surface waters.
      (8)   Protect and maintain natural salinity levels in estuarine areas.
      (9)   Minimize erosion and sedimentation.
      (10)   Prevent damage to wetlands and, insofar as possible, to the local
natural recharge areas known as interdunal troughs.
      (11)   Prevent damage from flooding while recognizing that natural
fluctuations in water levels are beneficial.
      (12)   Protect, restore and maintain the habitat of fish and wildlife.
   (B)   Ensure the attainment of these objectives by requiring the approval
and implementation of stormwater management plans for all activities which may
have a significant adverse impact upon community waters and nearby properties.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05; Am. Res. passed 10-13-11)
§ 154.09 APPLICABILITY.
   All development and redevelopment, including but not limited to, all single-
family and duplex residential dwellings, constructed within the town after the
effective date of this subchapter must comply with the minimum stormwater
control standards in §
154.07.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05)
§ 154.10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Performance standards. The proposed development, development activity,
or redevelopment shall be planned and designed by a professional engineer who
shall certify the system has been constructed and will be maintained to meet
each of the following standards:
      (1)   Ensure that, after development or redevelopment, runoff from the
site approximates the rate of flow, volume and timing of runoff that would have
occurred following the same rainfall under existing conditions and to the
extent practicable, the predevelopment conditions, unless runoff is discharged
into an off-site drainage facility.
      (2)   Maintain the natural hydrodynamic characteristics of the watershed.
      (3)   Protect and, to the extent feasible, restore the quality of surface
waters.
      (4)   Ensure that erosion during and after development and redevelopment
is minimized.
      (5)   Protect the beneficial functioning of wetlands as areas for the
natural storage of surface waters and the chemical reduction and assimilation
of pollutants.
      (6)   Prevent increased flooding and damage that results from improper
location, construction, and design of structures in areas which are presently
subject to danger from flooding.
      (7)   Prevent or reverse salt water intrusion.
      (8)   Protect the natural fluctuating levels of salinity in estuarine
areas.
      (9)   Protect, insofar as possible, the integrity of interdunal trough
groundwater recharge areas.
      (10)   Minimize injury to flora and fauna and adverse impacts to fish and
wildlife habitats.
      (11)   Otherwise further the objectives of this subchapter.
   (B)   Design standards. To ensure attainment of the objectives of this
subchapter and to ensure that performance standards will be met, the design,
construction and maintenance of drainage systems shall be consistent with best
management practices of the engineer profession, the law and relevant codes of
the United States, State of North Carolina, and the Town of Caswell Beach, to
include but not limited to all town development codes, CAMA, and the adopted
land use policy.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05; Am. Res. passed 10-13-11)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   Every application for a development or redevelopment permit shall have an
engineered stormwater management plan in a form acceptable to the town that
meets or exceeds the standards of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05; Am. Res. passed 10-13-11)
§ 154.12 PROCEDURES AND FEES.
   (A)   Any person planning a development, as defined in this subchapter,
unless exempted, shall submit a stormwater management plan to the town.
   (B)   A permit fee will be collected at the time the stormwater management
plan is submitted and will reflect the cost of administration and management of
the permitting process. Should the town determine it necessary to hire a
consulting engineer to verify the applicant’s engineered plans or to ensure the
plans were followed, subsequent fees shall be charged sufficient to pay for
those services. The fee schedule may be amended from time to time, and shall be
kept on file in the Town Clerk’s office.
   (C)   The stormwater management plan shall not be approved unless it clearly
indicates that the proposed development will meet the performance standards and
the design standards of this subchapter, except where a variance has been
granted.
   (D)   Within 30 days after submission of the completed stormwater management
plan, the town may approve, with or without specified conditions or
modifications, or reject the plan and shall notify the applicant accordingly.
If the town has not rendered a decision within 30 days after plan submission,
it shall inform the applicant of the status of the review process and the
anticipated completion date. If the plan is rejected or modified, the town
shall state its reasons. While the town will not actually design an acceptable
plan for the applicant, it will do all it can to work with the applicant to
achieve an acceptable project plan in harmony with this subchapter. Projects
requiring formal Planning Board and Board of Commissioners review shall not be
subject to the 30-day requirement. Approval of stormwater management plans for
these projects shall be determined in conjunction with the Planning Board’s and
the Board of Commissioner’s formal review process.
   (E)   The applicant shall arrange with the town the scheduling of the
following inspections:
      (1)   Initial inspection.  Prior to approval of the stormwater management
plan.
      (2)   Bury inspection.  Prior to the burial of any underground drainage
structure.
      (3)   Erosion control inspection.  As necessary to ensure effective
control of erosion and sedimentation.
      (4)   Finish inspection.  When all work including installation of all
drainage facilities has been completed.
   (F)   The town shall inspect the work and shall either approve it or notify
the applicant in writing in what respects there has been a failure to comply
with the requirements of the approved stormwater management plan. Any portion
of the work which does not comply shall be promptly corrected by the applicant
or the applicant will be subject to the penalty provisions of this subchapter.
   (G)   Any person aggrieved by the action of any official charged with the
enforcement of this chapter, as to the result of the disapproval of a properly
filed application for a permit, issuance of a written notice of violation, or
an alleged failure to properly enforce the ordinance with regard to a specific
application shall have the right to appeal the action to the Town of Caswell
Beach Board of Commissioners. The appeal must be filed within 20 days of the
mailing date of the official transmittal of the final decision or determination
to the applicant, and it must state clearly the grounds on which the appeal is
based, and shall be processed in the manner prescribed for hearing
administrative appeals.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05; Am. Res. passed 10-13-11)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.13 RESERVED.
§ 154.14 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Every owner of drainage systems has a responsibility to properly
maintain and repair the system utilizing appropriate technology and best
management practices.
   (B)   Any private drainage systems designed to serve subdivisions, multi-
family residential developments, and commercial structures shall have adequate
recorded easements to permit the town to inspect, and, if necessary, to take
corrective action should the owner fail to properly maintain the system. A copy
of such recorded provisions shall be provided to the town and shall be
considered a condition of any approval granted under this subchapter. Before
taking corrective action, the town shall give the owner written notice of the
nature of the existing defects. If the owner fails within 30 days from the date
of notice to commence corrective action, and therefore to proceed with due
diligence to make all necessary corrections, and fails to appeal the matter to
the Board of Commissioners, the town may take necessary action. If the town
takes necessary corrective action, the cost shall become a lien on the real
property until paid, or if the property is under common ownership, such as a
homeowners association, the cost shall be assessed equitably among all property
owners in the subdivision, multi-family residential development, and/or
commercial structure.
   (C)   The owner of the property on which work has been done pursuant to this
subchapter for private stormwater management facilities, or any other person or
agent in control of such property, shall maintain in good condition and
promptly repair and restore all grade surfaces, drains, structures, and other
protective devices. This includes regular removal of dead trees, leaves, and
debris that accumulates in ponds. Such repairs or restoration shall be in
accordance with approved plans.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05; Am. Res. passed 10-13-11)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.15 VARIANCES.
   The Board of Commissioners will hear all requests for variances from the
provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05; Am. Res. passed 10-13-11)
ILLICIT STORMWATER DISCHARGE
§ 154.25 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known as the Illicit Stormwater Discharge
subchapter of the Town of Caswell Beach, North Carolina.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05)
§ 154.26 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   The Board of Commissioners, based upon comprehensive science as evidenced
from the UNCW - Dr. Mike Malin Study of Tiny Piney Creek, among other data,
finds that the discharge of non-stormwater drainage to the waters of the state
and to the municipal stormwater drainage system could have significant adverse
impact upon the health, safety and welfare of the community. More specifically:
   (A)   Illicit stormwater discharges carry pollutants into receiving water
bodies, degrading water quality and effecting closure of shell fishing waters.
   (B)   Nutrients such as phosphorous and nitrogen accelerate eutrophication
of receiving waters adversely affecting flora and fauna.
   (C)   Improper connection to the storm drain system and to water of the
state adversely impacts the quality of receiving waters.
   (D)   Septic tank discharges from non-compliant systems, washing machine
discharges and illegal dumping into stormwater drains are examples of illicit
discharges.
   (E)   The town must have the authority to deter and/or stop illicit
discharges to stormwater drains, ditches and systems.
   (F)   Substantial economic losses result from adverse impacts on community
waters through illicit discharges.
   (G)   Illicit discharges to water bodies diminish their capacity to
naturally process runoff nutrients thereby harming flora and fauna.
   (H)   Pollutants in illicit discharges to waters can percolate into the soil
thereby decreasing groundwater quality.
   (I)   Improperly managed stormwater systems can decrease the quality of
property and human life.
   (J)   Improperly managed stormwater drainage systems can interfere with the
maintenance of estuarine areas and biological productivity.
   (K)   Future environmental problems can be avoided if land is developed and
used in compliance with the provisions of an illicit stormwater discharge
subchapter.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05; Am. Res. passed 10-13-11)
§ 154.27 OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for the health, safety
and general welfare of the community through the regulation of non-stormwater
discharges to the storm drainage system including the prohibition of discharges
which adversely affect the quality of groundwater and receiving water bodies.
This subchapter establishes methods for controlling the introduction of
pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) in order to
comply with requirements of the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit process.
   (B)   In order to protect, maintain and enhance the immediate and long-term
health, safety and general welfare of the community, this subchapter has the
following objectives:
      (1)   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal
separate storm sewer system and other community stormwater systems by
stormwater discharges by any user.
      (2)   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal
separate storm sewer system and other community stormwater systems.
      (3)   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspections,
surveillances, and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this subchapter.
      (4)   To encourage productive and enjoyable harmony between humanity and
nature.
      (5)   To protect and maintain the chemical, physical and biological
integrity of any and all waters.
      (6)   To prevent individuals and organizations from causing harm to the
community by activities which adversely affect water resources.
      (7)   To encourage the maintenance and construction of drainage systems
which aesthetically and functionally approximate natural systems.
      (8)   To encourage town citizens, property owners and visitors to be
aware of potential sources of illicit discharges so they can better manage
their actions in the environment.
      (9)   To protect natural systems and their uses in ways that do not
impair beneficial functioning.
      (10)   To increase and maintain the quality of groundwater sources.
      (11)   To protect and maintain estuarine areas.
      (12)   To prevent damage to waters, including wetlands and groundwater
systems.
      (13)   To protect and maintain fish and wildlife habitats.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05)
§ 154.28 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This subchapter shall apply to all water entering any storm drain
system generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless specifically
exempted by the town as an excluded discharge category.
   (B)   Stormwater discharges within the town occurring after the effective
date of this subchapter must comply with this subchapter. All persons must take
appropriate actions and measures as defined by this subchapter and other
appropriate regulations.
   (C)   All persons and organizations shall address present non-complying
illicit stormwater discharges including the following:
      (1)   Connections to a stormwater conveyance or stormwater conveyance
system which allows the discharge of non-stormwater, other than that in the
excluded discharge category, are unlawful. Prohibited discharges include but
are not limited to:
         (a)   Floor drains.
         (b)   Waste water from washing machines.
         (c)   Wastewater from sanitary sewers.
         (d)   Wash water from commercial vehicle washing or steam cleaning.
         (e)   Failed or failing wastewater disposal fields.
         (f)   Illicit discharge resulting from household pet waste.
         (g)   Illicit discharge resulting from lawn care products including
excessive fertilizers, lawn/landscape chemical treatments.
         (h)   Disposal of household hazardous pollutants.
         (i)   Abandoned water wells.
      (2)   Unless exempted or granted a variance pursuant to division (C)(6),
a corrective plan must be submitted and corrective action to remedy an
identified illicit stormwater discharge taken before:
         (a)   A plat is recorded or land is subdivided;
         (b)   An existing drainage system is altered, rerouted or deepened; or
         (c)   A new building permit is issued.
      (3)   The following development activities are exempt from the plan
requirement of this subchapter:
         (a)   Agricultural activity not involving the artificial drainage of
land.
         (b)   Variances. The town may grant a written variance from any
requirement of this subchapter using the following criteria:
            1.   There are special circumstances applicable to the subject
property or its intended use; and
            2.   The granting of the variance will not:
               a.   Significantly increase the rate of illicit discharge or
pollutants.
               b.   Have a significant adverse impact on area “404 wetlands”,
watercourse or water body.
               c.   Significantly contribute to the degradation of water
quality.
               d.   Otherwise significantly impair the attainment of the
objectives of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05; Am. Res. passed 10-13-11)
§ 154.29 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The town shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
subchapter. Any powers or duties imposed upon the town may be delegated or
contracted in writing to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest
of the town.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05)
§ 154.30 ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY.
   The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this subchapter
are minimum standards; therefore this subchapter does not intend nor imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05)
§ 154.31 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
   Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person’s lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. For the purpose of this section, beaver dams shall be
construed as debris. Beaver control is the responsibility of the property owner
who shall mitigate beaver related issues in accordance with state and federal
law. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned
structures within it adjacent to a watercourse so that such structures will not
become a hazard to the use, function or physical integrity of the watercourse.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05; Am. Res. passed 10-13-11)
§ 154.32 REQUIREMENTS TO PREVENT CONTROL AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY
THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES.
   The town will retain the latest available manual of best management
practices (BMPs) for illustrative purposes for use by those seeking to
appropriately manage stormwater discharges in accordance with this subchapter
or applicable ordinances. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial
establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from
accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into stormwater
drainage systems or watercourses through the use of structural and
nonstructural BMPs. Further, any person responsible for a property or premises
which is or may be the source of an illicit discharge, shall be required to
implement, at said person’s expense, additional structural or non-structural
BMPs to prevent the further discharge of discharge to stormwater drainage
systems or watercourses. Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid
NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial
activity shall be enforced by the State of North Carolina. The owner or
operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall prepare a facility-
specific pollution response plan that includes, at a minimum, BMP standards for
spill and release management of the anticipated flows. Sufficient response
equipment shall be kept on site and properly labeled as such. All employees
shall be familiar with the plan and the equipment. Included in the plan shall
be current emergency response numbers for local, state, and federal agencies
required to be notified of spills and releases.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05; Am. Res. passed 10-13-11)
§ 154.33 PERMITTED DISCHARGE ACTIVITY.
   Any person subject to a NPDES stormwater discharge permit (including
construction activity, land disturbance permit, industrial NPDES permit or
other NPDES permit) shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the town
prior to the allowing of discharges to stormwater drainage systems or
watercourse.
(Ord. 11-11-05)
§ 154.34 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into stormwater
drainage systems or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to
pollutants or waters containing pollutants that cause or contribute to a
violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater.
   (B)   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to
stormwater drainage systems or watercourses is prohibited except as described
below.
      (1)   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this subchapter:
         (a)   Rising ground water.
         (b)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water.
         (c)   Foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater
dewatering systems).
         (d)   Crawl space pumps.
         (e)   Other water source not containing pollutants.
      (2)   Discharges specified in writing by the town as being necessary to
protect public health and safety.
      (3)   Dye testing is an allowable discharge but requires a verbal
notification to the town prior to the time of the test.
      (4)   The prohibition shall not apply to any non-stormwater discharge
permitted under a NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued and
administered under compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver or
order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written
approval has been granted for any discharge to stormwater drainage systems or
watercourses.
   (C)   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to stormwater drainage systems is prohibited. This prohibition
expressly includes, without limitation, connections made in the past,
regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practice
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05; Am. Res. passed 10-13-11)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.35 MONITORING OF DISCHARGE.
   This section applies to all properties that have stormwater discharges.
   (A)   The town shall be permitted to enter and inspect property subject to
regulation under this subchapter as often as may be necessary to determine
compliance with this subchapter. If a discharger has security measures in
force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry onto
property, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access
to representatives of the town.
   (B)   Existing NPDES permit operators shall allow the town ready access to
all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination
and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of a NPDES permit
to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as
defined by state and federal law.
   (C)   The town has the right to establish on any permitted property such
devices as are necessary in the opinion of the town to conduct monitoring and/
or sampling of the stormwater discharge from the property. Sampling may include
turbidity, conform, nutrients, suspended solids. Other testing devices for
existing systems may include video recording, dye testing or similar
techniques.
   (D)   The town has the right to require NPDES permittees discharging
stormwater to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facilities
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and operating condition by the discharger at his or her expense. All devices
used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their
accuracy.
   (E)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
property to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the town and shall not be replaced.
The cost of clearing such access shall be borne by the property owner.
   (F)   Unreasonable delays in allowing the town access to a permitted
property is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this
subchapter. A person who is the operator of a property with a NPDES permit to
discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if
the person denies the town reasonable access to the permitted facility for the
purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this subchapter.
   (G)   If the town has been refused access to any part of the premises from
which stormwater is discharged, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to
believe that there may be a violation of this subchapter, or that there is a
need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling
program designed to verify compliance with this subchapter or any other order
issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and general
welfare of the community, then the town may seek issuance of a search warrant
from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05)
§ 154.36 SUSPENSION OF STORMWATER DRAIN ACCESS.
   (A)   The town may, without prior notice, suspend stormwater drain discharge
access to a person or business when such suspension is necessary to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present imminent and
substantial danger to the environment, or to the heath or welfare of persons,
or to stormwater drain systems, or to the waters of the community. If the
violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the
town may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to
stormwater systems or to the waters of the community, or to minimize damage to
persons.
   (B)   Any person discharging to a stormwater drainage system in violation of
this subchapter may have their stormwater drainage access terminated if such
termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The town will notify
the violator of the proposed termination of its stormwater drainage access. The
violator may petition the town for a reconsideration and hearing.
(Ord. 11-11-05)
§ 154.37 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS OR RELEASE.
   Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation, has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting in or may result in illegal discharges or
pollutants discharging into stormwater, stormwater system or community waters,
said person shall immediately implement their spill or release containment plan
and take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment and cleanup
of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said
person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies, town police, fire
and rescue departments, and town offices of the occurrence via emergency
dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said
person shall notify the town in person or by phone or facsimile no later than
the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed
by written notice addressed and mailed to the town within three business days
of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a
commercial or business establishment, the owner or operator of such
establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and
the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for
at least three years.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05; Am. Res. passed 10-13-11)
§ 154.38 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Any activity that is commenced without compliance with this subchapter
or is contrary to an approved plan as required by this subchapter shall be
deemed a public nuisance and may be restrained by injunction or otherwise
abated in a manner provided by law.
   (B)   When the town determines that an activity is not being carried out in
accordance with the requirements of this subchapter, the town will issue a
written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The notice of
violation shall contain:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner or applicant.
      (2)   The street address when available or a description of the building
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring.
      (3)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation.
      (4)   A description of the remedial actions necessary to bring the
development activity into compliance with this subchapter and a time schedule
for completion of such remedial action.
      (5)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed.
   (C)   The notice of violation shall be delivered to the holder of the
development approval and to the landowner of the property involved, if the
landowner is not the holder of the development approval, by personal delivery,
electronic delivery, or first-class mail and may be provided by similar means
to the occupant of the property or the person undertaking the work or activity.
The notice of violation may be posted on the property. The person providing the
notice of violation shall certify to the town that the notice was provided, and
the certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud.
   (D)   Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed
condition. Notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or
restoration must be completed. In the event that restoration is not undertaken
within a reasonable time after notice, the town may take necessary corrective
action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid.
Costs to the property owner may include:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analysis and reporting.
      (2)   The elimination of illicit connections and discharges.
      (3)   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
      (4)   Payment of costs for town administrative and remediation costs.
      (5)   Town’s cost for implementing source control or treatment BMPs.
   (E)   If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is
required, the said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail
to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the town or a
contractor will do the work and the expense thereof shall be charged to the
violator.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05; Am. Res. passed 10-13-11; Am. Ord. passed - -)
§ 154.39 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   A notice of violation issued pursuant to this subchapter constitutes a
determination from which administrative appeal may be taken to the Board of
Commissioners. A statement will be issued that the town’s determination of
violation may be appealed to the Board of Commissioners by filing a written
notice of appeal within 15 days of service of notice of violation. The decision
of the Board of Commissioners shall be final.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05)
§ 154.40 ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL.
   If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set
forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal within 15 days
of the decision of the Board of Commissioners upholding the violation,
representatives of the town may enter upon the subject property and take any
and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property.
It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, or agent in possession of any
premises to refuse to allow the town or their designated contractor to enter
upon the premises for the purposes set forth above.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05)
§ 154.41 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provisions or fail to
comply with any of the requirements of this subchapter. If a person violates or
continues to violate the provisions of this subchapter, the town may petition
for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from
activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to
perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05)
Penalty, see § 154.99
§ 154.42 RESERVED.
§ 154.43 VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any
condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of
this subchapter is a threat to public health, safety and welfare, and is
declared and deemed a nuisance, may be summarily abated or restored at the
violator’s expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel
the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. (G.S. § 160A-93).
(Ord. passed 11-11-05; Am. Res. passed 10-13-11)
§ 154.44 CRIMINAL PROSECUTION.
   (A)   Any person that has violated or continues to violate this subchapter
shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and
shall be subject to a criminal penalty cost, per each day of violation, and/or
imprisonment for a period of time not to exceed statutory limits.
   (B)   The town may recover all attorney’s fees, court costs, and other
expenses associated with enforcement of this subchapter, including sampling and
monitoring expenses.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05)
§ 154.45 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this subchapter are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is
within the discretion of the town to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05)
§ 154.99 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any development activity that is commenced without prior approval of a
stormwater management plan or is conducted contrary to an approved stormwater
management plan as required by this chapter may be deemed a public health
nuisance and may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner
prescribed by law. In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided
herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is
subject to a civil penalty. The penalty shall not be less than $100 nor more
than $1,000. Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day
during which the violation occurs or continues. If the violator does not pay a
civil penalty assessed by the town within 30 days after it is due, the town may
institute a civil action to recover the amount of the penalty assessed in the
Superior Court of Brunswick County. An assessed penalty that is not contested
is due when the violator is served with a notice of violation. An assessment
that is contested is due at the conclusion of the administrative and/or
judicial review of the assessment.
   (B)   Any violator may be required to restore the land disturbed by the
violator to its undisturbed condition. In such cases, the town shall bring an
action for mandatory and/or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement.
Should the violator fail to restore the land in accordance with the court’s
order of abatement, the town may execute the order of abatement and levy a lien
upon the property restored.
   (C)   When the town determines that development activity is not being
carried out in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, a stop work
order and notice of violation shall be issued to the owner of the property. The
notice of violation shall contain:
      (1)   The name and address of the owner or developer.
      (2)   The street address when available or a description of the building
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring.
      (3)   A statement specifying the nature of the violation.
      (4)   A description of the remedial actions necessary to bring the
development into compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for
completion of such remedial action.
      (5)   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed.
      (6)   A statement that the town’s determination may be appealed to the
Board of Adjustment by filing a written notice of appeal with the town within
15 days of service of the notice of violation.
   (D)   The notice of violation shall be served upon the person to whom it is
directed in any of, or any combination of, the following methods:
      (1)   By personal service upon the violator.
      (2)   By mailing a copy of the notice of violation by certified mail,
postage prepaid, returned receipt requested to such person at his or her last
known address. Notice shall be deemed to be received if no return is received
within ten days of the date of such mailing.
      (3)   By posting a notice in a visible location upon the property where a
violation is or was occurring. Notice of the violation shall be deemed to be
received by the violator immediately upon such posting.
   (E)   A notice of violation issued pursuant to this section constitutes a
determination from which an administrative appeal may be taken to the Board of
Adjustment.
   (F)   No action, inaction or election of remedy shall be construed as a
waiver of the town’s right to enforce any part of this chapter by any and all
remedies provided herein.
(Ord. passed 11-11-05)
   PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to 1975 Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
G.S. Section Code Section
G.S. Section                                  Code Section
Ch. 7A                                        151.34
                                              50.08,
                                              50.99,
                                              92.05,
14-4                                          95.20,
                                              96.06,
                                              131.99,
                                              152.99
14-4(b)                                       71.99
14-228.16                                     33.01
14-316                                        130.01
14-415.10 et seq.                             130.01
14-415.11(c)                                  130.01
14-415.23                                     130.01
18B-1001                                      99.01
20-138                                        72.02
20-219.11                                     90.21
Ch. 29                                        152.06
40A-3(b1)(1)                                  Ch. 92, Appendix A
40A-3(b1)(4)                                  Ch. 92, Appendix A
40A-3(b1)(7)                                  Ch. 92, Appendix A
40A-3(b1)(10)                                 Ch. 92, Appendix A
40A-3(b1)(11)                                 Ch. 92, Appendix A
40A-3(c)(8)                                   Ch. 92, Appendix A
40A-3(c)(9)                                   Ch. 92, Appendix A
40A-3(c)(10)                                  Ch. 92, Appendix A
40A-3(c)(12)                                  Ch. 92, Appendix A
40A-3(c)(13)                                  Ch. 92, Appendix A
40A-41                                        Ch. 92, Appendix A
40A-42(a)(2)                                  Ch. 92, Appendix A
Ch. 44A, Art. 1                               90.23
47-30                                         152.30,
                                              152.34
62A-1 et seq.                                 94.01
62A-3(9)                                      94.01
75A-13.3(a), (b)                              92.05
Ch. 105, Art. 5                               110.01
105-349                                       31.17
105-350                                       31.17
113-291.1                                     92.05
Ch. 115C                                      Ch. 92, Appendix A
115C-517                                      Ch. 92, Appendix A
Ch. 130A, Art. 9                              151.10
130A-185                                      91.01
130A-190                                      91.05
130A-290(a)(6)                                151.10
130A-290(a)(35)                               151.10
130A-290(a)(36)                               151.10
136-18(29)                                    153.026
136-66.10                                     152.03
136-66.11                                     152.03
136-102.6                                     152.51
Ch. 143, Art. 21, Part 6                      151.01
(143-215.51 - 143-215.62)
143-138                                       150.001
143-138(b5)                                   150.030
143-141                                       150.022
143-143.15                                    151.41
143-215.58                                    151.33,
                                              151.99
143-318 et seq.                               30.31
143-318.12(b)(1)                              30.32
143-755                                       153.143
153A-274                                      Ch. 92, Appendix A
153A-274(1)                                   Ch. 92, Appendix A
153A-274(2)                                   Ch. 92, Appendix A
153A-274(3)                                   Ch. 92, Appendix A
159-7 et seq.                                 31.18
159-25                                        31.18
Ch. 160A                                      32.03,
                                              153.001
160A-68                                       Charter, §
                                              3.3
160A-69                                       30.15
160A-70                                       30.16
160A-71                                       30.31
160A-74                                       30.30
160A-75                                       30.30
160A-79                                       10.01
160A-93                                       154.43
160A-146                                      30.01
160A-171                                      31.15
160A-172                                      31.15
160A-173                                      31.16
160A-175                                      91.11,
                                              131.99
160A-189                                      130.01
160A-193                                      95.19
160A-303.2                                    90.01
160A-307                                      153.026
160A-311                                      Ch. 92, Appendix A
160A-311(1)                                   Ch. 92, Appendix A
160A-311(2)                                   Ch. 92, Appendix A
160A-311(3)                                   Ch. 92, Appendix A
160A-311(4)                                   Ch. 92, Appendix A
160A-311(6)                                   Ch. 92, Appendix A
160A-311(7)                                   Ch. 92, Appendix A
160A-317                                      Ch. 52
160A-399.3, (Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Part 3B)      Ch. 92, Appendix A
160A-400.14                                   Ch. 92, Appendix A
                                              151.01,
Ch. 160D                                      153.136,
                                              153.155,
                                              153.161
Ch. 160D, Art. 8 (160D-801 - 160D-808)        152.05
Ch. 160D Art. 9, Part 4 (160D-940 - 160D-951) 152.41
Ch. 160D, Art. 12 (160D-1201 - 160D-1212)     150.056
                                              152.79,
                                              153.135,
160D-108                                      153.138,
                                              153.141,
                                              153.142
160D-402(d)                                   150.017
160D-403(b)                                   153.160
160D-406                                      153.155
160D-601                                      153.002,
                                              153.138
160D-602(b)                                   153.174
160D-702(b)                                   153.026
160D-801                                      152.04
160D-802(a)                                   152.06,
                                              152.30
160D-804                                      152.28
160D-806                                      152.27
160D-807                                      152.99
160D-1102                                     150.015,
                                              150.016
160D-1104                                     154.01
160D-1108                                     150.018
160D-1109                                     150.022
160D-1111                                     153.139
160D-1114                                     150.022
160D-1127                                     150.101
160D-1201 et seq.                             150.050
                                              150.053,
160D-1203                                     150.055,
                                              150.056
160D-1206                                     150.054
160D-1208                                     150.053
160D-1402                                     153.160
                                              
 
 
REFERENCES TO 1975 CODE
1975 Code Section 1996 Code Section
1975 Code Section 1996 Code Section
1-1-1             30.01
1-1-2             30.01
1-1-3             30.15
1-1-4             30.16
1-1-11            30.30
1-1-12            30.31
1-1-13            30.32
1-2-1             31.15
1-2-2             31.16
1-2-3             31.17
1-2-4             31.18
1-2-5             31.01
1-4-1             10.01
1-4-9             131.01
1-7-1             32.01
1-7-2             32.02
1-7-3             32.03
3-1-1             131.15
3-1-2             131.15
3-1-4             131.16
3-1-5             131.16
3-1-6             131.17
3-1-7             131.99
3-2-1             95.01
3-2-2             95.01
3-2-3             95.02
3-3-2             93.15
3-6-1             92.02
3-6-2             92.02
3-7-1             70.01
3-7-1(C)          70.99
3-7-2(A)          71.01
3-8-1             130.03
3-9-1             130.01
3-9-2             130.01
3-10-1            95.15
3-10-2            95.16
3-10-3            95.17
3-10-4            95.18
3-10-5            95.19
3-10-6            95.19
3-10-7            95.20
3-11-1            130.02
3-12-1            92.02
3-14-1            51.01
3-14-2            51.05
3-14-6            51.06
3-14-7            51.03
3-14-8            51.08
3-15-1            93.01
3-16-1            111.01
3-17-1            92.15
3-17-2            92.16
3-18-1            90.02
3-18-2            90.01
3-18-3            90.15
3-18-4            90.16
3-18-5            90.17
3-18-6            90.18
3-18-7            90.19
3-18-8            90.20
3-18-9            90.21
3-18-10           90.22
3-18-11           90.23
3-18-12           90.24
3-18-13           90.03
3-18-14           90.04
3-18-15           90.25
5-4-1             110.01
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
—      10-10-91    96.01 -
                     96.06
—      3-9-95      153.084
—      3-14-96     52.02
                     153.002,
—      4-10-97     153.025,
                     153.040
—      2-12-98     70.03
—      11-12-98    153.015
—      3-9-00      153.085
—      10-18-00    10.99
—      6-14-01     51.01 -
                     51.09
—      7-12-01     92.04
—      9-6-01      10.99
                     50.01 -
                     50.08,
                     50.20 -
                     50.22,
—      9-6-01      50.30,
                     50.32 -
                     50.35,
                     50.99,
                     91.06
—      11-8-01     150.038
—      1-10-02     50.08
—      2-14-02     51.03
—      4-11-02     51.03
                     91.01,
—      - -         91.06,
                     91.08
                     50.45 -
—      11-20-03    50.56,
                     50.99
—      12-11-03    150.038
—      1-8-04      153.015,
                     153.025
—      3-1-04      50.20
—      4-8-04      150.038
—      11-11-04    91.06,
                     153.174
—      6-9-05      10.99,
                     92.07
—      9-8-05      153.082
—      11-10-05    92.04
—      1-12-06     91.03,
                     91.05
—      3-9-06      110.01,
                     150.011
—      9-14-06     94.02
—      5-10-07     93.17
—      10-11-07    91.06
                     153.002,
—      12-13-07    153.029,
                     153.084
—      2-14-08     153.015
—      6-12-08     91.01,
                     91.09
—      9-11-08     91.09
—      4-9-09      52.02
—      4-9-09      96.02
                     31.15,
—      2-11-10     31.18,
                     31.19
                     152.01 -
                     152.12,
                     152.25 -
                     152.43,
                     152.49 -
—      4-8-10      152.56,
                     152.65,
                     152.66,
                     152.75-
                     152.80,
                     152.99,
                     Ch. 152 Appendix
                     153.001 -
                     153.004,
                     153.015,
                     153.016,
                     153.025 -
                     153.040,
                     153.050 -
                     153.057,
                     153.080 -
—      4-8-10      153.085,
                     153.095 -
                     153.098,
                     153.110 -
                     153.123,
                     153.135 -
                     153.142,
                     153.155 -
                     153.161,
                     153.170 -
                     153.175
—      5-13-10     91.09
—      4-5-11      52.02
                     52.03 -
                     52.06,
—      4-5-11      52.20 -
                     52.33,
                     52.99
                     50.01 -
                     50.04,
                     50.08,
—      4-14-11     50.20,
                     50.30,
                     50.32 -
                     50.35
                     52.02,
—      6-6-11      52.21,
                     52.99
—      6-9-11      150.039
—      8-11-11     150.030
—      10-13-11    150.072
                     154.01,
                     154.08,
                     154.10 -
                     154.12,
                     154.14,
                     154.15,
—      10-13-11    154.26,
                     154.28,
                     154.31,
                     154.32,
                     154.34,
                     154.37,
                     154.38,
                     154.43
—      11-10-11    52.01
—      5-10-12     30.15
—      5-10-12     153.084
—      9-13-12     50.32
—      11-8-12     51.01 -
                     51.10
—      11-8-12     153.002
—      12-13-12    153.174
                     72.01 -
—      5-11-17     72.03,
                     72.99
—      3-14-24     153.115
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.   Date Passed Code Section
—        - -         50.40
                       152.39 -
                       152.43,
                       153.001 -
                       153.004,
                       153.015,
                       153.016,
                       153.025 -
                       153.039,
—        6-8-78      153.050 -
                       153.056,
                       153.080 - 153.084,
                       153.095 -
                       153.098,
                       153.110 -
                       153.123,
                       153.170 -
                       153.175
—        2-7-83      32.01 -
                       32.03
                       150.001 -
                       150.010,
                       150.015 -
—        6-9-83      150.023,
                       150.030 -
                       150.039,
                       150.100,
                       150.101
                       152.01 -
                       152.12,
                       152.25 -
                       152.38,
                       152.49 -
—        9-8-83      152.56,
                       152.65,
                       152.66,
                       152.75 -
                       152.80,
                       152.99,
                       Ch. 152 Appendix
                       50.01 -
                       50.08,
                       50.20 -
—        2-11-88     50.24,
                       50.35 -
                       50.40,
                       50.99
—        6-30-88     150.070
—        9-8-88      150.039
—        12-8-88     50.07,
                       50.99
                       70.02,
—        1-12-89     70.99,
                       150.073
—        4-13-89     153.098
—        2-8-90      94.01 -
                       94.04
—        5-10-90     152.43
—        1-9-92      50.35
—        2-13-92     152.42
—        3-12-92     153.135 -
                       153.142
                       Charter, §§
                       3.2,
—        - -94       3.4,
                       3.5,
                       4.1,
                       4.2
—        3-10-94     150.007
—        4-14-94     150.038
—        7-1-94      50.35
—        8-25-94     153.155 -
                       153.161
—        9-8-94      150.072
                       153.002,
—        10-13-94    153.025,
                       153.038,
                       153.057, 153.084
—        11-13-97    150.039
—        4-9-98      50.01 -
                       50.99
—        6-12-97     50.35
—        11-13-97    150.039
—        5-14-98     150.038
—        10-8-98     50.01,
                       50.30
—        1-1-99      50.01
—        - -99       92.04
—        5-11-00     92.05
—        7-1-00      50.01
—        10-1-00     50.01
—        12-14-01    150.072
—        12-14-01    150.072
—        4-26-02     31.19
—        8-12-04     Charter § 2.1
—        12-9-04     110.01
                       50.09,
—        12-12-02    50.20,
                       50.33
                       150.030,
—        1-9-03      150.038,
                       150.072
—        8-22-03     150.030
—        2-12-04     150.020
—        9-9-04      131.02
                       152.43,
—        1-13-05     153.015,
                       153.160,
                       153.174
—        2-10-05     50.35
—        10-13-05    95.15,
                       95.17
                       154.01,
                       154.05 -
                       154.12,
                       154.14,
—        11-11-05    154.15,
                       154.25 -
                       154.41,
                       154.43 -
                       154.45,
                       154.99
—        11-10-11    130.02
2013-07-O  3-14-13     31.19
                       153.001,
                       153.002,
2013-08-O  5-9-13      153.050,
                       153.053,
                       153.086
2013-09-O  6-19-13     150.038
2013-14-O  9-12-13     93.20 -
                       93.25
                       32.03,
                       152.77,
                       153.001,
                       153.136,
                       153.138,
2014-001-O 4-10-14     153.139,
                       153.141,
                       153.142,
                       153.155, 
                       153.159 -
                       153.161,
                       153.174
                       113.01 -
2014-002-O 4-10-14     113.20,
                       113.99
                       153.015,
2014-003-O 6-12-14     153.025,
                       153.032
2014-005-O 6-12-14     97.01,
                       97.02
                       113.01,
2014-006-O 7-7-14      113.21,
                       113.99
2014-007-O 9-11-14     71.01
2014-008-O 11-13-14    153.002,
                       153.086
2014-009-O 11-13-14    30.15,
                       30.16
2015-001-O 10-8-15     91.07
2015-002-O 10-8-15     95.01
2015-003-O 11-12-15    30.15,
                       30.16
                       150.001 -
                       150.011,
                       150.015 -
                       150.023,
                       150.030 -
                       150.039,
2016-001   2-11-16     150.050 -
                       150.057,
                       150.070,
                       150.072,
                       150.073,
                       150.100,
                       150.101
2016-002   4-14-16     97.02,
                       97.03
2016-003   5-26-15     70.01
2016-004   6-9-16      51.10
2016-005   8-11-16     130.01
2016-006   9-8-16      71.02
—        - -         91.10
—        - -         99.01
—        - -         51.03
—        5-10-18     71.01,
                       71.99
                       151.01 -
                       151.04,
                       151.10,
                       151.15 -
                       151.21,
—        8-28-18     151.30 -
                       151.34,
                       151.40 -
                       151.49,
                       151.55 -
                       151.58,
                       151.99
—        11-8-18     91.06
—        11-8-18     71.01
—        10-10-19    150.072
—        5-1-20      33.01
                       150.015 -
                       150.018,
                       150.022,
                       150.050,
                       150.053 -
                       150.056,
                       150.101,
                       151.01,
                       151.16,
                       151.33,
                       152.04 -
                       152.06,
                       152.27 -
                       152.30,
                       152.33,
                       152.34,
                       152.36,
                       152.39,
                       152.41,
                       152.43,
                       152.49 -
                       152.51,
                       152.66,
                       152.76,
—        - -         152.77,
                       152.79,
                       152.80,
                       152.99,
                       153.002,
                       153.005,
                       153.015,
                       153.016,
                       153.025 -
                       153.027,
                       153.032,
                       153.038,
                       153.080,
                       153.123,
                       153.135 -
                       153.143,
                       153.155,
                       153.156,
                       153.159 -
                       153.161,
                       153.170,
                       153.173,
                       153.174,
                       153.176,
                       154.01,
                       154.38
—        - -         150.071,
                       153.087
—        - -         153.027
—        - -         153.038
—        - -         153.084
—        - -         150.030
—        - -         153.038
—        - -         153.087
—        9-9-21      153.038
—        3-10-22     Ch. 73, Sch. I
                       71.01,
—        1-12-23     71.02,
                       71.99
—        1-12-23     150.072
—        8-17-23     91.11
                       153.025,
—        5-9-24      153.038,
                       153.087
—        8-8-24      93.17
—        4-10-25     97.01,
                       97.03
—        4-10-25     71.01
—        1-5-26      32.01
—        1-8-26      93.17
                      
 
