FRANKLIN, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-17 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance 2025-010, passed 10-7-25
and State legislation current to ALS 2023 #6
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
TOWN OF FRANKLIN,
NORTH CAROLINA
TOWN OFFICIALS
TOWN OFFICIALS
MAYOR          C. Jack Horton
TOWN MANAGER   Amanda W. Owens
TOWN CLERK     Nicole Bradley
TOWN ATTORNEY  John F. Henning Jr.
               
TOWN COUNCIL
VICE MAYOR     Stacy Guffey
COUNCIL MEMBER Joe Collins
COUNCIL MEMBER David Culpepper
COUNCIL MEMBER Mike Lewis
COUNCIL MEMBER Rita Salain
COUNCIL MEMBER Robbie Tompa
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE
ENACTING AS AN ORDINANCE, A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE TOWN OF FRANKLIN
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SAID CODE.
WHEREAS, the present general ordinances of the Town of Franklin are incomplete
and inadequate and the manner of arrangement, classification and indexing
thereof is insufficient to meet the immediate needs of the Town; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the State Legislature of the State of North Carolina
empower and authorize the Legislative Body of this Town to revise, amend,
restate, codify and to compile any existing ordinance or ordinances and all new
ordinances not heretofore adopted or published and to incorporate said
ordinances into one ordinance in book form; and
WHEREAS, the Legislative Body of the Town of Franklin has authorized a general
compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the Town of a
general and permanent nature and publication of such ordinances in book form.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Aldermen of the Town of Franklin
that:
Section 1. The general ordinances of the Town of Franklin as herein revised,
amended, restated, codified, and complied in book form are adopted as and shall
constitute the "Code of Ordinances of the Town of Franklin.”
Section 2 . Said Code as adopted in Section 1 shall consist of the following
titles, to-wit:
Title I      General Provisions
Title III   Administration
Title V      Public Works
Title VII   Traffic Code
Title IX   General Regulations
Title XI   Business Regulations
Title XIII   General Offenses
Title XV   Land Usage
Tables of Special Ordinances
Parallel References
Index
Section 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in said Code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of said Code except
as they are included and reordained in whole or in part in said Code; provided
such repeal shall not affect any offense committed or penalty incurred or any
right established prior to the effective date of said Code, nor shall such
repeal affect the provisions of ordinances levying taxes, appropriating money,
annexing or detaching territory, establishing franchises or granting special
rights to certain persons, authorizing public improvements, authorizing the
issuance of bonds or borrowing of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of
real or personal property, granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication
of land to public use, naming or vacating or setting the boundaries of streets,
alleys or other public places, nor to any other ordinance of a temporary or
special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained therein.
Section 4.  Said code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Town Legislative Body and the Clerk of the Town of Franklin
is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of said Code in the Office of
the Town Clerk.
Section 5.  Said Code shall be in full force and effect immediately on the date
of its publication and filing thereof in the Office of the Clerk, and said Code
shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the ordinances and
all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein contained and of
the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed, attested, recorded
and approved and that any public hearings and notices thereof as required by
law have been given.
ADOPTED:  This 4th day of May, 1998.
TOWN OF FRANKLIN
                  By: Thomas B. Woodlee /s/
                     Mayor
ATTEST:
Janet A. Anderson /s/
Clerk
CHARTER*
Editor’s notes:
   Effective March 3, 2008, the town passed an ordinance to change the form of
government to the Council-Manager format.
   Effective May 15, 2017, the town passed Ordinance No. 2017-006 to change the
governing board from Board of Aldermen to Town Council.
Section
   
Section 1.      Body corporate; corporate name; corporate powers.
   
Section 2.      Corporate limits.
   
Section 3.      Town officers.
   
Section 4.      Election of officers; eligibility.
   
Section 5.      Elections under general law.
   
Section 6.      Mayor and Council members to qualify.
   
Section 7.      Council members to fill vacancies.
   
Section 8.      Mayor to preside at meetings of Council members; to break ties.
   
Section 9.      Council members to form one Council; meetings.
   
Section 10.      Council members to pass ordinances, bylaws, rules and
regulations.
   
Section 11.      Powers.
   
Section 12.      Bonds.
   
Section 13.      Same; record; coupons receivable for dues to town; exempt from
town tax.
   
Section 14.      Same; special tax.
   
Section 15.      Same; taxes kept separate; specific appropriation; application
of surplus.
   
Section 16.      Same; purposes of bond issues; apportionment of expenditures;
annexed territory not liable for present debt.
   
Section 17.      Same; bridges.
   
Section 18.      Town Clerk and Treasurer and Tax Collector.
   
Section 19.      Salary and duties of Town Clerk.
   
Section 20.      Tax Collector.
   
Section 21.      Police.
   
Section 22.      Same; fees; temporary police.
   
Section 23.      Same; suspension.
   
Section 24.      Tax lists.
   
Section 25.      Same; additions.
   
Section 26.      Subjects of taxation.
   
Section 27.      Council members to levy taxes.
   
Section 28.      Tax to be collected by distress.
   
Section 29.      Real estate to be sold.
   
Section 30.      Improvement of streets and sidewalks.
   
Section 31.      Equity of redemption.
   
Section 32.      License taxes.
   
Section 33.      Objects of taxation.
   
Section 34.      Streets.
   
Section 35.      Same; assessments.
   
Section 36.      Cemeteries.
   
Section 37.      Fire limits.
   
Section 38.      Additional powers.
   
Section 39.      Nuisances.
   
Section 40.      Markets.
   
Section 41.      Fines and penalties.
   
Section 42.      How penalties recoverable.
   
Section 43.      Salary of Council members.
   
Section 44.      Violations of ordinances.
RELATED LOCAL LAWS
   
Chapter 432.   Confederate Monument.
   
Chapter 3.      Use of Power Plant Proceeds.g
   
Chapter 38.   Qualifications of Officers.
Section 1. Body corporate; corporate name; corporate powers.
   The inhabitants of the Town of Franklin in Macon County, living within the
bounds set forth in section two hereof, are and shall continue to be as
heretofore a body corporate under the name and style of "The Town of Franklin,"
and under the name and style is hereby invested with all the privileges,
immunities and franchises, together with all other rights heretofore belonging
to Franklin, and in and by that name may sue and be sued, plead and be
impleaded, acquire, hold and dispose of property, real, personal and mixed, for
the welfare, improvement and use of the town, as its Town Council or other
proper author ities may deem necessary and expedient. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26,
Sec. 1; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Statutory references:
   General corporate powers, see G.S. §§ 160A-11, 160A-12
Section 2. Corporate limits.
   (A)   The corporate limits of the Town of Franklin shall be and embrace all
that territory lying in Macon County within a radius of one mile of the present
Macon County courthouse.
   (B)   The corporate limits of the Town of Franklin, a municipal corporation
located in Macon County, North Carolina, shall be extended by annexing to the
territory now within the corporate limits the area of land embraced within the
following boundaries, to-wit:
   Beginning at a point where the north boundary line of the right of way of
U.S. Highway No. 64 west of Franklin intersects the present line defining the
corporate limits of the Town of Franklin; runs westward with the north boundary
line of the right of way of U.S. Highway No. 64 to a point where the north
boundary line of the right of way of U.S. Highway No. 64 intersects a
prolongation of the west boundary line of Woodlawn Cemetery; then following the
west boundary line of Woodlawn Cemetery property to its southwest corner; then
following the southern boundary line of the Woodlawn Cemetery property to its
southeast corner; then following the east and southeast boundary lines of
Woodlawn Cemetery property to its northeast corner near the entrance of the
Roten Road; then following the south boundary line of the right of way of U.S.
Highway No. 64 to the line defining the present corporate limits of the Town of
Franklin; thence to the beginning.
   (C)   Beginning at a stake in the south edge of U.S. Highway 64 West of
Franklin, North Carolina running south 19 degrees 5 minutes east 185 feet east
to a point in the center of Crawford Branch, thence with center of Crawford
Branch south 37 degrees 30 minutes west 218 feet to a point, thence south 3
degrees 30 minutes east 117 feet thence south 3 degrees 0 minutes east 65 feet
thence south 34 degrees 30 minutes west 87 feet thence south 24 degrees 0
minutes west 152 feet thence south 62 degrees 0 minutes west 95 feet to a point
where Crawford Branch intersects with a small branch along Fred Conley's east
line thence with the branch south 3 degrees 30 minutes west 456 feet to a
point. Thence south 48 degrees 0 minutes east 453 feet to a point. Thence north
82 degrees 45 feet. East 227 feet. Thence south 140.7 degrees to a point in the
north edge of Womack Street thence along the north edge of Womack Street in an
easterly direction 93-2 feet thence in a northwesterly direction along the west
line of Harry Potts 159.3 feet to the southwest corner of Lot No. 16. Thence
north 83 degrees 30 minutes east 165.9 feet to an I.P. Thence north 11 degrees
west 59.5 feet. Thence north 69 degrees 0 minutes east 213 feet to an I.P.
Thence north 0 degrees 17 minutes east 145 feet to a concrete monument thence
north 24 degrees 36 minutes west 1118.9 feet to a red oak thence north 19
degrees 5 minutes west 211 feet to a point in U.S. Highway 64, thence in a
westerly direction with U.S. Highway 64 in a westerly direction 62 feet to a
point of beginning.
The same being the boundary description of Forest Hills Subdivision recorded on
plat as surveyed by R.H. Slagle and J.R. Bradley on April- May 1955 and
recorded on page 186 plat book No. 1 - records of Macon County, North Carolina.
   (D)   Beginning at a point in the center line of Third Street, the beginning
corner being located north 27 degrees 45 minutes east 125 feet from the
intersection of the center line of Third Street with the north margin of Cherry
Street in the Town of Franklin, Macon County, North Carolina; runs thence with
the center of Third Street, north 27 degrees 45 minutes east 635 feet to a
point in the center line of the street; thence continuing with the center line
of the street north 50 degrees east 277 feet to a point in the center line of
the street at the south margin of the Holly Springs Road; thence a northwest
direction approximately 15 feet to an iron pipe set on the west margin of Third
Street, a corner common to the R.B. Waldroop property; thence north 89 degrees
15 minutes west 135 feet to an iron pipe at the northernmost corner of Lot No.
10 of Highland Acres Subdivision; thence south 22 degrees 43 minutes west 15
feet to a stake; thence north 62 degrees 7 minutes west 150 feet to a stake;
thence south 27 degrees 30 minutes west with the east boundary line of the
Lyman Field Subdivision 824 feet to an iron pipe, a corner common to the R.
Cunningham lot; thence south 65 degrees 51 minutes east 150 feet to the point
of beginning.
   (E)   All laws and clauses of laws applicable to the Town of Franklin
according to the corporate limits as heretofore defined, shall be applicable to
the Town of Franklin with the extended boundaries as set forth in division (B)
above as fully as if the extended boundaries had been set forth in the original
charter of the municipal corporation, and each amendment thereto, and each re-
enactment of the charter. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 2; Pr. Laws 1915, C. 189,
Sec. 1; Sess. Laws 1949, C. 129)
Section 3. Town officers.
   (A)   The administration and government of the town shall be vested in one
principal officer, to be styled the Manager, as appointed by the Town Council,
a Town Council and other officers as are herein provided for. The own Council
of the Town of Franklin, Macon County, shall consist of six members who shall
be elected in accordance with the general laws governing municipal elections of
North Carolina. The Manager shall have duties and powers as established in G.S.
§ 160A-148.
   (B)   Any qualified voter desiring to become a candidate for the office of
Mayor or Council member shall file with the Town Clerk a Notice of Candidacy on
the form and at the time as prescribed by the Town Council by ordinance. Any
candidate for the office of Mayor shall pay to the Clerk a filing fee of $15
and any candidate for the office of Council member shall pay a filing fee of
$5. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 3; Pr. Laws 1933, C. 5; Pr. Laws 1935, C. 5;
Sess. Laws 1 965, C. 387; Am. Ord. adopted 3-3-08; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted
5-15-17)
Section 4. Election of officers; eligibility.
   The officers of the Town of Franklin, consisting of a Mayor and six Council
members, shall be elected by ballot in 1905, and biennially thereafter, and
shall hold their office for four years or until their successors are elected
and qualified. Any qualified voter of this state shall be eligible to the
office of Mayor, Council member or other officer of the Town of Franklin and
entitled to vote in its municipal elections: provided he shall have resided
within the corporate limits of the town for 90 days next preceding the day of
election and shall be entered on the registration books according to the rules
and regulations provided for in the following section. Provided further, that
the above provision shall not apply to the Chief of Police, Marshal, Policeman,
or other employees or officers elected, chosen, or em ployed by the Town
Council of the town, but the Chief of Police, Marshal, or policeman of the
town, or other officers or employees so chosen, employed, or elected by the
Town Council, need not have resided in the town for the 90 days, or previous to
the election or employment by the Council, and need not be a legal voter or
resident of North Carolina. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 5; Pr. Laws 1915, C.
189, Sec. 2; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Statutory reference:
   Residency requirements generally, North Carolina Constitution, Article VI
Section 5. Elections under general law.
   (A)   All elections held in the Town of Franklin for the election of Mayor,
Council member or other officer, or for other purposes, shall be held under the
rules and regulations set forth in the Public Laws. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec.
6)
   (B)   The members of the Town Council shall hereafter be elected for four-
year terms on a staggered basis as follows: at the regular municipal election
to be held in 1977, the three candidates who receive the highest number of
votes shall be elected for four-year terms while the three candidates who
receive the next highest number of votes shall be elected for two-year terms.
Beginning at the regular municipal election to be held in 1979, and every two
years thereafter, three members of the Town Council shall be elected to serve
for four-year terms. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 6: Ord. of 5/8/77; Am. Ord.
2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Statutory references:
   The Uniform Municipal Election Laws of 1971, as amended, G.S. §§ 163-279 et
seq.
Section 6. Mayor and Council members to qualify.
   The Mayor, within five days after election and before entering upon the
duties of his office, shall, before some person authorized to administer oaths
take the oath of office for Mayors prescribed in The Code; and each Council
member or other officer, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall
take, before the Mayor or other person authorized to administer oaths, an oath
of office prescribed in The Code. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 7; Am. Ord. 2017-
006, adopted 5-15-17)
Section 7. Council members to fill vacancies.
   (A)   The Town Council shall have power to fill any vacancy in the Council
that may occur during their term of office, by death, resignation or otherwise.
   (B)   The Town Council shall have power to elect one of their number Mayor
Pro Tempore, to act as Mayor in the case of absence of the Mayor or his
disability to perform the duties of his office. The person so appointed shall
possess all the powers and rights of the Mayor during his absence or inability
to attend to his duties. In the case of a vacancy in the office of Mayor,
caused by death, resignation or otherwise, the Town Council shall have
authority to elect his successor, who shall serve as Mayor until the next
regular election, when his successor is elected and qualified: Provided, that
any person eligible to the office of Mayor at the regular election may be
elected by the Town Council to fill out an unexpired term as above set forth.
(Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 8; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Statutory reference:
   Vacancies, G.S. § 160A-63; Mayor pro tem, G.S. § 160A-70
Section 8. Mayor to preside at meeting of Council members; to break ties.
   The Mayor, when present, shall preside at all the meetings of the Town
Council, and when there is an equal division upon any question or in the
election of officers by the Council he shall determine the matter by his vote.
He shall vote in no other case, and if he shall be absent the Mayor Pro Tempore
may exercise his duties. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 10; Am. Ord. 2017-006,
adopted 5-15-17)
Statutory reference:
   Mayor to preside over the Council, G.S. § 160A-69
Section 9. Council members to form one Council; meetings.
   The Council members shall form a Council, and a majority of them shall be
competent to perform all the duties prescribed, unless otherwise provided. At
their first meeting they shall fix stated days of meeting for the year, which
shall be as often at least as once in every month. Special meetings of the
Council members may also be held on the call of the Mayor or a majority of the
Council members, and of every meeting, when called by the Mayor, all the
Council members shall be notified, and when called by a majority of the Council
members as shall not join in the call shall be notified. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26,
Sec. 11; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Statutory reference:
   Procedure for regular and special meetings, G.S. § 160A-71
Section 10. Council members to pass ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations.
   The Town Council, when convened, shall have power to make and provide for
the execution thereof of ordinances, bylaws, rules and regulations for the
better government of the Town of Franklin as they may deem necessary, not
inconsistent with this act or with the laws of the land. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26,
Sec. 12; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Statutory reference:
   General ordinance making power, G.S. § 160A-174
Section 11. Powers.
   Among the powers hereby conferred on the Town Council they may borrow money
or create a public debt for purposes other than necessary expenses of the town,
only after they have passed an ordinance by a three-fourths vote of all the
Council, at two separate regular meetings, submitting the question of creating
a debt to the vote of the people, and a majority of the qualified registered
voters have voted in favor thereof. Thirty days' notice of the election shall
be given in some newspaper published in Macon County, at which election those
favoring the creation of the debt shall vote “Approved,” and those who oppose
it shall vote “Not Approved.” The Council may order a new registration at any
and all elections if they deem it proper to do so. They may provide water-
works, provide for macadamizing, building, repairing, paving and cleaning
streets and sidewalks, regulate markets and take all proper means to prevent
and extinguish fires; to appoint and regulate a police force to execute the
precepts as the Mayor or other person may issue to them; to preserve the peace
and order of the town and to execute the ordinances of the town; to suppress
and remove nuisances, preserve the health of the town from contagious or
infectious diseases, and shall appoint and provide for the pay and prescribe
the duties of all other officers as may be deemed necessary for the good order
of the town. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 13; Pr. Laws 1907, C. 323, Sec. 1; Am.
Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Section 12. Bonds.
   The Town Council of the Town of Franklin shall be and they are hereby
authorized, empowered, and directed to issue bonds of their Town to be styled
“Public Improvement Bonds of the Town of Franklin” to an amount which in the
discretion of the Town Council will meet with the necessary public improvements
authorized herein, and of the denomination and of the proportion as the Town
Council shall deem advisable; the bonds to be signed by the Mayor of the Town
of Franklin and countersigned by the Clerk of the Town Council of the town, and
to be of the form and tenor and transferable in the way and the principal
thereof payable or redeemable at the time or times, not exceeding 40 years from
the date thereof, at the place or places as the Town Council of the Town of
Franklin may determine; that none of the bonds may be disposed of at a less
price than their par value, and the bonds may be issued at the time or times
and in the amount or amounts as may be deemed best by the Town Council of the
town to meet the expenditures contemplated by this Act and provided for herein.
The bonds shall bear interest from the date of issuing thereof at a rate not to
exceed 6% per annum, with interest coupons attached, payable annually or
semiannually as the Council may determine, and at the time or times and at the
place or places as may be deemed advisable by the Town Council: Provided, that
the bonds so issued as provided for herein shall not exceed in the aggregate
the sum of $30,000. (Pr. Laws 1915, C. 189, Sec. 3; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted
5-15-17)
Section 13. Same; record; coupons receivable for dues to Town; exempt from Town
tax.
   The bonds and their coupons when issued as herein provided shall be numbered
and a record shall be kept of all bonds and when due. The interest coupons
shall be received in payment of all taxes, fines, assessments, or debts due the
town, and the bonds shall not be taxed by the town nor shall they be subject to
any town tax. (Pr. Laws 1915, C. 189, Sec. 4)
Section 14. Same; special tax.
   For the purpose of providing for the payment of the annual or semiannual
interest of the bonds, and to create a sinking fund for the final discharge and
payment of the bonds when due, the Town Council of the Town of Franklin are
hereby authorized and it shall be their duty annually to compute, lay, and levy
at the time of levying other taxes of the town a sufficient special tax upon
all polls and all property, real and personal, and on other subjects of
taxation mentioned in the charter of the Town, which shall be returned or
listed for general taxation in the Town to meet the purpose, at all times
observing the constitutional equation between the property and polls; and the
taxes shall be collected in the same manner and at the same time as other taxes
in the Town are collected, and shall be paid over by the Tax Collector to the
Treasurer of the Town, and the Tax Collector and Town Treasurer shall give
justified bonds in sufficient amounts to cover the amount of taxes, both the
bonds to be approved by the Town Council and to be filed with the Clerk of the
Town Council of the Town. (Pr. Laws 1915, C. 189, Sec. 5; Am. Ord. 2017-006,
adopted 5-15-17)
Section 15. Same; taxes kept separate; specific appropriation; application of
surplus.
   The taxes levied and collected as provided in this act and for the purposes
specified herein shall be kept separate and apart from any other taxes of the
Town, and shall be used only for the purposes for which they were levied and
collected: Provided, that if the tax levied and collected for the payment of
interest shall in any year exceed the sum required for that purpose, then the
amount in excess may be applied to the credit of the interest fund for the next
succeeding year, or the Town Council may create a sinking fund for the final
payment and discharge of the bonds when due by excess. (Pr. Laws 1915, C. 189,
Sec. 6; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Section 16. Same; purposes of bond issues; apportionment of expenditures;
annexed territory not liable for present debt.
   The bonds herein provided for shall be for the following purposes: for the
improvement, construction, or extension of streets, sidewalks, bridges, sewers,
drains, and water-works within the limits of the Town of Franklin as set out in
section one of this act, and for no other purposes; and the Town Council of the
Town are hereby authorized, empowered, and directed to use, in their
discretion, the pro rata portion of the sum or sums realized from the sale of
the bonds as the taxable values within the present limits of the Town bear to
the taxable values of the extended territory included herein, and to apportion
the same to the public improvements in respective areas according to the ratio
or pro rata portion: Provided, that neither the polls, real or personal
property now outside the corporate limits of the Town of Franklin and proposed
to be included within the limits as set out in Section one of this charter,
shall ever be taxed to pay any part of the interest or principal of the present
indebtedness of the Town of Franklin, bonded or otherwise. (Pr. Laws 1915, C.
189, Sec. 7; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Section 17. Same; bridges.
   The provisions of this act shall not apply to or include the bridges across
the Tennessee River within the limits of the Town, but the bridges shall be and
remain under the care and control of the County of Macon, and the County of
Macon shall, through its proper officers, as provided by law, direct, control,
and pay for all maintenance, repair, or construction thereon necessary, and be
under the same pains and penalties therefor as now provided by law. (Pr. Laws
1915, C. 189, Sec. 8)
Section 18. Town Clerk and Treasurer and Tax Collector.
   At the first meeting of the Town Council after their qualification, or as
soon thereafter as practicable, they shall elect a Town Clerk and Treasurer and
a Tax Collector, who shall, respectively, hold their offices during the term of
the Council electing them and until their successors are elected and qualified,
subject, however, to be removed at any time and others appointed in their stead
for misbehavior or neglect in office. Before acting, each of the officers shall
take an oath before the Mayor to faithfully discharge the duties required of
him by the Town Council, and each shall execute a bond in an amount as the
Council may require, with security, to be approved by the Council. The bonds
required of the Clerk and Treasurer and Tax Collector shall be renewed every
year. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 14; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Statutory references:
   Oaths of office, G.S. § 160A-61
Section 19. Salary and duties of Clerk.
   The Clerk and Treasurer shall have a reasonable salary, and it shall be his
duty to keep regular and fair minutes of the proceedings of the Council, and to
preserve all books, papers and other articles committed to his care during his
continuance in office, and deliver them to his successor; and he shall receive
and faithfully keep all monies which shall be paid to him for the use and in
behalf of the Town, and disburse the same according to orders given in
obedience to the direction of the Council appearing on the minutes. He shall
keep a fair and correct account of all monies so received and disbursed by him
in a book kept for that purpose, showing from what source money is received and
for what purpose paid out, and shall submit said accounts to the Council
whenever required. He shall pay to his successor all monies in his hands
belonging to the Town, and faithfully perform all duties imposed on him as
Clerk and Treasurer by the laws and ordinances of the Council. (Pr. Laws 1905,
C. 26, Sec. 15; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Statutory references:
   Duties of the Clerk, G.S. § 160A-171; duties of the finance officer, G.S. §
159-25
Section 20. Tax Collector.
   The Tax Collector whose appointment is herein provided for shall be vested
with the same power and authority in the collection of taxes that Sheriffs
have, and subject to the same fines and penalties for failure or neglect of
duty. He shall be charged with the sums appearing by the tax lists as due for
town taxes. He shall be credited in settlement as Sheriffs are credited with
amounts in suit by appeal, all poll tax and tax on personal property certified
by the Clerk of the Commissioners of Macon County by order of the Board of
County Commissioners to be insolvent and uncollectible. He shall at no time
retain in his hands more than $50 for a longer time than ten days, under a
penalty of 10% per month to the City upon all sums so unlawfully retained. The
Town Council, at a regular meeting before the last regular meeting in each
year, shall appoint one of their number to be present and assist at the
counting and settlement between the Tax Collector and Treasurer, and to audit
and settle the accounts of the Town Treasurer. The accounts so audited shall be
reported to the Town Council, and when approved by them shall be recorded in
the minute book of the Council and be prima facie evidence of their
correctness. It shall be the duty of the Council to remove any Tax Collector
who shall fail to settle and fully pay off the taxes due by law from him, and
he shall not be eligible to re-election to the office. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26,
Sec. 16; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of the Tax Collector, G.S. § 105-350
Section 21. Police.
   The Town Council shall have power to appoint a police force, to consist of a
Chief of Police or Chief Marshal and number of policemen as the good government
of the Town may require, who shall hold their office during the term of the
Council appointing them and until their successors are appointed. The Chief of
Police or Marshal shall give bond in the sum as the Town Council may require
for the faithful performance of the duties imposed by law and the ordinances of
the Town, and to faithfully account to the Town for all monies that may come
into his hands from fines, penalties, and the like. It shall be the duty of the
Chief of Police to attend the Mayor's Court when in session, and report at
times as the Council may require, not less than once in each week, to the Mayor
any violations of law or ordinances of the City, to collect all fines and
penalties imposed and pay them to the Town Treasurer, and to execute the orders
and judgments of the Mayor’s Court; to see that the laws and ordinances of the
Town are enforced, and do other things as may be required of him by the
Council. The Chief of Police and all members of the force shall have all the
power and authority vested in sheriffs and constables for the preservation of
the peace of the Town by suppressing disturbances and apprehending offenders.
They shall execute all the processes directed to them by the Mayor or others,
and in the execution thereof shall have all the powers which sheriffs and
constables have. The Chief and members of the police force shall take an oath
before the Mayor for the faithful performance of the duties by law and
ordinances. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 17; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Section 22. Same; fees; temporary police.
   The members of the police force shall be entitled to receive the same fees
arising from the execution of precepts as sheriffs and constables for the same
service, which fees shall be collected and paid into the treasury of the Town.
The Town Council shall pass ordinances for the government and direction of the
police and fix their compensation. In times of exigencies the Mayor may appoint
temporarily additional policemen for the time as shall appear necessary, not
exceeding one week, who shall take the same oath and shall be subject to the
same control as regular policemen. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 18; Am. Ord.
2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Section 23. Same; suspension.
   The Mayor may at any time, upon charges being preferred, or upon finding any
member of the police force guilty of misconduct, have power to suspend the
members from service until the Town Council may convene and take action in the
matter, and upon hearing the proofs in the case the Council may discharge or
restore the member, and the pay of the member shall cease from the time of the
suspension to the time of his restoration to service. Any violations of the
regulations of the Council or orders of the Mayor shall be good cause for
dismissal. The Mayor shall suspend the Chief or any member of the police force
if found drunk or disorderly when on duty. The police shall have general power
to do whatever may be necessary to preserve the good order and peace of the
Town and secure the inhabitants from personal violence and their property from
loss or injury. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 19; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-
15-17)
Section 24. Tax lists.
   The Clerk and Treasurer shall, on the third Monday in May of each and every
year, make advertisement in some newspaper, notifying all persons residing in
the Town of Franklin who own or have control of taxable property in the Town on
the first of June to return to him on or before the last day of June a list of
their taxable property in the Town. The list shall state the number of lots or
parts of lots and all other property now taxable or that may hereafter be made
taxable by the laws of the State or the ordinances of the Town, and the list so
returned to the Clerk and Treasurer shall be sworn to before him, and he is
hereby authorized to administer to them the following oath: "I,
__________________________ do solemnly swear that the tax return made out and
returned by me contains a full and accurate list of the number of lots owned by
me in the Town, a full and accurate list of all property, stocks, bonds, shares
in incorporated companies, income, solvent credits and all other property of
all kinds and descriptions subject to taxation by the laws of the State and
ordinances of the Town according to my best information and belief: So help me,
God." And from the return so made the Clerk and Treasurer shall, within 30 days
after the expiration of the time for taking the list, make out in a book kept
for that purpose an alphabetical list of the persons and owners of property who
have so made their return in the same manner as tax lists are made out by law
for the collection of State taxes. And the Clerk and Treasurer shall copy in
the book the assessments made by the Board of Township Assessors of all
property within the Town limits, which assessment may be revised, corrected or
amended by the Town Council. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 20; Am. Ord. 2017-006,
adopted 5-15-17)
Section 25. Same; additions.
   The Clerk and Treasurer shall, within 30 days from the return of the tax
list, make out, to the best of his knowledge and belief, by comparing his book
with the returns made by the Board of Township Assessors and by diligent
inquiry from other sources, a list of taxable polls and owners of taxable
property in the Town who shall have failed to return a list in the manner and
time aforesaid, and the person so listed shall forfeit and pay a sum to be
fixed by the Town Council not exceeding twice the amount of his tax, which
penalty may be recovered as other fines and penalties are recovered by the Town
Council before the Mayor of a justice of the peace. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec.
21; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Section 26. Subjects of taxation.
   In order to raise a fund for the expenses incident to the proper government
of the Town, the Council members may annually levy and collect the following
taxes, viz.:
   (A)   On all real estate and personal property in the Town, a tax not
exceeding fifty cents on every hundred dollars value of property, and on all
taxable polls a tax not exceeding $1.50, who may be residents of the Town on
the first day of June of each year or may have been so resident within 60 days
next preceding that day; the constitutional equation to be observed in all
levies.
   (B)   On all carriages, buggies, hacks and horses used in the Town for hire,
a tax not exceeding $5. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 22; Pr. Laws 1907, C. 323,
Sec. 2; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Section 27. Council members to levy taxes.
   As soon as the Clerk and Treasurer shall have furnished the assessment roll
as provided, and the same shall have been revised by the Board, the Town
Council shall proceed to levy the taxes on the subjects of taxation as they may
choose and shall place the tax list in the hands of the collector for
collection, who shall proceed forthwith in the collection, and shall complete
the same on or before the first day of January next ensuing, and shall pay the
monies as collected to the Treasurer; and the collector for his compensation
shall receive not exceeding 5% on the amount collected. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26,
Sec. 23; Pr. Laws 1907, C. 323, Sec. 3; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Section 28. Tax to be collected by distress.
   If any person liable to taxes on subjects di rected to be listed shall fail
to pay them within the time prescribed for collection, the collector shall
proceed forthwith to collect the same by distress and sale, after public
advertisement for the space of ten days in some newspaper published in the
county, if the property to be sold be personalty, and of 30 days if the
property be realty. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 24)
Section 29. Real estate to be sold.
   When the tax due on any lot or other land which is hereby declared to be a
lien on the same shall remain unpaid on the first day of January, and there is
no other visible estate of the lot or land of the person in whose name it is
listed liable for distress and sale known to the Collector, he shall report the
fact to the Council members, together with a particular description of real
estate and thereupon the Council members shall direct the same to be sold at
the courthouse door by the Collector, after advertising for 30 days in some
newspaper published in the County, which the Collector shall do. And the
Collector shall divide the land or lot into as many parts as may be convenient
(for which purpose he is authorized to employ a surveyor), and shall sell as
many parts as may be required to pay the taxes and all expenses attendant
thereto. If the same cannot be conveniently divided the Collector shall sell
the whole; and if no person will pay the whole of the tax and expenses for the
whole of the land the same shall be struck off for the Town, and, if not
redeemed as hereinafter provided, shall belong to the Town in fee. The
Collector shall return an account of his proceedings to the Council members,
specifying the portions in which the land was divided and the purchaser or
purchasers thereof, and the prices paid by each, which shall be entered on the
book of proceedings of the Council, and if there shall be a surplus after
paying the taxes and expenses of advertising and selling the same it shall be
paid into the Town Treasury, subject to the demand of the owner. (Pr. Laws
1905, C. 26, Sec. 25; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Section 30. Improvement of streets and sidewalks.
   The Town Council is hereby authorized and empowered to tax and assess at any
regular meeting 1/2 the cost of paving sidewalks and 1/3 the cost of
macadamizing or paving streets against the lands fronting on each side of the
street, each property being liable only for the share of the cost of paving or
macadamizing that part of the street or sidewalk upon which the property
fronts; and for the purpose the Town Council shall cause to be kept an accurate
account of the cost of the pavement or macadam upon which each property fronts;
and the person appointed or directed to keep the account shall report the same
to the Council under oath, and when found by the Council to be correct, it
shall be entered in the minutes as a charge against the frontage, and the sums
so charged shall be a lien on the property from the time, which lien shall
relate back to the time the improvements were begun under an order of the
Council for the purpose. The Council shall cause notice to be served personally
or through the mails upon the owner of the lands charged of the amount of the
charge and of the time herein provided for the payment of the same, and unless
the same shall be paid within 30 days thereafter the Clerk of the Council shall
issue execution against the property charged, directed to the Chief of Police,
who shall sell the same after due advertisement, by descending bids, to the
person who will pay the charges and costs of sale for the least number of front
feet running back at right angles with the street to the back of the lot. Any
landowner may pay amount so charged against his land under protest and file a
statement with the Town Council, under oath, that the amount charged is in
excess of the share of costs for which the property is made liable by this act;
in which case the Council shall cause the issue to be transferred to the
Superior Court, to be tried as other civil issues, and the Town shall return
any excess found to the owner with costs, if the issue is found against it.
(Pr. Laws 1907, C. 323, Sec. 4; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Section 31. Equity of redemption.
   The owner of any land sold under the provi sions of this charter and
amendments, or any person acting for them, may redeem the same within one year
after the sale by paying to the purchaser the sum paid by him and 25% on the
amount of taxes and expenses, and the Treasurer shall refund to him the
proceeds, less double the amount of the taxes. That if the real estate sold as
aforesaid shall not be redeemed within the time specified, the corporation
shall convey to the purchaser or his assigns the same in fee; and the recitals
in the conveyance, or in any other conveyance of land sold for taxes due the
town, that the taxes were due, or of any other matter required to be true or
done before the sale might be made, shall be prima facie evidence that the same
was true and done. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 26)
Section 32. License taxes.
   In addition to the subjects listed for taxation the Council members may levy
a tax on the following subjects, the amount of which tax, when fixed, shall be
collected by the Tax Collector immediately, and if the same be not paid on
demand the same may be recovered by suit on the articles upon which the tax is
imposed. Any other property of the owner may be distrained and sold to satisfy
the same, viz.:
   (A)   Upon all itinerant merchants or peddlers selling or offering to sell
in the Town, a tax not exceeding $50 per year, except only as sell books,
charts or maps, and the like as sell only goods, wares and merchandise and
other productions of the growth and manufacture of the state. Upon every
company of circus riders who shall exhibit within the Town or in one mile
thereof, and upon every person or company exhibiting within the Town or in one
mile thereof, stage or theatrical companies, sleight-of-hand performers, rope-
dancing, tumbling or menagerie, a tax not exceeding $100 for every day they
exhibit.
   (B)   Upon every exhibition of any other kind, and on every theater company,
circuses, menageries, horse-dealers or any other business, company or agency
enumerated in Schedule “B” of chapter 247 of the Public Laws of 1903, or which
may hereafter be the subject of taxation by the State law, when not exempt from
a license or privilege tax by Towns, a tax equal to the amount imposed by the
State law for the use of the State. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 27; Am. Ord.
2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Section 33. Objects of taxation.
   Taxes for the Town purposes shall be levied on real and personal property,
and all other objects of taxation shall be taxed as provided in the State
Constitution. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 28)
Section 34. Streets.
   The Town Council shall have power to grade, macadamize and pave the streets
and sidewalks, and to lay out, build and open new streets or widen those
already open, and make the improvements thereon as the public convenience may
require. That when any land or right-of-way may be required for the purpose of
opening new streets or for widening those already open, or for other subjects
allowed by this charter, and for want of agreement as to the value thereof the
same cannot be purchased from the owner or owners, the same may be taken at a
valuation to be made by three freeholders of the town to be chosen by the
Council members of the Town, after giving ten days' notice to the land-owner in
writing; and in making the valuation the freeholders, after being duly sworn by
the Mayor or other officer authorized to administer oaths, shall take into
consideration the loss or damage which may accrue to the owner in consequence
of the land or right-of- way being surrendered; also any benefit or advantage
the owner may receive from the opening or widening of the streets or other
improvement, and ascertain the sum which shall be paid to the owner of the
property, or, if the benefits shall be greater than the damage to the property
owner, shall report the amount of benefits to the property owner and report the
same to the Town Council, and under their hands and seals, which report, on
being confirmed by the Council and spread upon their minutes, shall have the
effect of a judgement against the Town Council or land-owner, as the case may
be, and shall pass the title to the Town Council in their corporate capacity of
the land so taken; and in the case of the improvement being declared a benefit
to the land- owner by the appraisers, as above provided, shall be a lien on the
land of the owner for the amount of the sum so declared: Provided, that if any
person over whose land the street may pass or improvement be erected, or the
Council members, be dissatisfied with the value thus made, then in that case
either party may appeal to the next Superior Court of Macon County, where the
issues may be tried as appeals are from the Commissioners' court: Provided,
however, that the appeal shall not hinder or delay the Council members opening
or widening the street or erecting the improvement. The Town Council shall
further have power to cause the sidewalks to be curbed and paved, or repaired
when deemed necessary: Provided always, that the owner before whose lot the
curbing or paving may have been ordered shall have 30 days' notice, in writing,
of the order of the Council. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 29; Am. Ord. 2017-006,
adopted 5-15-17)
Section 35. Same; assessments.
   Whenever the Town Council of the Town of Franklin shall order any street or
sidewalk to be opened, graded, macadamized, paved or otherwise constructed,
repaired or improved, the Town Council shall have the power to assess any
portion, not exceeding one-half, of the cost of the opening, grading,
macadamizing, paving, construction, repairs or improvements against the
property owners benefited by proposing opening, grading, macadamizing, paving,
construction, repairs or improvements. To the end that the provisions of this
section may be carried into effect the Town Council shall have the power to
declare the area within the town as may be directly benefited by the proposed
opening, grading, macadamizing, paving, construction, repairs or improvements,
a taxing district and the cost of the proposed improvements assessed against
the property owners shall be a lien upon the lands of the several property
owners lying within the area to the extent and in the manner following:
   The Town Council having declared the taxing district and fixed its
boundaries and having ordered the proposed improvements and fixed the
proportion to be assessed against the property owners benefited, shall appoint
a jury of three disinterested freeholders of the Town, who shall go upon the
property embraced in the taxing district, after 30 days notice in writing to
the respective owners of the property, and assess against the owner of each
individual piece of property within the district the proportion of the cost to
be paid by him, and the same shall be a lien upon all property of the property
owner lying with said taxing district. It shall be a lien upon all property of
the property owner lying with the taxing district. It immediately adjacent or
contiguous to the street or sidewalk so ordered to be opened, graded,
macadamized, paved, constructed, repaired or improved, but it shall be
sufficient that the property be included in the taxing district so declared and
established by the Town Council. But the Town Council shall only include in the
taxing district the property as is directly benefited by the proposed
improvement. The jury so appointed shall make their report in writing to the
Town Council under their hands and seals, which report shall be subject to
review or amendment by the Town Council, and on being confirmed by the Council
and spread upon their minutes, shall have the effect of a judgment against the
respective landowners and be a lien upon the lands of the owners for the
amounts so declared: Provided, that any party aggrieved by the action of the
Town Council upon the report shall have the right of appeal to the Superior
Court of Macon County. (Pr. Laws 1920 E.S., C.6; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-
15-17)
Section 36. Cemeteries.
   The Town Council shall have power to regulate the manner and terms on which
bodies may be interred in the cemeteries in the Town, and have the cemeteries
kept in due order and repair, and they shall have power to purchase, when they
deem it necessary, a piece of land within or beyond the limits of the Town for
the purpose of a public cemetery. They also have power to forbid any and all
interments of dead bodies within the limits of the Town whenever they may deem
it expedient. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 30; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-
17)
Section 37. Fire limits.
   The Town Council of the Town may have power to establish fire limits within
the Town, within which limits it shall not be lawful for any person to erect or
build any wooden house, make any wooden additions to any house or cover any
building other than with metal or slate without first obtaining a building
permit from the Council, under the penalties as the Council may establish, and
penalties may be sued for and recovered against the owner of the property in
any court having jurisdiction. (Pr. Laws. 1905, C. 26, Sec. 31; Am. Ord. 2017-
006, adopted 5-15-17)
Section 38. Additional powers.
   The Town Council shall have power to prohibit or control the firing of
firearms, firecrackers, torpedoes and other explosives, and to control the sale
and manner in which the same may be kept in the Town; the pace and speed at
which horses may be driven or ridden in the Town; the arrangement of all
stovepipes and flues in buildings; the manner in which powder and other
explosives and inflammable materials may be kept and sold; the manner in which
dogs, hogs and other stock may be kept, and prevent them from running at large
in the Town; to cause all alleys, lots, cellars, privies, stables and other
places of like character to be examined by a sanitary officer to be appointed
for that purpose. It shall be their duty, on complaint, to cause by their order
the sanitary officer to have the places cleaned and the nuisance abated, and
the sanitary officer or other person appointed by the Council or charged with
that duty shall have authority to enter the premises described to be in bad
order and inspect and have the same cleaned; and the expense of having the same
cleaned and of abating the nuisance shall be recovered from the owner by action
of debt in any court having jurisdiction: Provided, the owner or occupier
refuses to abate the nuisance after notice given by the sanitary officer. (Pr.
Laws 1905, C 26, Sec. 32; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Section 39. Nuisances.
   The Town Council shall have power and it shall be their duty to prohibit all
trades or occupations which are a nuisance from being carried on in their Town,
and the power and authority of the Council for the abatement of nuisances shall
extend ½ mile from the town limits. They shall have power and it shall be their
duty to cause all ponds, sunken lots and other places where filth accumulates
to be drained and filled up, and to declare all houses which have become
decayed and dilapidated or in an unsanitary condition, or that are dangerous to
life and limb from their dilapidated condition, a nuisance, and have them
repaired or torn down, and to recover of the owner or occupier of the premises,
as above, the expenses incurred in the removal or repairing of the house or the
abating of the nuisance, which expenses shall be a lien on the lot: Provided,
the owner or occupier of the lot, after ten days' notice, shall neglect or
refuse to remove, repair or abate the nuisance. They shall have authority to
cause all nuisances arising from any cause whatever within and for ½ mile
without the Town limits to be removed or abated, and for the removal or abating
any nuisance the person creating the same shall pay the same as above required.
(Pr. Laws. 1905, C. 26, Sec. 33; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Section 40. Markets.
   The Council shall have power to regulate the manner in which provisions and
all other articles shall be sold in the streets and markets of the Town, and to
regulate the manner in which the streets, markets, squares and sidewalks in the
Town may be used and kept. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 34; Am. Ord. 2017-006,
adopted 5-15-17)
Section 41. Fines and penalties.
   All fines and penalties imposed by this act, or which are or may be imposed
by the ordinances of the Town or the laws of the State shall be paid to the
Town Treasurer for the benefit of the town. That for the violation of any
ordinance or bylaw made by the Town Council they may prescribe penalties not
exceeding $50 for each offense; and when judgment shall be given for any
penalty the defendant may, unless the penalty and costs be paid, be tried for a
misdemeanor and committed to the County jail for 30 days or fined $50, in the
discretion of the court, unless payment of the penalty and costs be made. (Pr.
Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 35; Am. Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Section 42. How penalties recoverable.
   All penalties imposed by law relating to the Town and all imposed by this
act or the ordinances of the Town shall be recoverable in the name of “The Town
of Franklin” before the tribunal having jurisdiction thereof. (Pr. Laws 1905,
C.26, Sec. 36)
Section 43. Salary of Council members.
   The Council members may each be allowed a salary not exceeding two dollars
$2 per day for the time actually employed in the service of the city, and the
salary of no officer appointed or elected shall be increased or diminished
during the time for which he was elected. (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 37; Am.
Ord. 2017-006, adopted 5-15-17)
Statutory reference:
   G.S. § 160A-64 authorizes the Council to establish and alter their own
compensation
Section 44. Violations of ordinances.
   Any person or persons violating any of the ordinances of the Town shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the provisions of the Code relative to
“Towns.” (Pr. Laws 1905, C. 26, Sec. 38)
Statutory reference:
   Violations of municipal ordinances, G.S. § 14-4
RELATED LOCAL LAWS
PRIVATE LAWS 1927
CHAPTER 432
Confederate Monument
Section 1. Desecration prohibited; use of lot.
Section 2. Violation; penalty.
CHAPTER 432 Confederate Monument
Section 1. Desecration prohibited; use of lot.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to desecrate or use
in any way except as a memorial to the Confederate soldiers of Macon County the
lot in the Town of Franklin which has been set aside and designated as the
Confederate memorial lot, the lot being enclosed by an iron railing, and on
which is erected the monument of the Confederate dead.
Section 2. Violation; penalty.
   Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this act shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined not less than
$50 or imprisoned not less than 30 days, within the discretion of the court.
PRIVATE LAWS 1929
CHAPTER 3
Use of Power Plant Proceeds
Section 1. Purpose of expenditures.
Section 2. Division of expenditures authorized.
CHAPTER 3 Use of Power Plant Proceeds
Section 1. Purpose of expenditures.
   It shall be unlawful for the Town Council of the Town of Franklin, in Macon
County, to use the $26,000, now in the hands of its Treasurer, and arising from
the sale of its municipal power plant, to pay off and discharge any notes or
other debts of the Town of Franklin now outstanding, whether due or hereafter
to become due, to build, construct, hard-surface or improve any street or
streets of the Town, to build or construct sidewalks, to build or construct any
waterworks or any other improvements in the Town for the general use of the
citizens of the Town.
Section 2. Division of expenditures authorized.
   The Town Council of the Town of Franklin be and they are hereby authorized,
directed and empowered to use any part or all of the $26,000 for the purpose of
any one or all of the purposes set out in section one of this act.
SESSION LAWS 1947
CHAPTER 38
Qualifications of officers
Section 1. Exemption from law.
CHAPTER 38 Qualifications of Officers
Section 1. Exemption from law.
   The provisions of Chapter 160-25 of the General Statutes of 1943, requiring
mayors, commis sioners, intendants of police, aldermen or other chief officers
of any city or town to be qualified voters therein, shall not apply to the Town
Police Chief, Town Clerk, Town Fire Chief, police officers or other officers or
employees of the Town of Franklin except that the Mayor and the members of the
Town Council shall be qualified voters of the municipality.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.19   Damaging ordinances prohibited
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the Town of Franklin shall be
designated as the Code of Franklin and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
   COUNTY. Macon County, North Carolina.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
   PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of North Carolina.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
   TOWN, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. The town of Franklin, North
Carolina.
   WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words
YEAR OF OUR LORD.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this municipality shall be by the
following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of
the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this town exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this town for the transaction of all municipal
business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the Town Board of Aldermen requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the Town Board of Aldermen shall desire to amend any existing
chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment,
substituted in its place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section.
Example: ('76 Code, § 1-1001) (Ord. passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-70; Am.
Ord. passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (G.S. § 160A-6) ('76 Code, § 1-1001) (Ord. passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord.
passed 1-1-85).
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference”
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.
For example:
   § 31.10 MAYOR.
      The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the legislative body.
   (Ord. 10, passed 1-1-80)
   Statutory reference:
      For the powers and duties of the Mayor, see G.S. § 160A-67
§ 10.19 DAMAGING ORDINANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall tear or deface any of the town ordinances.
('76 Code, § 1-1007)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   In addition to any other remedies cited in this code of
ordinances for the enforcement of the provisions of this code of ordinances,
the regulations and standards contained in this code of ordinances may be
enforced through the issuance of citations by the appropriate town official.
These citations shall be in the form of a civil penalty. The town may recover
this penalty in a civil action in the nature of a debt if the offender does not
pay the penalty within 72 hours after being cited for a violation. In addition,
failure to pay the civil penalty within 72 hours may subject the violator to
criminal charges of not more than $50 or imprisonment for not more than 30
days, as set forth in G.S. § 14-4(a). The following civil penalties are
established for violations under this section:
         (a)    Warning citation (to be issued in the discretion of the issuing
officer): correct violation within ten days.
         (b)   First citation, $25.
         (c)   Second citation for same offense, $100.
         (d)   Third and subsequent citation for same offense, $200.
      (2)   These civil penalties are in addition to any other penalties which
may be imposed by a court for violation of the provisions of this code of
ordinances.
   (B)    In addition to the foregoing enforcement provisions, this chapter may
be enforced by any remedy provided in G.S. § 160A-175, including, but not
limited to, all appropriate equitable remedies issued from a court of complete
jurisdiction as provided in G.S. § 160A-175(e). This section specifically
provides that each day's continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct
offense.
(Am. Ord. 2021-007, passed 7-6-2021)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   BOARD OF ALDERMEN
      
31.   TOWN OFFICIALS
      
32.   FINANCE AND REVENUE
      
33.   DEPARTMENTS, BOARD AND COMMISSIONS
      
34.   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
      
35.   TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: TOWN COUNCIL
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Appointment of Committees and officials
   
30.02   Regular and special meetings
Ordinances
   
30.20   Effective date
   
30.21   Ordinances confined to one subject
   
30.22   Official copy
   
30.23   Ordinance book
Editor’s note:
   Effective May 15, 2017, the town passed Ordinance No. 2017-006 to change the
governing board from Board of Aldermen to Town Council.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 APPOINTMENT OF COMMITTEES AND OFFICIALS.
    (A)   The Town Council may create the committees of the Town Council for
special purposes as they deem best.
('76 Code, § 2-1001) (Am. Ord. 2025-010, passed 10-7-25)
   (B)   The Town Council shall appoint the Town Manager.
(Ord. passed 3-3-08; Am. Ord. 2025-010, passed 10-7-25)
§ 30.02 REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   The regular meetings of the Town Council shall be held on the first
Monday of each month at a time set by the Town Council, at the Town Hall,
except for those instances when the first Monday of the month falls on a
holiday. In that event, the regular meeting of the Town Council shall be held
the following day at the approved time set by the Town Council, at the Town
Hall, unless otherwise designated by the Town Council.
   (B)   (1)   The Mayor, the Vice Mayor, or any two members of the Town
Council may at any time call a special meeting by signing a written notice
stating the time and place of the meeting and the subjects to be considered.
The notice shall be delivered to the Mayor and each Town Council member or left
at his usual dwelling place at least six hours before the meeting. Only those
items of business specified in the notice may be transacted at a special
meeting, unless all members are present or have signed a written waiver of
notice. In addition to the procedures set out in this division (B)(1) or any
Town Charter, a person or persons calling a special meeting of the Town Council
shall comply with the notice requirements of G.S. Ch. 143, Art. 33C.
      (2)   Special meetings may be held at any time when the Mayor and all
members of the Town Council are present and consent thereto, or when those not
present have signed a written waiver of notice.
      (3)   During any regular meeting, or any duly called special meeting, the
Town Council may call or schedule a special meeting, provided that the motion
or resolution calling or scheduling any such special meeting shall specify the
time, place and purpose or purposes of such meeting and shall be adopted during
an open session.
(G.S. § 160A-71) ('76 Code, § 2-1011) (Am. Ord. passed 10-3-94; Am. Ord. 2025-
010, passed 10-7-25)
ORDINANCES
§ 30.20 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   All ordinances shall be effective after the ratification thereof except
ordinances specifying some other effective date or ordinances required by state
law to be effective only after having met specific date requirements.
('76 Code, § 2-1021)
 § 30.21 ORDINANCES CONFINED TO ONE SUBJECT.
   All ordinances shall be confined to one subject except appropriation
ordinances which shall be confined to the subject of appropriations only.
('76 Code, § 2-1022)
§ 30.22 OFFICIAL COPY.
   A true copy of an ordinance, which has been duly enacted by the Board,
signed by the Mayor, and attested to by the Clerk shall be known as an official
copy of any ordinance for the town. All ordinances or a true copy thereof shall
be inserted in this Code in the proper chapter.
('76 Code, § 2-1023)
Statutory reference:
   Pleading and proving municipal ordinances, see G.S. § 160A-79
§ 30.23 ORDINANCE BOOK.
   The Clerk shall file a true copy of each ordinance, until it is codified in
this Code, in an ordinance book separate and apart from the Board's minute
book. The ordinance book shall be appropriately indexed and maintained for
public inspection in the office of the Clerk.
('76 Code, § 2-1024)
Statutory reference:
   Code of Ordinances and ordinance book, see G.S. §§ 160A-77, 78
CHAPTER 31: TOWN OFFICIALS
Section
   
31.00   Manager
   
31.01   Mayor
   
31.02   Clerk; Treasurer
   
31.03   Other officers and employees; compensation
   
31.04   Clerk and other officers or employees; bonds
Cross-reference:
   Town Council appoints Tax Collector from time to time, see
Charter § 18.
§ 31.00 MANAGER.
   It shall be the duty of the Town Manager to cause all ordinances of the town
to be enforced and to attend all meetings of the Town Council. It shall further
be the duty of the Manager within 30 days after the close of each year to
require a report to the Town Council from the various departments of the town
government for the previous year and recommend the adjustments as he may see
fit, and the Manager shall perform other duties as the Town Council may from
time to time require.
(Ord. passed 3-3-08)
§ 31.01 MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall attend and preside over all meetings of the Town Council.
The power and duties of the Mayor shall be such as are conferred upon him by
the Town Council pursuant to law. The Mayor shall be the official head of the
town for the purpose of civil service process and for all ceremonial purposes.
(‘76 Code § 2-2001) (Ord. passed 3-3-08)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-67
§ 31.02 CLERK; TREASURER.
   (A)   The Clerk shall be appointed, suspended or removed by and serve at the
direction of the Town Manager. The Clerk shall:
      (1)   Give notice of meetings of the Town Council;
      (2)   Keep an ordinance book as provided in §
30.23 hereof;
      (3)   Perform other duties as the Town Council or Town Manager may from
time to time require.
   (B)   The Treasurer (which may also be styled “Finance Officer”) shall be
appointed, suspended or removed by and serve at the direction of the Town
Manager. The Treasurer shall:
      (1)   Keep or cause to be kept in a safe place all the monies, records,
and accounts;
      (2)   Disburse funds for the various purposes of the town only when an
appropriation has been made in the annual budget and disbursement is authorized
by the Town Council;
      (3)   Keep true, accurate and just books of accounts and the dealings and
transactions of the town, which books shall show at all times the true
condition of the town, its resources and liabilities and the disposition and
use of the monies coming under the control of the town;
      (4)   Perform other duties as are imposed upon finance officers pursuant
to applicable law, or as the Town Manager may from time to time require.
('76 Code, § 2-2002) (Ord. passed 7-7-14; Am. Ord. passed 10-3-16)
Statutory reference:
   Duties of the Clerk, see G.S. § 160A-171
   Duties of the Finance Officer, see G.S. § 159-25
   Pre-audit of disbursements, see G.S. § 159-28
Editor’s note:
   Any instances of Clerk-Treasurer will now read as Town Clerk due to
separation of positions.
§ 31.03 OTHER OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES; COMPENSATION.
   All officers and employees shall receive compensation as from time to time
may be prescribed by the Town Council.
('76 Code, § 2-2003)
Statutory reference:
   Compensation of personnel, see G.S. § 160A-162
§ 31.04 CLERK AND OTHER OFFICERS OR EMPLOYEES; BONDS.
   The Clerk and other officers or employees required by the Town Council
shall, before entering upon their duties, post bond in amounts specified by the
Town Council. All bond premiums shall be paid from town funds. Provided, that
when two offices are combined, the office of Clerk and Treasurer, only one bond
shall be required.
('76 Code, § 2-2004)
CHAPTER 32: FINANCE AND REVENUE
Section
Purchasing
   
32.01   Disbursement of funds
   
32.02   Purchase orders required
Disposal of Property
   
32.10   Disposal of personal property valued at less than $5,000
Fiscal Procedures
   
32.15   Fiscal year
   
32.16   Collection of taxes in installments
PURCHASING
§ 32.01 DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
   No money shall be disbursed from the Town Treasury except in accordance with
the Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act.
('76 Code, § 2-4001)
§ 32.02 PURCHASE ORDERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Before any order is given for items to be paid for by the town or any
purchase made by any town employee, amounting to $500 or more, a purchase order
must first be obtained from the Finance Officer.
   (B)   Any town employee purchasing goods, whose cost is $500 or more,
without a purchase order from the Finance Officer may be held responsible for
the cost of same.
('76 Code, § 2-4002) (Am. Ord. passed 1-4-16)
DISPOSAL OF PROPERTY
§ 32.10 DISPOSAL OF PERSONAL PROPERTY VALUED AT LESS THAN $5,000.
   (A)   The Town Manager is hereby authorized to dispose of any surplus
personal property owned by the town, whenever he or she determines, in his or
her discretion, that:
      (1)   The item or group of items has a fair market value of less than
$5,000;
      (2)   The property is no longer necessary for the conduct of public
business; and
      (3)   Sound property management principles and financial considerations
indicate that the interests of the town would best be served by disposing of
the property.
   (B)   The Town Manager may dispose of any such surplus personal property by
any means he or she judges reasonably calculated to yield the highest
attainable sale price in money or other consideration, including but not
limited to the methods of sale provided in Article 12 of G.S. Chapter 160A.
Such sale may be public or private, with or without notice and minimum waiting
period.
   (C)   The surplus property shall be sold to the party who tenders the
highest offer, or exchanged for any property or services useful to the town if
greater value may be obtained in that manner. The Town Manager is hereby
authorized to execute and deliver any applicable title documents. If no offers
are received within a reasonable time, the Town Manager may retain the
property, obtain any reasonably available salvage value, or cause it to be
disposed of as waste material. No surplus property may be donated to any
individual or organization except by resolution of the Town Council.
   (D)   For all property sold under the authority of this section, the Town
Manager shall keep a record, which shall generally describe: the property sold
or exchanged; to whom it was sold, or with whom exchanged; and the amount of
money or other consideration received for each sale or exchange.
   (E)   This section is enacted pursuant to G.S. § 160A-266(c).
(Ord. passed 3-2-98)
FISCAL PROCEDURES
§ 32.15 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the town shall commence on the first day of July of each
year and end on the 30th day of June of the next year.
('76 Code, § 2-4021)
§ 32.16 COLLECTION OF TAXES IN INSTALLMENTS.
   The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to collect in partial payments and to
give receipts for same.
(Ord. passed 6-6-21) ('76 Code, § 2-4022)
CHAPTER 33: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section
Police Department
   
33.01   Organization
   
33.02   Department administration
   
33.03   Chief of Police
   
33.04   Oath of office; holding other offices
   
33.05   Powers and duties of policemen
   
33.06   Extraterritorial jurisdiction of police officers
Fire Department
   
33.20   Organization
   
33.21   Duties of Chief
   
33.22   Chief's duties as Fire Inspector
   
33.23   General authority at fires
   
33.24   Interfering with fire alarm apparatus
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.01 ORGANIZATION.
    The Police Department of the town shall consist of a Chief and as many
police officers as the Town Council shall from time to time provide for in the
town budget; and such Chief and officers shall be appointed by the Manager,
along with as many special police officers as the Manager and Town Council may
deem necessary to appoint for special purposes.
('76 Code, § 3-1001) (Am. Ord. passed 10-3-16; Am. Ord. 2021-006, passed 7-6-
2021)
Statutory reference:
   Law enforcement generally, see G.S. §§ 160A-281 et seq.
§ 33.02 DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATION.
   The Manager, consistent with the Manager’s authority pursuant to state law,
shall have general supervision over the Police Department. The Manager may
suspend, for cause, any member of the Police Department, pursuant to Town
Council policy and such departmental rules as the Manager shall approve in
collaboration with the Chief of Police.
('76 Code, § 3-1002) (Am. Ord. passed 10-3-16)
§ 33.03 CHIEF OF POLICE.
   The Chief shall have control over the Police Department under the
supervision of the Town Council. The Chief shall keep the Town Council informed
of the department's activities and shall make reports that the Town Council may
from time to time require. He shall perform other duties as may be required of
him by the Town Council.
('76 Code, § 3-1003)
§ 33.04 OATH OF OFFICE; HOLDING OTHER OFFICES.
   Each person appointed or employed as Chief of Police, police officer, or
auxiliary police officer shall take and subscribe before some person authorized
by law to administer oaths the oath of office required by Article VI, Sec. 7 of
the North Carolina Constitution. The oath shall be filed with the Clerk. The
offices of police officer, Chief of Police, and auxiliary police officer may be
held concurrently with any other appointive office pursuant to Article VI, Sec.
9, of the North Carolina Constitution.
('76 Code, § 3-1004)
§ 33.05 POWERS AND DUTIES OF POLICEMEN.
   Each police officer shall:
   (A)   Have within the corporate limits of the town all of the powers
invested in law-enforcement officers in accordance with state law;
   (B)   Have power to serve all civil and criminal process that may be
directed to him by any officer of the General Court of Justice;
   (C)   Rigidly enforce all laws, ordinances and regulations of the town and
the State of North Carolina and report each and every violation thereof as
directed;
   (D)   At all times preserve the peace, protect the property and the safety
of the citizens of the town.
('76 Code, § 3-1005)
§ 33.06 EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION OF POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   In addition to their authority within the corporate limits, police
officers shall have all the powers invested in law-enforcement officers within
one mile of the corporate limits of the town, and on all property owned by or
leased to the town wherever located, in accordance with state law.
   (B)   Any officer pursuing an offender who has committed a criminal offense
within the corporate limit or extraterritorial jurisdiction for which the
officer could have arrested the person within the said limit or jurisdiction,
and who pursues the offender in immediate and continuous flight outside the
corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the town may exercise
jurisdiction as allowed pursuant to applicable law to effect the offender’s
arrest, and shall be entitled to all of the privileges, immunities, and
benefits to which he would be entitled if acting within the town, including
coverage under the workmen's compensation laws.
('76 Code, § 3-1006) (Am. Ord. passed 1-3-17)
Statutory reference:
   Extraterritorial jurisdiction of police, G.S. § 160A-286
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 33.20 ORGANIZATION.
    The Fire Department shall consist of the Chief of the Fire Department and a
sufficient number of firefighters (voluntary, part or full time) to maintain
and operate the Department. The Manager shall appoint the Chief and approve the
appointment to the Department of all members. The Department may from time to
time adopt its own rules and regulations governing the Department subject to
the approval of the Town Manager.
('76 Code, § 3-2001) (Am. Ord. passed 10-3-16; Am. Ord. 2021-006, passed 7-6-
2021)
Cross-references:
   For provisions concerning Fire Limits, see
Chapter 150
   For provisions concerning Fire Prevention, see
Chapter 92
Statutory reference:
   Fire protection generally, see G.S. §§ 160A-291 et seq.
§ 33.21 DUTIES OF CHIEF.
   The Chief, subject to supervision by the Town Manager, shall:
   (A)   Have general control of the Department, the personnel, apparatus, and
fire hydrants;
   (B)   Command the Department and supervise the firefighting and
extinguishing of all fires;
   (C)   Inspect or cause to be inspected all trucks and other equipment of the
Fire Department to ascertain that the equipment is being kept in proper
condition. He or she shall report annually to the Town Council the condition of
all equipment;
   (D)   Inspect or cause to be inspected all fire hydrants and shall maintain
records to be available upon request.
('76 Code, § 3-2002) (Am. Ord. 2023-006, passed 10-2-23)
§ 33.22 CHIEF'S DUTIES AS FIRE INSPECTOR.
   (A)   In the event that the town does not have an interlocal agreement with
another unit of local government providing for fire inspections and related
services for the town, the Town Manager may direct the Fire Chief to assume the
function of Fire Inspector. As such, he (or his designated agent) shall have
authority to enter any and all premises, at a reasonable time, for purposes of
inspection. When reasonably possible, the Chief will notify the owner of
property to be inspected of his intention to inspect the property, and the time
and date of the inspection. The notice shall be in writing and sent to the
owner by registered or certified mail.
   (B)   Routine inspections. He shall make annual inspections of all
structures located within the fire district.
   (C)   Inspections upon complaint. He shall, upon receipt of a complaint
forthwith investigate.
   (D)   He shall investigate the causes of fires and shall keep records of his
findings as to origin, location, owner, extent of damage and injury, and amount
of insurance carried. The findings must be reported to the North Carolina
Insurance Commissioner at regular intervals.
   (E)   He shall cause the removal of fire hazards by serving proper orders to
the owner or agent of premises in question; the orders to state a reasonable
time limit. Failure to comply with the order shall be considered a misdemeanor.
('76 Code § 3-2003) (Am. Ord. passed 12-5-16)
§ 33.23 GENERAL AUTHORITY AT FIRES.
   It shall be unlawful to congregate on the streets or alleys near a fire in a
manner which would interfere with the activities of the Fire Department.
('76 Code § 3-2004)
§ 33.24 INTERFERING WITH FIRE ALARM APPARATUS.
   No person shall interfere carelessly or willfully with the fire alarm system
or injure the poles, wires, boxes, or other apparatus connected therewith.
('76 Code, § 3-2007)
Statutory reference:
   Following fire apparatus; driving over fire hose, see G.S. § 20-157.
CHAPTER 34: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
   
34.01   State of emergency; issuance of public proclamation
   
34.02   Restrictions which may be imposed
   
34.03   Form and content of proclamation
   
34.04   End of state of emergency
 
   
34.99   Penalty
§ 34.01 STATE OF EMERGENCY; ISSUANCE OF PUBLIC PROCLAMATION.
   (A)   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever, during times
of great public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe, or similar public
emergency, for any reason, municipal public safety authorities are unable to
maintain public order or afford adequate protection for lives or property.
   (B)   In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency
endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the
town, or threatening damage to or destruction of property, the Mayor is hereby
authorized and empowered to issue a public proclamation declaring to all
persons the existence of a state of emergency, and, in order to more
effectively protect the lives and property of people within the town, to place
in effect any or all of the restrictions hereinafter authorized.
   (C)   The Mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to limit by the
proclamation the application of all or any part of the restrictions to any area
specifically designated or described within the corporate limits of the town
and to specific hours of the day or night; and to exempt from all or any part
of the restrictions; law enforcement officers, firefighters and other public
employees, doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals and other medical
facilities; on-duty military personnel whether state or federal; on duty
employees of public utilities, public transportation companies, and newspaper,
magazine, radio broadcasting, and television broadcasting corporations operated
for profit; and other classes of persons as may be essential to the
preservation of public order and immediately neces sary to serve the safety,
health, and welfare needs of the people within the town.
('76 Code, § 3-3001 (a) - (c))
§ 34.02 RESTRICTIONS WHICH MAY BE IMPOSED.
   During the existence of a proclaimed state of emergency, the Mayor may
impose by proclamation any or all of the following restrictions:
   (A)   Prohibit or regulate the possession off one's own premises of
explosives, firearms, ammunition, or dangerous weapons of any kind, and
prohibit the purchase, sale, transfer or other disposition thereof;
   (B)   Prohibit or regulate the buying or selling of beer, wine, or
intoxicating beverages of any kind, and their possession or consumption off
one's own premises;
   (C)   Prohibit or regulate any demonstration, parade, march, vigil, or
participation therein from taking place on any of the public ways or upon any
public property;
   (D)   Prohibit or regulate the sale of gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, or any
other explosive or inflammable fluids or substances:
   (E)   Prohibit or regulate travel upon any public street, alley, or roadway
or upon any other public property, except by those in search of medical
assistance, food, or other commodity or service necessary to sustain the well-
being of themselves or their families or some member thereof;
   (F)   Prohibit or regulate the participation in or carrying on of any
business activity, and prohibit or regulate the keeping open of places of
business, places of entertainment, and any other places of public assembly.
('76 Code, § 3-3001 (e)) Penalty, see §
34.99
§ 34.03 FORM AND CONTENT OF PROCLAMATION.
   The proclamation for the declaration of a state of emergency and the
imposition of specific prohibitions and restrictions shall take substantially
the following form:
   “WHEREAS, The governing body of the           of                          ,
                         has duly adopted an ordinance authorizing the Mayor to
determine and proclaim the existence of a state of emergency and to impose
various restrictions after he determines that the restrictions are necessary as
a response to an emergency.
   “NOW THEREFORE, I,                           , Mayor of the               
of                  proclaim that:
   I.   “An emergency exists, and restrictions set forth in this proclamation
are necessary in order to maintain an acceptable level of public order,
services, and protection of lives, safety, and property during this emergency.
   II.   “I proclaim the following restrictions:
      (A)   No person shall be a part of any assembly of three or more persons
in the area bounded by the Corporate limits of                   ,
                                                      .
      (B)   Possession, consumption, and transfer of intoxicating liquor.
         (1)   No person shall possess or consume any intoxicating liquor,
including beer and wine, other than on his premises.
         (2)   No person shall sell or otherwise transfer any intoxicating
liquor, including beer and wine.
      (C)   Curfew.
         (1)   No person not exempted by this proclamation shall appear in
public in the geographic area described in this proclamation between the hours
of           p.m. and midnight or between the hours of midnight and          
a.m. of any day until I remove this curfew by proclamation.
         (2)   This curfew shall apply to the area bounded by
                                                            
                                                            
         (3)   I find it necessary to the preservation of the public health,
safety, and welfare to exempt from these curfew restrictions the following
classes of people in the circumstances indicated:
            (a)   Those whose appearance is essential in order to obtain or
furnish a service or commodity which is immediately necessary to sustain the
health or well-being of themselves or of someone within curfew area.
            (b)   Those whose appearance necessarily occurs in the process of
leaving a place at which they were temporarily engaged and from which they
could not reasonably have planned their departure so as to avoid appearing
during the period during which the curfew was applicable.
            (c)                                    
            (d)                                    
   (D)   Possession and transfer of dangerous weapons or substances.
      (1)   No person shall possess any dangerous weapons or substances unless
they remain in a place of storage on his premises, or, if they cannot be
readily stored on his premises, unless they remain in a customary place of
storage not readily available to the possessor. No person may transport or sell
or otherwise transfer any dangerous weapons or substances.
      (2)   I find it necessary to the protection of the public health, safety,
and welfare to exempt from these restrictions the following classes of people
in the circumstances indicated:
         (a)   Police officers may possess any weapon necessary to carry out
their duties when on active duty.
         (b)   Anyone may possess gasoline when the gasoline is in the tank of
a car in his possession.
                                       may transfer                   when
                                                   .
   (E)   Access to restricted areas.
      (1)   I direct the Chief of Police and his subordinates to restrict or
deny access to any area, location, or street where a restriction is necessary
in order to help overcome this emergency or to prevent the emergency from
worsening. These restrictions on access shall be indicated by means of
barricades, posted notices, or orders to anyone in the area.
      (2)   No person shall obtain access or attempt to obtain access to any
area, location, or street to which the Chief of Police and his subordinates
have restricted access according to the directions I have just given to them.
   III.   “Anyone violating any restriction imposed by this proclamation or
under its authority violates city ordinance and is guilty of a misdemeanor.
   IV.   “This proclamation shall take effect immediately.
                                        
            Hour and Date
                                        
            Mayor
“SEAL OF THE CITY”
(Ord. passed 5-6-68) (Am. '76 Code, § 3-3002)
§ 34.04 END OF STATE OF EMERGENCY.
   The Mayor shall proclaim the end of the state of emergency or all or any
part of the restrictions imposed as soon as circumstances warrant or when
directed to do so by the Board.   
('76 Code, § 3-3001 (d))
§ 34.99 PENALTY.
   The violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any provision of any
restriction imposed by any proclamation authorized by this subchapter, shall
constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine not
exceeding $50 or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, as provided by G.S. § 14-
4.
(Ord. passed 5-6-68) (Am. '76 Code, § 3-3003)
CHAPTER 35: TAXATION
Section
   
35.01   A tax on gross receipts derived from the retail short-term lease or
rental of vehicles
   
35.02   Minimal tax overpayments
 
   
35.99   Penalty
§ 35.01 A TAX ON GROSS RECEIPTS DERIVED FROM THE RETAIL SHORT-TERM LEASE OR
RENTAL OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CUSTOMER. Any person that leases or rents a vehicle on a short-term lease
or rental basis.
      GENERAL STATUTES. The North Carolina General Statutes and any reference
to a particular section thereof shall include the same as may be from time to
time amended, modified, supplemented, revised or superseded.
      GROSS RECEIPTS. The amount that is or would be reported as gross receipts
on a business's state income tax return, or on the federal income tax return
filed with the state income tax return if the state return does not separately
state gross receipts for the most recently completed tax year. Taxes collected
hereunder are not subject to the tax herein imposed and are not included in
gross receipts.
      LEASE OR RENTAL. A transfer, for consideration, of the use but not the
ownership of property to another for a period of time (G.S. § 105-164.3(7a)).
      LONG-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL.  A lease or rental made under a written
agreement to lease or rent property to the same person for a period of at least
365 continuous days (G.S. § 105-187.1(3)).
      PERSON. Any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation,
unincorporated association, partnership, sole proprietorship, company, firm, or
other legal entity.
      SHORT-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL. Any lease or rental of a vehicle that is not
a long-term lease or rental (G.S. § 160A-215.1(e)(2) and G.S. § 105-187.1(4)).
      TAX COLLECTOR. That individual appointed by the governing body (pursuant
to G.S. § 105-349 or to the provisions of the municipal charter) to collect
taxes on behalf of the town, and any other person authorized to carry out the
duties and functions of such individual.
      TAXPAYER. Any person liable for the taxes imposed by this section.
      VEHICLE. Any of the following:
         (1)   A motor vehicle of the private passenger type, including a
passenger van, minivan, or sport utility vehicle.
         (2)   A motor vehicle of the cargo type, including a cargo van, pickup
truck, or truck with a gross vehicle weight of 26,000 pounds or less used
predominantly in the transportation of property for other than commercial
freight, and that does not require the operator to possess a commercial drivers
license.
         (3)   A trailer or semitrailer with a gross vehicle weight of 6,000
pounds or less (G.S. 160A-215.1(e)(2)).
   (B)   Levy of tax. A tax is hereby imposed and levied in an amount equal to
1.5% of the gross receipts derived from the short-term lease or rental of
vehicles at retail to the general public. This tax on gross receipts is in
addition to the privilege taxes authorized by G.S. § 160A-211.
   (C)   Collection of the tax. At the time of each lease or rental, every
person engaged in the business of the short-term lease or rental of vehicles at
retail to the general public shall: collect the tax herein levied, place the
tax so collected in a segregated account, and thereafter remit such tax to the
Tax Collector in accordance with the provisions of this section. In each short-
term lease or rental agreement, the taxpayer shall include a provision stating
that the percentage amount (enacted by this section) of the total lease or
rental price, excluding sales tax, is being charged as a tax on gross receipts.
The amount of the tax shall be stated separately from the lease or rental and
shown separately on the taxpayer's records. The tax shall be paid by the
customer to the taxpayer as trustee for and on account of the town. The
taxpayer shall be liable for the collection thereof and for its payment to the
Tax Collector; the taxpayer's failure to charge or to collect the tax from the
customer shall not affect such liability.
   (D)   Report and payment of tax. Taxes levied under this section are due and
payable when a return is required to be filed. Every taxpayer shall, within the
time specified, submit a return to the Tax Collector on the form prescribed by
the Tax Collector. A return must be signed by the taxpayer or the taxpayer's
agent. Returns of taxpayers are due to the Tax Collector each month on or
before the fifteenth of the month following the month in which the tax accrues.
As provided in G. S. § 160A-208.1, a return shall not be considered a public
record and information contained in a return may be disclosed only in
accordance therewith.
   (E)   Taxpayer to keep records. The taxpayer shall keep and preserve
suitable records of the gross receipts received in the conduct of business and
such other books or accounts as may be necessary to determine the amount of the
tax for which such taxpayer is liable under the provisions of this section. It
shall be the duty of the taxpayer to keep and preserve for a period of three
years all such records of gross receipts and other books and accounts
described. All records, books and accounts herein described shall be open for
examination at all reasonable hours during the day by the Tax Collector or his
duly authorized agent.
   (F)   Tax Collector to provide forms. To insure a full collection of and
accounting for taxes due, the Tax Collector shall design, prepare and print
forms and instructions for filing returns; and shall make them available to all
taxpayers operating within the municipal boundaries of the town. Failure to
obtain or receive forms shall not relieve a taxpayer from the payment of the
tax at the time and in the manner provided.
   (G)   Situs. The transaction giving rise to the tax herein levied shall be
deemed to have occurred at the location of the entity from which the customer
takes delivery of the vehicle (G.S. § 160A-215.1(b)).
   (H)   Administration. In addition to the provisions herein, the levy and
collection of the taxes herein imposed shall be otherwise administered in the
same manner as the tax levied under G.S. § 105-164.4(a)(2) (G.S. § 160A-215.1
(d)).
   (I)   Authority. This section is enacted pursuant to the provisions of G.S.
§ 160A-215.1.
   (J)   Effective date. This section and the taxes thereby levied and imposed
shall become effective July 1, 2000.
(Ord. passed 6-20-00) Penalty, see §
35.99
§ 35.02 MINIMAL TAX OVERPAYMENTS.
   (A)   Pursuant to S.L. 2015-266, the Town Council directs that the town
shall not mail a refund for an overpayment of tax if the refund is less than
$15.
   (B)   The Town Tax Collector is hereby directed to:
      (1)   Keep a record of all minimal refunds by receipt number and amount,
      (2)   Make a report of the amount of these refunds to the Town Council at
the time of settlement, and
      (3)   Implement a system by which payment of the refund may be made to a
taxpayer who comes in person to the Town Hall seeking the refund, or
alternatively applied as a credit against the tax liability of the taxpayer for
taxes due to the town for the next succeeding year.
   (C)   Unless the taxpayer requests the minimal refund in person at the Town
Hall before the end of the same fiscal year in which the refund is due, the
Town Tax Collector is directed to apply that amount to the taxpayer’s tax
liability to the town for the next succeeding year.
(Res. passed 11-7-16)
§ 35.99 PENALTY.
   The provisions with respect to remedies and penalties applicable to
Subchapter VIII (Local Government Sales and Use Tax) of Chapter 105 of the
General Statutes, as contained in Article 5 and Article 9, Subchapter 1,
Chapter 105 thereof, shall be applicable in like manner to taxes authorized to
be levied and collected under this chapter, to the extent that the same are not
inconsistent with the provisions hereof. The governing body of the town may
exercise any power the Secretary of Revenue may exercise in collecting sales
and use taxes (G.S. § 160A-215.1(f)).
(Ord. passed 6-20-00)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE
      
51.   SEWERS
      
52.   WATER
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Refuse required to be deposited in approved containers
   
50.03   Burning or burying garbage and refuse regulated
   
50.04   Accumulation of garbage and refuse prohibited
   
50.05   Containers required
   
50.06   Pre-collection practices
   
50.07   Location of containers
   
50.08   Unlawful to displace containers
   
50.09   Special or bulk collections regulated
   
50.10   Rates, charges and billing
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING MATERIAL SCRAPS. Scrap building material from the construction,
reconstruction, remodeling or repair of a building, walkway, driveway, sign and
other structure, including but not limited to, excavated earth, tree stumps,
rocks, gravel, bricks, plaster, concrete, lumber or any other similar material
used in construction or in the containers or wrappings therefor.
   GARBAGE. All putrescible wastes, including animal and vegetable matter,
animal offal and carcasses, and recognizable industrial byproducts, but
excluding sewage and human wastes.
   REFUSE. All nonputrescible wastes.
   SOLID WASTE. Garbage, refuse, rubbish, trash, and other discarded solid
materials, including solid waste materials resulting from homes, businesses,
industrial, commercial, and agricultural operations, and from community
activities, but does not include solids or dissolved materials in domestic
sewage or other significant pollutants.
   TREE TRIMMINGS. Tree limbs, leaves, shrub bery trimmings and cuttings and
all other trimmings from the natural growth of trees, shrubbery, weeds, plants
or grass.
(‘76 Code, § 4-2001)
§ 50.02 REFUSE REQUIRED TO BE DEPOSITED IN APPROVED CONTAINERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, place or deposit any garbage
or refuse of any kind on any public or private property except in approved
containers or as otherwise provided in this subchapter.
(‘76 Code, § 4-2002) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.03 BURNING OR BURYING GARBAGE AND REFUSE REGULATED.
   It shall be unlawful to burn or set fire to or bury any garbage for the
purpose of disposal unless a permit therefor has been granted by the Fire
Chief.
(‘76 Code, § 4-2003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.04 ACCUMULATION OF GARBAGE AND REFUSE PROHIBITED.
   All garbage and refuse shall be collected and placed in containers as
required by this chapter and it shall be unlawful for any person to permit
garbage or refuse to accumulate or remain on any premises longer than is
reasonably necessary to remove and deposit same in approved containers as
required herein.
(‘76 Code, § 4-2004) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.05 CONTAINERS REQUIRED.
   The occupant of every building or premises where garbage and refuse does or
may exist shall provide containers made of substantial galvanized iron,
plastic, rubber or other non-rusting material in which shall be deposited all
garbage and refuse existing at the building or premises. Each container shall
be provided with handles or bails and with a tight fitting cover made of the
same material as the container. All containers shall be water tight and they
shall be of a size that can be conveniently handled by the collectors, and no
containers shall be more than 32 gallons in capacity and measure not more than
22 inches in diameter nor 30 inches in height. All containers shall be kept in
a reasonably clean manner by the use of lye or other effective cleaner. The
other provisions of this subchapter notwithstanding, commercial containers
approved by the town and emptied by contract with the town for a fee are
permissible, regardless of size or capacity.
(‘76 Code, § 4-2005)
§ 50.06 PRE-COLLECTION PRACTICES.
   All garbage and refuse shall have the liquid drained therefrom and shall be
wrapped in paper or other like material before it is placed in the container
for collection. Ashes and cinders shall be placed in a separate container
provided for that purpose and no ashes shall be deposited in any container
until they are cold. Containers which fail to have a top as required in §
50.05 above or which become rusted or broken and therefore are unable to
contain garbage and refuse in a satisfactory manner will not be used.
(‘76 Code, § 4-2006)
§ 50.07 LOCATION OF CONTAINERS.
   Containers shall not be placed adjacent to the street or sidewalk except on
the days when garbage is to be collected. A schedule of collection shall be
kept on file at the Clerk’s office. When collection schedules are altered from
time to time, notice of the change shall be given by publishing the new
schedule in a newspaper having general circulation in the town. Garbage
containers shall be removed from their positions adjacent to the street or
sidewalk after the contents have been emptied on that same day. Provided, that
at places of business or manufacturing, empty containers shall not be left on
the street for more than 30 minutes between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m.
(‘76 Code, § 4-2007)
§ 50.08 UNLAWFUL TO DISPLACE CONTAINERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, displace, or otherwise
interfere with garbage containers or their contents except the owner or upon
permission or at the request of the owner.
(‘76 Code, § 4-2008) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.09 SPECIAL OR BULK COLLECTIONS REGULATED.
   (A)   No bulk trash, tree limbs, shrubbery cuttings, leaves and other refuse
will be collected without charge unless the refuse can be placed in regulation
type garbage cans. Provided, however, that limbs, tree trunks, tree and bush
cuttings are of the size that can be readily loaded in regulation garbage
trucks in amounts not in excess of one-half a truck load for any one residence
or place of business. In this event no charge will be made for the collection.
   (B)   Any property owner desiring special bulk collections of loose matter
not in closed containers or tied in bundles may request a special collection
for which a charge will be made. If sufficient manpower and equipment are
available, town personnel are authorized to make the special collections,
provided, the person making the request agrees to pay for the labor and
equipment used at the rate specified by the Town Clerk.
   (C)   No collection shall be made from vacant lots nor shall any large
rocks, tree trunks, tree stumps, tree limbs of more than 8 feet in length or
other heavy objects be collected by the town. No waste building materials or
lot clearings shall be collected from houses or other structures under
construction or recently completed.
   (D)   Material to be collected by special collec tions shall be placed in
neat piles and so located that the refuse can be easily loaded on trucks for
disposal.
(‘76 Code, § 4-2009)
§ 50.10 RATES, CHARGES AND BILLING.
   Should the town elect to re-enter into the operation of a solid waste
collection enterprise, the rates and charges to be assessed for such services
shall be set by the Town Council in its yearly budget ordinance, and may be
amended by ordinance from time to time thereafter.
(Ord. passed 3-7-16)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Purpose and policy
   
51.002   Definitions and abbreviations
General Sewer Use Requirements
   
51.010   Prohibited discharge standards
   
51.011   National categorical pretreatment standards
   
51.012   Local limits
   
51.013   State requirements
   
51.014   Right of revision
   
51.015   Dilution
   
51.016   Pretreatment of wastewater
   
51.017   Accidental discharge/slug control plans
   
51.018   Hauled wastewater
Fees
   
51.030   Purpose
   
51.031   User charges
   
51.032   Surcharges
   
51.033   Pretreatment program administration charges
Wastewater Discharge Permit Application and Issuance
   
51.040   Wastewater dischargers
   
51.041   Wastewater permits
Reporting Requirements
   
51.050   Baseline monitoring reports
   
51.051   Compliance schedule progress reports
   
51.052   Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard, deadline
   
51.053   Periodic compliance reports
   
51.054   Reports of changed conditions
   
51.055   Reports of potential problems
   
51.056   Reports from unpermitted users
   
51.057   Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting
   
51.058   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste
   
51.059   Analytical requirements
   
51.060   Grab and composite sample collection
   
51.061   Timing
   
51.062   Record keeping
   
51.063   Electronic reporting
Compliance Monitoring
   
51.070   Monitoring facilities
   
51.071   Inspection and sampling
   
51.072   Search warrants
Confidential Information
   
51.080   Confidential information
Enforcement
   
51.090   Administrative remedies
   
51.091   Civil penalties
   
51.092   Other available remedies
   
51.093   Remedies nonexclusive
Noncompliance
   
51.100   Annual publication of significant noncompliance
Adjudicatory Hearings
   
51.105   Hearings
Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
   
51.110   Upset
   
51.111   Prohibited discharge standards defense
   
51.112   Bypass
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the Town
of Franklin, hereafter referred to as the town, and enables the town to comply
with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33
United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40
CFR, Part 403).
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater discharges
into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of
the system or contaminate the resulting sludge;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants and wastewater discharges
into the municipal wastewater system which will pass through the system,
inadequately treated, into any waters of the State or otherwise be incompatible
with the system;
      (3)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludges
from the municipal system;
      (4)   To protect both municipal personnel who may be affected by sewage,
sludge, and effluent in the course of their employment as well as protecting
the general public;
      (5)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation,
maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system; and
      (6)   To ensure that the municipality complies with its NPDES or non-
discharge permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other
federal or state laws to which the municipal wastewater system is subject.
   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the municipal wastewater system, through the issuance of
permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of general
requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement
activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting of fees for
the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein.
   (D)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the municipal wastewater
system, as authorized by G.S. § 160A-312 and/or G.S. § 153A-275. The town shall
designate an administrator of the POTW and pretreatment program hereafter
referred to as the POTW Director. Except as otherwise provided herein, the POTW
Director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. Any powers granted to or imposed upon the POTW Director may be
delegated by the POTW Director to other town personnel. By discharging
wastewater into the municipal wastewater system, industrial users located
outside the town limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions
established in this chapter, as well as any permits, enforcement actions, or
orders issued hereunder.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.002 DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.
   (A)   Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following
terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated:
      (1)   ACT OR “THE ACT”. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §1251, et seq.
      (2)   APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Director of the Division Of Water Quality
of the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources or his
designee.
      (3)   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER.
         (a)   If the industrial user is a corporation, authorized
representative shall mean:
            1.   The president, secretary, or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
            2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management
decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having
the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment
RECOMMENDATIONS, and initiate and direct comprehensive measures to assure long-
term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can
ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
         (b)   If the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship,
an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or the proprietor,
respectively.
         (c)   If the industrial user is a federal, state or local government
facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest
official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of
the activities of the government facility, or their designee.
         (d)   The individuals described in divisions (A)(3)(a) through (A)(3)
(c) above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization
is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position
responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge
originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the
company, and the written authorization is submitted to the town.
         (e)   If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of
this section must be submitted to POTW Director prior to or together with any
reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
      (4)   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedures for five days at 20° centigrade, usually expressed as a
concentration (e.g. mg/1).
      (5)   BUILDING SEWER. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a
user to the POTW.
      (6)   BYPASS. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion
of a user’s treatment facility.
      (7)   CATEGORICAL STANDARDS. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
or Pretreatment Standard.
      (8)   CONTROL AUTHORITY. Refers to the POTW organization if the POTW
organization’s Pretreatment Program approval has not been withdrawn.
      (9)   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY OR EPA. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a
designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of said
agency.
      (10)   GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-
time basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of
time not to exceed 15 minutes.
      (11)   HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks, including but
not limited to such holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
      (12)   INDIRECT DISCHARGE OR DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction
from any nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the
Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged
into the system).
      (13)   INDUSTRIAL USER OR USER. Any person which is a source of indirect
discharge.
      (14)   INTERFERENCE. The inhibition, or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes, operations, or its sludge process, use, or disposal, which causes or
contributes to a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES, collection
system or non-discharge permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with specified applicable state and federal statutes, regulations,
or permits. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by
the POTW in accordance with section 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any
criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA)(42 U.S.C. §6901, et seq.), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act, the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary Act
(MPRSA) or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any
state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable
to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.
      (15)   MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood
and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated
bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and
dialysis wastes.
      (16)   NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR CATEGORICAL
STANDARD. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
EPA in accordance with sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1317)
which applies to a specific category of industrial users, and which appears in
40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
      (17)   NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD OR PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD.  Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances;
these prohibitions appear in §
51.010 and are developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR,
section 403.5.
      (18)   NEW SOURCE.
         (a)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which
there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under
section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such
standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with section 307(c),
provided that:
            1.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or
            2.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
            3.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of division (A)(18)(a)2. or (A)(18)(a)3. above but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
         (c)   For purposes of this definition, construction of a new source
has commenced if the owner or operator has:
            1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
               a.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
               b.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities
or equipment; or
            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation
under this definition.
      (19)   NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not
come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.
      (20)   NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM, OR NPDES, PERMIT.
A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1342), or
pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.1 by the state under delegation from EPA.
      (21)   NON-DISCHARGE PERMIT. A disposal system permit issued by the state
pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.1 for a waste which is not discharged directly to
surface waters of the state or for a wastewater treatment works which does not
discharge directly to surface waters of the state.
      (22)   PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the
state in quantities or concentrations which, alone or with discharges from
other sources, causes a violation, including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation, of the POTW’s NPDES or non-discharge permit, or a
downstream water quality standard.
      (23)   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their or their legal representatives,
agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local
government entities.
      (24)   pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance,
expressed as standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the
reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter
of solution.
      (25)   POLLUTANT. Any “waste” as defined in G.S. § 143-213(18) and
dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage
sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar
dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste and certain
characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color,
metals, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor).
      (26)   POTW DIRECTOR. The Town Administrator designated with the
responsibility for the pretreatment program and enforcement of this chapter.
      (27)   POTW TREATMENT PLANT. That portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.
      (28)   PRETREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing such pollution into a POTW collection system and/or treatment
plant. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes, or process changes or other means, except as prohibited
by 40 CFR Part 403.6(d).
      (29)   PRETREATMENT PROGRAM. The program for the control of pollutants
introduced into the POTW from non-domestic sources which was developed by the
town in compliance with 40 CFR 403.8 and approved by the approval authority as
authorized by G.S. § 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40 CFR 403.11.
      (30)   PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard.
      (31)   PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Prohibited discharge standards,
categorical standards, or local limits which applies to an industrial user.
      (32)   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) or MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER
SYSTEM.  A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. §
1292) which is owned in this instance by the town. This definition includes any
devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and
reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It
also includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey
wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. For the purposes of this chapter,
“POTW” shall also include any sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from
persons outside the town who are, by contract or agreement with the town, or in
any other way, users of the POTW of the town.
      (33)   SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the user’s treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
      (34)   SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER OR SIU. An industrial user that
discharges wastewater into a publicly owned treatment works and that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and
boiler blowdown wastewater);
         (b)   Contributes process wastewater which makes up 5% or more of the
NPDES or non- discharge permitted flow limit or 5% or more of the maximum
allowable headworks loading of the POTW treatment plant for any POTW pollutant
of concern;
         (c)   Is subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR
Part 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471; or
         (d)   Is designed as such by the control authority on the basis that
the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the
POTW’s operation, or for violating any Pretreatment Standard or requirement, or
for contributing to violations of the POTW’s effluent limitations and
conditions in its NPDES or non-discharge permit, or for contributing to
violations of the POTW’s receiving steam standard, or for limiting the POTW’s
sludge disposal options.
         (e)   Subject to Division approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907(b), the
control authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in
divisions (a) and (b) above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW’s operation or for violating any Pretreatment Standards or
requirement, or for contributing to violations of the POTW’s effluent
limitations and conditions in its NPDES or non-discharge permit, or for
contributing to violations of the POTW’s receiving stream standard, or for
limiting the POTW’s sludge disposal options, and thus is not a significant
industrial user.
         (f)   Subject to Division approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907(b), the
control authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in
division (c) above meets the requirements of 40 CFR Part 403.3(v)(2) and thus
is a non-significant categorical industrial user.
         (g)   Subject to Division approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907(b), the
control authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in
division (c) above meets the requirements of 40 CFR Part 403.12(e)(3) and this
is a middle tier significant industrial user. Sampling and inspection
requirements may be cut in half as per 40 CFR Parts 403.8(f)(2)(v)(C) and
403.12(e)(3).
      (35)   SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE OR SNC.  The status of noncompliance of
a significant industrial user when one or more of the following criteria are
met. Additionally, any industrial user which meets the criteria in division
(c), (d), or (h) shall also be SNC.
         (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here
as those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter (not including flow) during a six month period exceed (by
any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(l).
         (b)   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined
by 40 CFR Part 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC; (TRC = 1.4 for BOD,
TSS, fats, oil and grease, 1.2 for all other pollutants (except flow and pH).
         (c)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 CFR Part 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the control authority and/or
POTW determine has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public).
         (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant or wastewater that has caused
imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has
resulted in either the control authority’s or the POTWs, if different from the
control authority, exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR Part 403.8
(f)(1)(vi)(B) and §
51.090(E) to halt or prevent such a discharge.
         (e)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a
pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing
construction, and attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the
schedule date.
         (f)   Failure to provide reports for compliance schedule, self-
monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, and
periodic compliance reports within 30 days from the due date.
         (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
         (h)   Any other violation or group of violations that the control
authority considers will adversely affect he operation or implementation of the
local pretreatment program.
      (36)   SLUG LOAD OR DISCHARGE. Any discharge at a flow rate or
concentration which has a reasonable potential to cause Interference or Pass-
Through, or in any other way violates the POTW’s regulations, local limits, or
Industrial User Permit conditions. This can include but is not limited to
spills and other accidental discharges; discharges of a non-routine, episodic
nature; a non-customary batch discharge; or any other discharges that can cause
a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §
51.010.
      (37)   STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987.
      (38)   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
      (39)   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the
surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which
is removable by laboratory filtering.
      (40)   UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
      (41)   WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile
sources, treatment facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater,
surface water, and storm water that may be present, whether treated or
untreated, which are contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
      (42)   WASTEWATER PERMIT. As set forth in §
51.041.
      (43)   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, rivers, brooks, swamps, sounds,
tidal estuaries, bays, creeks, lakes, waterways, reservoirs and all other
bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or
artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or
border upon the State or any portion thereof.
   (B)   This chapter is gender neutral and the masculine gender shall include
the feminine and vice-versa.
   (C)   Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary.
   (D)   The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and
the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use.
   (E)   The following abbreviations when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
      (1)   BOD Biochemical Oxygen Demand
      (2)   CFR Code of Federal Regulations
      (3)   COD Chemical Oxygen Demand
      (4)   EPA Environmental Protection Agency
      (5)   gpd Gallons per day
      (6)   1 Liter
      (7)   mg Milligrams
      (8)   mg/1 Milligrams per liter
      (9)   N.C.G.S. North Carolina General Statutes
      (10)   NPDES National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
      (11)   O & M Operation and Maintenance
      (12)   POTW Publicly-Owned Treatment Works
      (13)   RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
      (14)   SIC Standard Industrial Classification
      (15)   SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act
      (16)   TSS Total Suspended Solids
      (17)   TKN Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen
      (18)   U.S.C. United States Code.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
§ 51.010 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   (A)   General prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater
which causes interference or pass through. These general prohibitions apply to
all users of a POTW whether or not the user is a significant industrial user or
subject to any national, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.
   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of
less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
      (2)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater
than one-half inch (½") in any dimension.
      (3)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
      (4)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.5 or more than 9.5 or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage to the
POTW or equipment.
      (5)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding
pollutants, (BOD, etc) in sufficient quantity, (flow or concentration) either
singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to cause interference with the
POTW.
      (6)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150° F (66° C), or
which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104° F (40° C).
      (7)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems.
      (8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW Director in accordance with §
51.018 of this chapter.
      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
      (10)   Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case,
shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance
with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits issued under section 405 of
the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act, or State criteria applicable to the sludge management method being
used.
      (11)   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts sufficient color to the treatment
plant’s effluent to render the waters injurious to public health or secondary
recreation or to aquatic life and wildlife or to adversely affect the
palatibility of fish or aesthetic quality or impair the receiving waters for
any designated uses.
      (12)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
except as specifically approved by the POTW Director in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
      (13)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, arterisan well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the POTW Director.
      (14)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than one hundred (100) mg/1 unless authorized by the
POTW Director.
      (15)   Any sludges, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes.
      (16)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the POTW
Director in a wastewater discharge permit.
      (17)   Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or other chelating
agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere with the mucicipal
wastewater system.
      (18)   Any material that would be identified as hazardous waste according
to 40 CFR Part 261 if not disposed of in a sewer except as may be specifically
authorized by the POTW Director.
      (19)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to violate
State Water Quality Standards for toxic substances as described in 15A NCAC 2B
.0200.
      (20)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant’s effluent to fail a toxicity test.
      (21)   Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy.
      (22)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming in the municipal wastewater
system.
      (23)   At no time, shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard
meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the
system) be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive
limit (LEL) of the meter.
   (C)   Pollutants, substances, wastewater, or other wastes prohibited by this
section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the municipal wastewater system. All floor drains located in
process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user’s
pretreatment facility before connecting with the system.
   (D)   When the POTW Director determines that a user(s) is contributing to
the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts which may
cause or contribute to interference of POTW operation or pass through, the POTW
Director shall:
      (1)   Advise the user(s) of the potential impact of the contribution on
the POTW in accordance with §
51.090; and
      (2)   Take appropriate actions in accordance with §§
51.040 and
51.041 for such user to protect the POTW from interference or pass through.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.011 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply
with applicable standards as set out in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts
405-471 and incorporated herein.
   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the POTW
Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with
40 CFR 403.6(c).
   (B)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the POTW Director
shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40
CFR 403.6(e).
   (C)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard
if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in
40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally
different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical
pretreatment standard.
   (D)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
   (E)   A user may request a removal credit adjustment to a categorical
standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.7.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.012 LOCAL LIMITS.
   (A)   An industrial waste survey is required prior to a User discharging
wastewater containing in excess of the following average discharge limits.
      BOD      250      mg/l
      TSS      250      mg/1
      TKN      40      mg/1
      NH3      25      mg/l
      Arsenic   0.003      mg/1
      Cadmium   0.003      mg/1
      Copper      0.061      mg/1
      Cyanide   0.015      mg/1
      Lead      0.049      mg/1
      Mercury   0.0003      mg/1
      Nickel      0.021      mg/1
      Silver      0.005      mg/1
      Chromium   0.05      mg/1 (total chromium)
      Zinc      0.175      mg/1
   (B)   Industrial waste survey information will be used to develop user-
specific local limits when necessary to ensure that the POTW’s maximum
allowable headworks loading is not exceeded for particular pollutants of
concern. User-specific local limits for appropriate pollutants of concern shall
be included in wastewater permits. The POTW Director may impose mass based
limits in addition to, or in place of concentration based limits.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.013 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.014 RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The town reserves the right to establish limitations and requirements which
are more stringent than those required by either state or federal regulation if
deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in §
51.001 of this chapter or the general and specific prohibitions in §
51.010 of this chapter, as is allowed by 40 CFR 403.4.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.015 DILUTION.
   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, unless expressly authorized by an
applicable pretreatment standard, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation
developed by the town or state.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.016 PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as
necessary to comply with this chapter and wastewater permits issued under §
51.041 of this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all National
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out
in §
51.010 of this chapter within the time limitations as specified by EPA, the
state, or the POTW Director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities
necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the
user’s expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and
operating procedures shall be submitted to the town for review, and shall be
approved by the POTW Director before construction of the facility. The review
of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from
the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
effluent acceptable to the town under the provisions of this chapter. Any
subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall
be reported to and be approved by the POTW Director prior to the user’s
initiation of the changes.
   (B)   Additional pretreatment measures.
      (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW Director may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams,
and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine
the user’s compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   The POTW Director may require any person discharging into the POTW
to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
      (3)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the POTW Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of type and capacity approved by the POTW Director and shall be
so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by
the user at their expense.
      (4)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.017 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   The POTW Director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial
user needs a plan or other action to control and prevent slug discharges and
accidental discharges as defined in §
51.002(A)(36). All SIUs must be evaluated within one year of being designated
an SIU. The POTW Director may require any user to develop, submit for approval,
and implement such a plan or other specific action. Alternatively, the POTW
Director may develop such a plan for any user.
   (B)   All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at
its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharge,
discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge,
or a slug load. Also see §§
51.054 and
51.055.
   (C)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum,
the following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW Director of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by §
51.055 of this chapter; and
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.018 HAULED WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the POTW Director, and at such times as are established by the
POTW Director. Such waste shall not violate §§
51.010 through
51.018 of this chapter or any other requirements established by the town. The
POTW Director may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater
discharge permits.
   (B)   The POTW Director shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain
wastewater discharge permits. The POTW Director may require generators of
hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW
Director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The
discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of
this chapter.
   (C)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the POTW Director. No load may be discharged without prior
consent of the POTW Director. The POTW Director may collect samples of each
hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW Director
may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load
prior to discharge.
   (D)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the
industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and
addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The
form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
FEES
§ 51.030 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide for the recovery of costs
from users of the wastewater disposal system of the town for the implementation
of the program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set
forth in a schedule of sewer use charges and fees by the POTW Director and
approved by the Town Board. A copy of these charges and fees will be made
available from the POTW Director.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.031 USER CHARGES.
   A user charge shall be levied on all users including, but not limited to,
persons, firms, corporations or governmental entities that discharge, cause or
permit the discharge of sewage into the POTW.
   (A)   The user charge shall reflect, at least, the cost of debt service,
operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the POTW.
   (B)   Each user shall pay its proportionate cost based on volume of flow.
   (C)   The Manager of the town shall review annually the sewage contributions
of users, the total costs of debt service, operation and maintenance of the
POTW and will make recommendations to the Council or Board serving the town for
adjustments in the schedule of charges and fees as necessary.
   (D)   Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable to the users
shall be distributed among all users of the POTW based upon the volume of flow
of the users.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
2015 S-11
§ 51.032 SURCHARGES.
   The amount of the surcharges will be based upon:
   (A)   The volume of flow used in determining the total discharge of
wastewater for payment of user charges and surcharges shall be based on the
following:
      (1)   Metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter readings
maintained by the town; or
      (2)   If required by the town or at the individual dischargers option,
other flow monitoring devices which measure the actual volume of wastewater
discharged to the sewer. Such devices shall be accessible and safely located,
and the measuring system shall be installed in accordance with plans approved
by the town. The metering system shall be installed and maintained at the users
expense according to arrangements that may be made with the town.
      (3)   Where any user procures all or part of his water supply from
sources other than the town, the user shall install and maintain at his own
expense a flow measuring device of a type approved by the town.
   (B)   The character and concentration of the constituents of the wastewater
used in determining surcharges shall be determined by samples collected and
analyzed by the town. Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be
representative of the actual discharge and shall be analyzed using procedures
set forth in 40 CFR Part 136.
   (C)   The determination of the character and concentration of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge by the POTW Director or his or her
duly appointed representatives shall be binding as a basis for charges.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.033 PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION CHARGES.
   The schedule of charges and fees adopted by the town may include charges and
fees for:
   (A)   Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the Pretreatment
Program;
   (B)   Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
   (C)   Reviewing slug control plans, including accidental and/or slug load
discharge procedures and construction plans and specifications;
   (D)   Permitting;
   (E)   Other fees as the town may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements of the Pretreatment Program.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE
§ 51.040 WASTEWATER DISCHARGERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or discharge to the POTW
without first obtaining the permission of the town. When requested by the POTW
Director, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of
its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The POTW Director is authorized
to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update
this information.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.041 WASTEWATER PERMITS.
   All significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user
permit prior to the commencement of discharge to the POTW. Existing industrial
users who are determined by the POTW Director to be significant industrial
users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit within 180 days of
receiving notification of the POTW Director’s determination. Industrial users
who do not fit the significant industrial user criteria may at the discretion
of the POTW Director be required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit for
non-significant industrial users.
   (A)   Significant industrial user determination. All persons proposing to
discharge non-domestic wastewater, or proposing to change the volume or
characteristics of an existing discharge of non-domestic wastewater shall
request from the POTW Director a significant industrial user determination. If
the POTW Director determines or suspects that the proposed discharge fits the
significant industrial user criteria he or she will require that a significant
industrial user permit application be filed.
   (B)   Significant industrial user permit application. Users required to
obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and file with the
town, an application in the form prescribed by the POTW Director, and
accompanied by an application fee in the amount prescribed in the schedule of
charges and fees. Significant industrial users shall apply for a significant
industrial user permit within 90 days after notification of the POTW Director’s
determination in §
51.041(A) above. The application shall include at a minimum:
      (1)   Name of industrial user;
      (2)   Address of industrial user;
      (3)   Standard industrial classification (SIC) code(s) or expected
classification and industrial user category;
      (4)   Wastewater flow;
      (5)   Types and concentrations (or mass) of pollutants contained in the
discharge;
      (6)   Major products manufactured or service supplied;
      (7)   Description of existing on-site pretreatment facilities and
practices;
      (8)   Locations of discharge permits;
      (9)   Raw materials used or stored at the site;
      (10)   Flow diagram or sewer map for the industrial user;
      (11)   Number of employees;
      (12)   Operation and production schedule;
      (13)   Description of current and projected waste reduction activities in
accordance with G.S. 143-215.1(g); and
      (14)   Any other information as may be deemed by the POTW Director to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
   (C)   Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge
permit applications and user reports must be signed by the current authorized
representative of the user on file with the control authority and/or
municipality as defined in §
51.002(A)(3) and contain the following certification statement:
“I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.”
   (D)   Application review and evaluation. The POTW Director will evaluate the
data furnished by the user and may require additional information.
      (1)   The POTW Director is authorized to accept applications for the town
and shall refer all applications to the POTW staff for review and evaluation.
      (2)   Within 30 days of receipt the POTW Director shall acknowledge and
accept the complete application; or if not complete, shall return the
application to the applicant with a statement of what additional information is
required.
   (E)   Tentative determination and draft permit.
      (1)   The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the application and an on-
site inspection of the significant industrial user, including any pretreatment
facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation and tentative determination
to issue or deny the significant industrial user permit.
      (2)   If the staff’s tentative determination in division (E)(1) above is
to issue the permit, the following additional determinations shall be made in
writing:
         (a)   Proposed discharge limitations for those pollutants proposed to
be limited;
         (b)   A proposed schedule of compliance, including interim dates and
requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and
         (c)   A brief description of any other proposed special conditions
which will have significant impact upon the discharge described in the
application.
      (3)   The staff shall organize the determinations made pursuant to
divisions (E) (1) and (E)(2) above; and the general permit conditions of the
town into a significant industrial user permit.
   (F)   Permit supporting documentation. The control authority staff shall
prepare the following documents for all significant industrial user permits.
      (1)   An allocation table (AT) listing permit information for all
significant industrial users, including but not limited to permit limits,
permit effective and expiration dates, and a comparison of total permitted
flows and loads with Division approved maximum allowable loadings of the POTW,
including flow, on forms or in a format approved by the Division. The AT shall
be updated as permits are issued or received, and as permits are modified where
the permitted limits or other AT information is revised.
      (2)   The basis, or rationale, for the pretreatment limitations,
including the following:
         (a)   Documentation of categorical determination, including
documentation of any calculations used in applying categorical pretreatment
standards; and
         (b)   Documentation of the rationale of any parameters for which
monitoring has been waived under 40 CFR Part 403.12(e)(2).
   (G)   Final action on significant industrial user permit applications.
      (1)   The POTW Director shall take final action on all applications not
later than 90 days following receipt of a complete application.
      (2)   The POTW Director is authorized to:
         (a)   Issue a significant industrial user permit containing such
conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter and G.S.
§ 143-215.1;
         (b)   Issue a significant industrial user permit containing time
schedules for achieving compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements;
         (c)   Modify any permit upon not less than 60 days notice and pursuant
to division (H) of this section;
         (d)   Revoke any permit pursuant to §
51.090 of this chapter;
         (e)   Suspend a permit pursuant to §
51.090 of this chapter;
         (f)   Deny a permit application when in the opinion of the POTW
Director such discharge may cause or contribute to pass-through or interference
of the wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to effectuate the purposes
of G.S. § 143-215.1.
   (H)   Permit modification.
      (1)   Modifications of permits shall be subject to the same procedural
requirements as the issuance of permits except as follows:
         (a)   Changes in the ownership of the discharge when no other change
in the permit is indicated;
         (b)   A single modification of any compliance schedule not in excess
of four months;
         (c)   Modification of compliance schedules (construction schedules) in
permits for new sources where the new source will not begin to discharge until
control facilities are operational. Any changes or new conditions in the permit
shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance.
      (2)   Within nine months of the promulgation of a National Categorical
Pretreatment Standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such
standards shall be revised to require compliance with such standard within the
time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a National
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application
for a wastewater discharge permit as required by division (B), the user shall
apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the promulgation
of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
      (3)   A request for a modification by the permittee shall constitute a
waiver of the 60 day notice required by G.S. § 143-215.1(b) for modifications.
   (I)   Permit conditions.
      (1)   The POTW Director shall have the authority to grant a permit with
such conditions attached as he believes necessary to achieve the purpose of
this chapter and G.S. § 143-215.1. Wastewater permits shall contain, but are
not limited to, the following:
         (a)   A statement of duration (in no case more than five years);
         (b)   A statement of non-transferability;
         (c)   Applicable effluent limits based on categorical standards or
local limits or both;
         (d)   Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification
of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and
sample type based on federal, state and local law;
         (e)   Requirements for notifying the POTW in the event of an
accidental discharge or slug load as defined in §
51.002(A)(36);
         (f)   Requirements to implement a plan or other controls for
prevention of accidental discharges and/or slug loads as defined in §
51.002(A)(36), if determined by the POTW Director to be necessary for the user;
         (g)   Requirements for immediately notifying the POTW of any changes
at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental
discharges, or slug load as defined in §
51.002(A)(36). Also see §§
51.054 and
51.055; and
         (h)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable
compliance schedule.
      (2)   In addition, permits may contain, but are not limited to, the
following:
         (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, and/or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
         (b)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or
maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater
pollutants or properties.
         (c)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or
construction of appropriate containment devices, etc., designed to reduce,
eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works.
         (d)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the municipal wastewater system.
         (e)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the system.
         (f)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment.
         (g)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for
tests, and reporting schedules.
         (h)   Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of
noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within 30 days where
self-monitoring indicates a violation(s).
         (i)   Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and
requirements.
         (j)   Requirements for submission of periodic self-monitoring or
special notification reports.
         (k)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plans and records
relating to wastewater discharges as specified in §
51.062 and affording the POTW Director, or his representatives, access thereto.
         (l)   Requirements for prior notification and approval by the POTW
Director of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of any significant
change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to introduction in
the system.
         (m)   Requirements for the prior notification and approval by the POTW
Director of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by
the permittee.
         (n)   A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the
permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and
state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the
terms of the permit.
         (o)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW Director to
ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
   (J)   Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year
or may be stated to expire on a specific date.
   (K)   Permit transfer. Wastewater permits are issued to a specific user for
a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or
transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or
changed operation.
   (L)   Permit reissuance. A significant industrial user shall apply for
permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in accordance
with this section a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the existing
permit.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 51.050 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.
   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the information
listed in division (B), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their
discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to
the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the
POTW Director a report which contains the information listed in division (B),
below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use
to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give
estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
   (B)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth below.
      (1)   Identifying information.  The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
      (2)   Environmental permits.  A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
      (3)   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes.
      (4)   Flow measurement.  Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.
         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process.
         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the POTW
Director/Superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be
representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with
procedures set out in §
51.059 of this chapter.
         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in §
51.060 of this chapter and 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (g), including 40 CFR 403.12(g)
(4).
      (6)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the current user’s
authorized representative as defined in §
51.002(A)(3) and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements.
      (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for
the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this
section must meet the requirements set out in §
51.051 of this chapter.
      (8)   Signature and certification.  All baseline monitoring reports must
be signed and certified in accordance with §
51.041(C) of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.051 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.
   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
§
51.050(B)(7) of this chapter:
   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW Director no later
than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress
reports to the POTW Director.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.052 REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD,
DEADLINE.
   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the POTW
Director a report containing the information described in §
51.050(B)(4) - (B)(6) of this chapter. For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-
term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
51.041(C) of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.053 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
   Municipalities may sample and analyze user discharges in lieu of requiring
the users to conduct sampling and analysis.
   (A)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by
the POTW Director but in no case less than once every six months, submit a
report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by pretreatment standards and the applicable flows for the
reporting period. Sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in §§
51.059 and
51.060 of this chapter. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with §
51.041(C) of this chapter.
   (B)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW Director,
using the procedures prescribed in §§
51.059 and
51.060 of this chapter, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the
report.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.054 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   Each user must notify the POTW Director of any planned significant changes
to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or
volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change. The permittee
shall not begin the changes until receiving written approval from the control
authority and/or municipality, See §
51.055(D) for other reporting requirements.
   (A)   The POTW Director may require the user to submit such information as
may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under §
51.041 of this chapter.
   (B)   The POTW Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under §
51.041 of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under
§
51.041 of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed
conditions.
   (C)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are
not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants, increases or decreases to production;
increases in discharge of previously reported pollutants, discharge of
pollutants not previously reported to the control authority and/or
municipality; new or changed product lines; new or changed manufacturing
processes and/or chemicals; new or changed customers.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.055 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, as defined in §
51.002(A)(36), that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall
immediately telephone and notify the POTW Director/ Superintendent of the
incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type
of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by
the user.
   (B)   Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the POTW Director, submit a detailed written report describing the
cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any
expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of
damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or
property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties,
or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
discharge described in division (A), above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the
emergency notification procedure.
   (D)   All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at
its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharge,
discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge,
or a slug load as defined in §
51.002(A)(36).
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.056 REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.
   (A)   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director as the POTW Director may
require.
   (B)   All users classified as non-significant categorical industrial users
under §
51.002(34)(f) shall provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director as the
POTW Director may require. At a minimum, this shall include the annual
certification of continuing to meet the non-significant categorical industrial
user criteria as required under 40 CFR 403.12(g).
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.057 NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.
   (A)   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must
notify the POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of
the repeat analysis to the POTW Director within 30 days after becoming aware of
the violation. If allowed by the POTW Director the user is not required to
resample:
      (1)   If the POTW Director monitors at the user’s facility at least once
a month; or
      (2)   If the POTW Director samples between the user’s initial sampling
and when the user receives the results of this sampling.
   (B)   If the POTW Director has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu
of the industrial user and the POTW sampling of the user indicates a violation,
the POTW Director shall repeat the sampling and obtain the results of the
repeat analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the violations, unless
one of the following occurs:
      (1)   The POTW Director monitors at the user’s facility at least once a
month; or
      (2)   The POTW Director samples the user between their initial sampling
and when the POTW receives the results of this initial sampling; or
      (3)   The POTW Director requires the user to perform sampling and submit
the results to the POTW Director within the 30-day deadline of the POTW
becoming aware of the violation.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.058 NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   The town prohibits the discharge of any hazardous wastes without
notification and approval of the POTW Director.
   (A)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as
set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of
discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100
kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also
shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known
and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharge during the
calendar month, and an estimation of the mass and concentration of such
constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following
12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the
discharge commences. The user shall not begin the discharge until receiving
written approval from the town. Any notification under this division need be
submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharge. However, notifications
of changed conditions must be submitted under §
51.054 of this chapter. The notification requirement in this section does not
apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical
pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of §§
51.050,
51.052 and 51.052 of this chapter.
   (B)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (A), above,
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of
hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specific in
40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms
of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a
one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more
than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional
notification.
   (C)   In the case of any new regulation under section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the POTW
Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and State
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days
of the effective date of such regulations.
   (D)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
   (E)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.059 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed
by a laboratory certified by the state to perform the wastewater analysis in
accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise
specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard or unless
otherwise performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA or town. If
40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance
with procedures approved by EPA and town.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.060 GRAB AND COMPOSITE SAMPLE COLLECTION.
   (A)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   (B)   Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and
grease, sulfide, volatile organic compounds, and any other pollutants as
required by 40 CFR 136. The POTW shall determine the number of grabs necessary
to be representative of the user’s discharge. See 40 CFR 403.12(g)(5) for
additional grab sample number requirements for BMR and 90-day compliance
reports. Additionally, the POTW Director may allow collection of multiple grabs
during a 24-hour period which are composited prior to analysis as allowed under
40 CFR 136.
   (C)   Composite samples: All wastewater composite samples shall be collected
with a minimum of hourly aliquots or grabs for each hour that there is a
discharge. All wastewater composite samples shall be collected using flow
proportional composite collection techniques, unless time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the POTW Director. When
authorizing time-proportional composites or grabs, the samples must be
representative and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be
documented.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.061 TIMING.
   Written reports will be, deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.062 RECORD KEEPING.
   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include
the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person
(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the
analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such
analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three
years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any
litigation concerning the user or the town, or where the user has been
specifically notified of a longer retention period by the POTW Director.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.063 ELECTRONIC REPORTING.
   The POTW Director may develop procedures for receipt of electronic reports
for any reporting requirements of this chapter. Such procedures shall comply
with 40 CFR Part 3. These procedures shall be enforceable under §§
51.090 through
51.093 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 2-4-13)
COMPLIANCE MONITORING
§ 51.070 MONITORING FACILITIES.
   (A)   The town requires the user to provide and operate at the user’s own
expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s premises, but the
town may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on
the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk
area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked
vehicles.
   (B)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in
a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
   (C)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
the town and all applicable local construction standards and specifications.
Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written notification
by the town.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.071 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   The town will inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the
purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are being complied
with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or
discharged shall allow the town, approval authority and EPA or their
representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying or in the performance of any of their duties. The town, approval
authority and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user’s property such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring
and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which
would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards
so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the town,
approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the
purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. Denial of the town’s,
approval authority’s, or EPA’s access to the user’s premises shall be a
violation of this chapter. Unreasonable delays may constitute denial of access.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.072 SEARCH WARRANTS.
   If the town, approval authority, or EPA has been refused access to a
building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program of the town designed to verify compliance with
this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall
public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the town, approval
authority, or EPA may seek issuance of a search warrant from the General Court
with jurisdiction of the town.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
§ 51.080 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information and data provided by an industrial user to the POTW
Director pursuant to this chapter identifying the nature and frequency of a
discharge, shall be available to the public without restriction. All other
information which may be so submitted by an industrial user to the POTW
Director in connection with any required reports shall also be available to the
public unless the industrial user or other interested person specifically
identifies the information as confidential upon submission and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW Director that the disclosure of
such information or a particular part thereof to the general public would
divulge methods or processes entitled to protection as trade secrets.
   (B)   Information provided by an industrial user to the POTW Director that
is determined to be entitled to confidential treatment shall be made available
upon written request to the Division of Water Quality to any state agency for
uses related to the Pretreatment Program, the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, collection system permit, stormwater permit,
and/or non-discharge permit, and for uses related to judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
   (C)   Information and data received by the Division or other state agency
under division (B) above shall be subject to the processes set forth in G.S. §
143.215.3C.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 51.090 ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES.
   (A)   Notification of violation. Whenever the POTW Director finds that any
industrial user has violated or is violating this chapter, wastewater permit,
or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained therein or any other
pretreatment requirement the POTW Director may serve upon such a person a
written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days from the
date of this notice, an explanation for the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the town by the user.
Submission of this plan does not relieve the discharger of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
   (B)   Consent orders.  The POTW Director is hereby empowered to enter into
consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance.
Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the discharger to
correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order.
Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as an administrative order
issued pursuant to division (D), below.
   (C)   Show cause hearing.  
      (1)   The POTW Director may order any industrial user who causes or is
responsible for an unauthorized discharge, has violated this chapter or is in
noncompliance with a wastewater discharge permit to show cause why a proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. In the event the POTW Director
determines that a show cause order should be issued, a notice shall be served
on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user
show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice
of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be
made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
      (2)   The POTW Director shall review the evidence presented at the
hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement action is appropriate.
      (3)   A show cause hearing under this section is not a prerequisite to
the assessment of a civil penalty under §
51.091 nor is any action or inaction taken by the POTW Director/ Superintendent
under this section subject to an administrative appeal under §
51.105.
   (D)   Administrative orders. When the POTW Director finds that an industrial
user has violated or continues to violate this chapter, permits or orders
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW Director may
issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons
in noncompliance to do any of the following:
      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements;
      (2)   Comply in accordance with a compliance time schedule set forth in
the order;
      (3)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a
continuing or threatened violation;
      (4)   Disconnect unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other
related appurtenances are installed and properly operated within a specified
time period.
   (E)   Emergency suspensions.  
      (1)   The POTW Director may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/
or wastewater permit when such suspension is necessary in order to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the
environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the POTW to violate any
condition of its NPDES or non-discharge permit.
      (2)   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. A hearing will be held within 15 days of the notice of suspension
to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or the user’s waste discharge
permit terminated. In the event of a failure to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the POTW Director shall take such steps as deemed necessary
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The POTW Director
shall reinstate the wastewater permit and the wastewater treatment service upon
proof of the elimination of the noncompliant discharge. The industrial user
shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the
POTW Director prior to the date of the above-described hearing.
   (F)   Termination of permit or permission to discharge.
      (1)   The POTW Director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit or
permission to discharge for good cause, including, but not limited to, the
following reasons:
         (a)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his discharge;
         (b)   Failure to report significant changes in operations, or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;
         (c)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
         (d)   Violation of conditions of the permit or permission to
discharge, conditions of this chapter, or any applicable state and federal
regulations.
      (2)   Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed
termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an opportunity to
show cause under §
51.090 of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.091 CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (A)   Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of
this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder,
may be accessed a civil fine up to $25,000 per day per violation. Penalties
between $10,000 and $25,000 per day per violation may be assessed against a
violator only if:
      (1)   For any class of violation, only if a civil penalty has been
imposed against the violator within the five years preceding the violation; or
      (2)   In the case of failure to file, submit, or make available, as the
case may be, any documents, data, or reports required by this chapter, or the
orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, only if the POTW
Director determines that the violation was intentional and a civil penalty has
been imposed against the violator with the five years preceding the violation.
   (B)   In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW Director
shall consider the following:
      (1)   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural resources, to the
public health, or to public or private property resulting from the violation;
      (2)   The duration and gravity of the violation;
      (3)   The effect on ground or surface water quantity or quality or on air
quality;
      (4)   The cost of rectifying the damage;
      (5)   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;
      (6)   Whether the violation was committed willfully or intentionally;
      (7)   The prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply
with the pretreatment program;
      (8)   The costs of enforcement to the town.
   (C)   Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this section
shall be as provided in §
51.105.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.092 OTHER AVAILABLE REMEDIES.
   Remedies, in addition to those previously mentioned in this chapter, are
available to the POTW Director who may use any single one or combination
against a noncompliant user. Additional available remedies include, but are not
limited to:
   (A)   Criminal violations. The District Attorney for Judicial District 30
may, at the request of the town, prosecute noncompliant users who violate the
provisions of G.S. § 143-215.6B.
Note: Under North Carolina law, it is a crime to negligently violate any term,
condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit, or negligently fail to
apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S. § 143-215.6B
(f)), to knowingly and willfully violate any term, condition, or requirement of
a pretreatment permit, or knowingly and willfully fail to apply for a
pretreatment permit, issued by local governments (G.S. § 143-215.6B(g)), to
knowingly violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit
issued by local governments, or knowingly fail to apply for a pretreatment
permit, knowing at the time that a person is placed in imminent danger of death
or serious bodily injury, (G.S. § 143-215.6B(h)), and to falsify information
required under G.S. § 143-215.6B(i).
   (B)   Injunctive relief. Whenever a user is in violation of the provisions
of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, the POTW Director,
through the City Attorney, may petition the Superior Court of Justice for the
issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary and permanent injunction which
restrains or compels the activities in question.
   (C)   Water supply severance. Whenever an industrial user is in violation of
the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, water
service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only recommence,
at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated ability to
comply .
   (D)   Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent
limitations of this chapter or of a permit or order issued hereunder, is hereby
declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the
POTW Director. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the
provisions of the appropriate ordinances of the town governing such nuisances,
including reimbursing the POTW for any costs incurred in removing, abating or
remedying said nuisance.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.093 REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The POTW
Director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in
accordance with enforcement response plan of the town. However, the POTW
Director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant.
Further, the POTW Director is empowered to take more than one enforcement
action against any noncompliant user.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
NONCOMPLIANCE
§ 51.100 ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE.
   At least annually, the POTW Director shall publish in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction(s)
served by the POTW, a list of those industrial users which were found to be in
significant noncompliance, also referred to as reportable noncompliance, in 15A
NCAC 2H .0903(b)(10), with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements,
during the previous 12 months.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
ADJUDICATORY HEARINGS
§ 51.105 HEARINGS.
   The local government may conduct hearings in accordance with its regular
hearing procedure.
   (A)   Adjudicatory hearing.
      (1)   An applicant whose permit is denied, or is granted subject to
condition he or she deems unacceptable, a permittee/user assessed a civil
penalty under §
51.091, or one issued an administrative order under §
51.090 shall have the right to an adjudicatory hearing before the POTW Director
or other hearing officer appointed by the POTW Director upon making written
demand, identifying the specific issues to be contested, to the POTW Director
within 30 days following receipt of the significant industrial user permit,
civil penalty assessment, or administrative order. Unless such written demand
is made within the time specified herein, the action shall be final and binding
and further appeal is barred. For modified permits, only those parts of the
permit being modified may be adjudicated.
      (2)   The hearing officer shall make a final decision on contested
penalties within 90 or less days of the receipt of the written demand for a
hearing. The hearing officer shall make a final decision on contested permits
or orders within 90 days of the receipt of the written demand for a hearing.
      (3)   The POTW Director shall transmit a copy of the hearing officer’s
decision by registered or certified mail as described in division (B) below.
The decision is a final decision for the purposes of seeking judicial review.
The terms and conditions of a permit under appeal shall be as follows:
         (a)   New permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the
General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a newly issued permit,
the terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed and the permit is not
in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties
reach a mutual resolution.
         (b)   Renewed permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the
General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a renewed permit, the
terms and conditions of the existing permit remain in effect until either the
conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution.
         (c)   Terminated permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in
the General Courts of Justice, of a terminated permit, no permit is in effect
until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a
mutual resolution.
   (B)   Official record. When a final decision is issued under division (A)
above, the Hearing Officer shall prepare an official record of the case that
includes:
      (1)   All notices, motions, and other like pleadings.
      (2)   A copy of all documentary evidence introduced.
      (3)   A certified transcript of all testimony taken, if testimony is
transcribed. If testimony is taken and not transcribed, then a narrative
summary of any testimony taken.
      (4)   A copy of the final decision of the Hearing Officer.
   (C)   Judicial review. Any person against whom a final order or decision of
the Hearing Officer is entered, pursuant to the hearing conducted under
division (A) above, may seek judicial review of the order or decision by filing
a written request for review by the Superior Court of Macon County within 30
days after receipt of notice by registered or certified mail of the order or
decision, but not thereafter, along with a copy to the town. Within 30 days
after receipt of the copy of the written request for review by the Court, the
Hearing Officer shall transmit to the reviewing court the original or a
certified copy of the official record.
(Ord. passed 2-4-13)
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
§ 51.110 UPSET.
   (A)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of division (B), below, are met.
   (B)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the POTW
Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is
provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days):
         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   (C)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (D)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   (E)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.111 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS DEFENSE.
   (A)   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action
brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in §
51.010(A) of this chapter or the specific prohibitions in §
51.010(B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(5) - (B)(7), and (B)(9) - (B)(23) of this chapter if
it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge,
alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass
through or interference and that either:
      (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was
in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through
or interference; or
      (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when
the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
   (B)   Pursuant to 40 CFR Section 403.5(a)(2), the affirmative defense
outlined in this section cannot apply to the specific prohibitions in §
51.010(B)(1) and (B)(4), and (B)(8).
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
§ 51.112 BYPASS.
   (A)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provisions of divisions (B) and (C) of this section.
   (B)   (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the POTW Director/Superintendent, at least ten days
before the date of the bypass, if possible.
      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW Director/
Superintendent of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment
standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A
written submission shall also be provided within five days of this time the
user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including
exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW Director
may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has
been received within 24 hours.
   (C)   (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW Director/Superintendent may
take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under division (B) of
this section.
      (2)   The POTW Director may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the POTW Director determines that it will
meet the three conditions listed in division (C)(1) of this section.
   Note: The affirmative defense for bypass from the federal regulations has
not been incorporated into state pretreatment regulations either verbatim or by
reference. It will be incorporated when the state pretreatment regulations are
modified in 1993 to incorporate changes to the federal regulations that have
occurred since 1987 when the state regulations were last modified. The state
regulations governing NPDES permits do, however, incorporate the bypass
provision. DWQ is of the opinion that local governments may incorporate the
bypass provision into their ordinances since such authority is provided by the
federal regulations and since state regulations do not specifically prohibit
the bypass provision, even though state pretreatment regulations do not as yet
specify the bypass provision. Incorporation of this provision within the
ordinance prior to change in the state pretreatment regulations will prevent
the necessity of changing the ordinance at a later date when the state
pretreatment regulations are modified.
(Ord. passed 12-4-06; Am. Ord. passed 5-4-09; Am. Ord. passed 2-4-13)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
   
52.01   Classification of service
   
52.02   Rate schedule and tap-on fees
   
52.03   Application for services
   
52.04   Deposit
   
52.05   Initial or minimum charge
   
52.06   Corporation’s responsibility and liability
   
52.07   Consumer’s responsibilities
   
52.08   Extensions to mains and service; pipe specifications
   
52.09   Access to premises
   
52.10   Change of occupancy
   
52.11   Meter reading, billing and collection
   
52.12   Suspension of service
   
52.13   Complaints; adjustments
   
52.14   Abridgement or modification of rules
   
52.15   Locating and re-location of existing water lines
   
52.16   Fire sprinkler systems
   
52.17   Orderly allocation of facilities
§ 52.01 CLASSIFICATION OF SERVICE.
   All services are classified under two categories to include residential,
schools, churches and commercial users.
(Ord. passed 2-2-81)
§ 52.02 RATE SCHEDULE AND TAP-ON FEES.
   The schedule of rates, charges, fees to be assessed for water service shall
be set by the Town Council in its yearly budget ordinance, and may be amended
by ordinance from time to time thereafter.
(Ord. passed 3-7-16)
§ 52.03 APPLICATION FOR SERVICES.
   (A)   Service will be supplied to applicants in areas that can be served by
existing and proposed reservoirs and water mains.
   (B)   Persons will make application for service, in person, at the office of
the town and at the same time make the deposit guarantee required.
   (C)   The town may reject any application for service not available under a
standard rate or which involves excessive service cost, or which may affect the
supply of service to other customers or for other good and sufficient reasons.
   (D)   The town may reject any application for service when the applicant is
delinquent in payment of bills incurred for service previously supplied at any
location provided that when the owner of the premises has been served water and
has not paid for the same, the town shall not be required to render service to
anyone at the location where the water was used until the water bill has been
paid.
   (E)   Prior to approval of application and acceptance of payment for service
the following determination will be made by the town:
      (1)   Location of main or mains of adequate size to serve the applicant.
      (2)   Determine if the water pressure will be adequate to serve the
property without booster pumps and advise applicant if a booster is required.
      (3)   The above divisions (A), (B) and (C) will be investigated and a
determination will be made prior to the issuance of a certificate of compliance
or building permit.
   (F)   In the event a booster pump is required to serve the applicant, the
pump will be installed and maintained at users expense.
(Ord. passed 2-2-81) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.04 DEPOSIT.
   (A)   All users will make a minimum cash deposit in an amount to be set by
the Town Council in its yearly budget ordinance, which amount may be amended by
ordinance from time to time hereafter. In no case shall a deposit be required
in excess of three months estimated consumption. Deposits shall not draw
interest.
   (B)   The individual in whose name the deposit is made shall be responsible
for payment of all bills incurred in connection with the service furnished.
   (C)   A separate deposit is required for each meter installed.
   (D)   The deposit receipt is not negotiable and can be redeemed only at the
office of the town.
   (E)   Where the town finds that the request for a deposit refund is
questionable, the town may require the applicant, for refund, to produce the
deposit re ceipt properly endorsed.
(Ord. passed 2-2-81; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-16)
§ 52.05 INITIAL OR MINIMUM CHARGE.
   (A)   The initial or minimum charge, as provided in the rate schedule, shall
be made for each meter installed, regardless of location. Each meter requires a
separate meter reading sheet and each meter reading sheet shall cover a
separate and individual account.
   (B)   Where service is furnished to a consumer during certain months only,
the minimum charge per service for the period of non-use shall be the regular
minimum as set out in the published rates of the town, unless service is paused
and no charges will be incurred.
   (C)   Water furnished for a given lot shall be used on that lot only. Each
consumer’s service must be separately metered at a single delivery and metering
point. Each commercial unit and each storeroom or stall used for business
purposes shall have a separate meter, unless full approval is granted by the
Town Council. All commercial use, including storerooms and stalls for business
purposes, shall be metered separately from any residential use and vice versa,
whether now in service or to be installed in the future.
(Ord. passed 2-2-81; Am. Ord. 2025-004, passed 4-7-25)
§ 52.06 CORPORATION’S RESPONSIBILITY AND LIABILITY.
   (A)   The town shall run a service line from its distribution line to the
property line where the distri bution line runs immediately adjacent and
parallel to the property to be served and for which a tap-on fee then in effect
for each size of meter will be charged.
   (B)   The town may install its meter at the property line or, at the town’s
option on the consumer’s property or in a location mutually agreed upon.
   (C)   When two or more meters are to be installed on the same premises for
different consumers, they shall be closely grouped and each clearly designated
to which consumer it applies.
   (D)   The town does not assume the responsibility of inspecting the
consumer’s piping or apparatus and will not be responsible therefor.
   (E)   The town reserves the right to refuse service unless the consumer’s
lines or piping are installed in a manner as to prevent cross-connections or
backflow.
   (F)   The town shall not be liable for damage of any kind whatsoever
resulting from water or the use of water on the consumer’s premise, unless the
damage results directly from negligence on the part of the town. The town shall
not be responsible for any damage done by or resulting from any defect in the
piping, fixtures or appliances on the consumer’s premises. The town shall not
be responsible for negligence of third persons or forces beyond the control of
the town resulting in any interruption of service.
   (G)   Under normal conditions, the consumer will be notified of any
anticipated interruption of service.
(Ord. passed 2-2-81)
§ 52.07 CONSUMER’S RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Piping on the consumer’s premises must be so arranged that the
connections are conveniently located with respect to the town’s lines or mains.
   (B)   If the consumer’s piping on consumer’s premises is so arranged that
the town is called upon to provide additional meters, each place of metering
will be considered as a separate and individual account.
   (C)   Where meter is placed on premises of a consumer, a suitable place
shall be provided by consumer for placing the meter - unobstructed and
accessible at all times to the meter reader. Furthermore, the consumer must
keep an area around the meter, at least three feet by three feet and at least
18 inches from the ground level, clear of any planting, structure or other
potential obstruction to town employees' ability to access and service the
meter. Consumers should take notice that the town will not be responsible for
damage to plantings, structures or other objects left within the area required
to be kept clear.
   (D)   The consumer shall furnish and maintain an approved private cutoff
valve on the consumer’s side of the meter, the town to provide a valve on the
town’s side of the meter.
   (E)   The consumer’s piping and apparatus shall be installed and maintained
by the consumer at the consumer’s expense in a safe and efficient manner and in
accordance with the town’s rules and regulations and in full compliance with
the sanitary regulations of the State Board of Health.
   (F)   The consumer shall guarantee proper protection to the town’s property
placed on the consumer’s premises and shall permit access to it only by
authorized representatives of the town.
   (G)   In the event that any loss or damage to the property of the town or
any accident or injury to persons or property is caused by or results from the
negligence or wrongful act of the consumer, his agents or employees, the cost
of the necessary repairs or replacements shall be paid by the consumers to the
town; and any liability otherwise resulting shall be assumed by the consumer.
   (H)   The amount of the loss or damage or the cost of repairs shall be added
to the consumer’s bill; and if not paid, service may be discontinued by the
town.
(Ord. passed 2-2-81; Am. Ord. 2019-003, passed 1-7-19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.08 EXTENSIONS TO MAINS AND SERVICE; PIPE SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Water distribution lines to serve an undeveloped subdivision will be
handled as follows:
      (1)   The developer will submit plans for review and approval by the
town, its engineer, and the State Board of Health as required.
      (2)   The developer will install the lines in accordance with approved
plans.
      (3)   Upon completion of the new extension and after one year of trouble-
free operation, the developer has the option to deed the complete facility
(including all rights-of-way, easements, permits, franchises and
authorizations, or other instruments needed for the operation and maintenance
of the facility) to the town. The town will not reimburse the developer for the
extension.
   (B)   Other Extensions. The extension of water lines will be handled as
follows:
      (1)   The plans for the extension will be submitted for review and
approval by the town, its engineer, and the State Board of Health as required.
      (2)   The lines will be installed in accordance with the approved plans.
      (3)   Prior to or upon completion of the new extension, all rights-of-
way, easements, permits, franchises and authorizations, or other instruments
needed for the installation, operation and maintenance of the facility will be
deeded to the town. The cost involved in the new extension will be paid by the
person or persons requesting the extension.
      (4)   Any users connecting to the town water system will use the
following pipe: 200 PSI PVC, or cement-lined, ductile iron pipe. After getting
permission from the town, the pipe will be connected according to manufacturers
or Plumbing Code specifications and any additional specifications set forth by
the town.
(Ord. passed 10-27-83; Am. Ord. passed 9-5-95; Am. Ord. 2023-007, passed 10-2-
23)
      (5)   Acceptance and approval of extensions outside the town limits shall
be solely within the discretion of the Town Council.
(Ord. passed 2-2-81; Am. Ord. passed 9-5-95)
   (C)   For any user to connect into the town sewer system the following pipe
will be used by the customer. SDR 35, PVC size four inches or above, Schedule
40 PVC size four inches or above, ductile iron size four inches or above. Pipe
will be fitted together according to manufacturers or Plumbing Code
specifications. The ditch will be left open for inspection by a representative
of the town before the pipe is covered and ditch filled.
(Am. Ord. 2023-007, passed 10-2-23)
   (D)   The inspection will include a complete check for roof drains, storm
drains or any other possible source of water into the system other than
sanitary sewage.
   (E)   Any user connecting to the town water system will use the following
pipe: 200 PSI PVC, Schedule 40 type K or L, pipe. The pipe will be connected
according to manufacturers or Plumbing Code specifications. The ditch will be
left open for inspection by a representative of the town.
(Ord. passed 10-27-83; Am. Ord. 2023-007, passed 10-2-23)
§ 52.09 ACCESS TO PREMISES.
   (A)   Duly authorized agents of the town shall have access at all reasonable
hours to the premises of the consumer for the purpose of installing or removing
the town’s property, inspecting piping, reading or testing meters or for any
other purpose in connection with the town’s service and facilities.
   (B)   Each consumer shall grant or convey or shall cause to be granted or
conveyed to the town a perpetual easement and right of way across any property
owned or controlled by the consumer wherever the perpetual easement and right
of way is necessary for the town water facilities and lines so as to be able to
furnish service to the consumer.
(Ord. passed 2-2-81)
§ 52.10 CHANGE OF OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   Notice must be given in person or writing, at the town Office, to
discontinue service for a change in occupancy.
   (B)   The outgoing party shall be responsible for all water consumed up to
the time of departure or the time specified for departure, whichever period is
longest.
(Ord. passed 2-2-81; Am. Ord. 2025-004, passed 4-7-25)
§ 52.11 METER READING, BILLING AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   Meters will be read and bills rendered monthly, but the town reserves
the right to vary the dates or length of period covered, temporarily or
permanently if necessary or desirable.
   (B)   Bills for water will be figured in accordance with the town’s
published rate schedule then in effect, and will be based on the amount
consumed for the period covered by the meter readings.
   (C)   Charge for service commences when meter is installed and connection
made, whether used or not. Sixty days may be allowed for hook-up on initial
installation of the water system.
   (D)   Readings from different meters will not be combined for billing,
irrespective of the fact that the meters may be for the same or different
premises, or for the same or different consumers, or for the same or different
services.
   (E)   Bills are due when rendered and become delinquent 15 days thereafter,
whereupon a penalty of 1½% will be added; and if not paid in 21 days, service
may be discontinued by the town, subject to §
52.13(A). The penalty provided for in this division (E) shall accrue on the
unpaid balance monthly until paid, but not to exceed $150, and shall be
collected in the manner of a civil fine.
   (F)   Failure to receive bills or notices shall not prevent the bills from
becoming delinquent or relieve the consumer from payment.
(Ord. passed 2-2-81; Am. Ord. passed 9-5-95; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-16) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 52.12 SUSPENSION OF SERVICE.
   (A)   When services are discontinued and all bills paid, the deposit will be
refunded.
   (B)   Upon discontinuance of service for nonpayment of bill, the deposit
will be applied by the town toward settlement of the account. Any balance will
be refunded to the consumer; but if the deposit is not sufficient to cover the
bill, the town may proceed to collect the balance in the usual way provided by
law for the collection of debts.
   (C)   Service discontinued for nonpayment of bills will be restored only
after: bills are paid in full; redeposit is made; and a service charge is paid
for meter reconnection as follows:
                     Inside      Outside
      ¾-inch meter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . $50       $75
      1-inch, 1½-inch and 4-inch meters . . . . . 75       100
   (D)   The town reserves the right to discontinue its services without notice
for the following additional reasons:
      (1)   To prevent fraud or abuse.
      (2)   Consumers willful disregard of the town’s rules.
      (3)   Emergency repairs.
      (4)   Insufficiency of supply due to circumstances beyond the town’s
control.
      (5)   Legal processes.
      (6)   Direction of public authorities.
      (7)   Strike, riot, fire, flood, accident or any unavoidable cause.
   (E)   In addition to prosecution by law, the town may permanently refuse
service to any consumer who tampers with a meter or other measuring device.
(Ord. passed 2-2-81; Am. Ord. passed 9-5-95) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.13 COMPLAINTS; ADJUSTMENTS.
   (A)   If the consumer believes his bill to be in error, he shall present his
or her claim, in person, at the town Office before the bill becomes delinquent.
If the claim continues to be in dispute, the consumer may request a hearing
before the Town Council. The consumer may pay the bill under protest and the
payment shall not prejudice his or her claim.
   (B)   The town will make special meter readings at the request of the
consumer (for fees of $5 inside and $10 outside town limits) provided, however,
that if the special reading disclosed that the meter was overread, no charge
will be made.
(Ord. passed 2-2-81; Am. Ord. passed 9-5-95; Am. Ord. passed 11-7-16) Penalty,
see §
10.99
§ 52.14 ABRIDGEMENT OR MODIFICATION OF RULES.
   (A)   No promise, agreement or representation of any employee of the town
shall be binding upon the town except as it shall have been agreed upon in
writing, signed and accepted by the acknowledged officers of the town.
   (B)   No modification of rates or any of the rules and regulations shall be
made by any agent of the town.
(Ord. passed 2-2-81)
§ 52.15 LOCATING AND RE-LOCATION OF EXISTING WATER LINES.
   (A)   As near as possible all water lines will be laid along a public road
or an adequate right of way or easement will be obtained for proper maintenance
of the water lines.
   (B)   In the event it becomes necessary to move and re-locate water line for
the convenience and necessity of the user from where the existing water line is
installed, and the town holds a valid easement for such easement or right-of-
way, the user or owner will pay the cost of re-locating the water line provided
however that a new right of way or easement can be obtained.
(Ord. passed 2-2-81)
§ 52.16 FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Owner’s and users of sprinkler systems connected to the town’s water
system are responsible for the maintenance of the system. The maintenance shall
include but is not limited to:
      (1)   A good workable cut-off valve where the sprinkler main enters the
property of the user.
      (2)   A good workable cut-off valve on the blow-off test and drain line
of the system.
      (3)   Prompt repair of water leaks within the users system.
   (B)   The town reserves the right to perform periodic inspections of all
sprinkler systems.
   (C)   In case of leaks within the system, it is the user’s responsibility to
close down the system. If the town’s maintenance crew is required to close and
open valves for the maintenance of the system, the town will be reimbursed for
the time spent at the town’s cost to do so. The town also reserves the right to
discontinue service to a system where leaks are observed or the customers
control valves are not properly working.
   (D)   It is the owner’s responsibility for any damage caused by a
malfunction of any sprinkler system.
   (E)   Each owner of a sprinkler system is encouraged to familiarize his or
her employees with location and operation of control valves.
(Ord. passed 2-2-81)
§ 52.17 ORDERLY ALLOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   All persons, firms or corporations who shall obtain volume allocations
and/or authorizations or permits to connect to the town’s sewer and/or water
mains or lines shall commence the construction or installation of the lines to
be connected to the town’s sewer and/or water mains within 12 months from the
date of such volume allocations, authorizations or permits; and shall complete
such construction or installation and make connection with the town’s sewer
and/or water mains within 30 months from that date.
   (B)   All persons, firms or corporations that have heretofore received
volume allocations and/or authorizations or permits to connect to the town’s
sewer and/or water mains or lines shall commence the construction or
installation of the lines to be connected to the town’s sewer and/or water
mains within 12 months of the date of the enactment of this section; and shall
complete such construction or installation and make connection with the town’s
sewer and/or water mains within 30 months from this date.
   (C)   Volume allocations, authorizations and permits to connect to the
town’s sewer and/or water mains or lines shall automatically expire and be
terminated for failure to comply with divisions (A) and/or (B) above.
(Ord. passed 9-2-97)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC RULES
      
72.   USE OF BICYCLES, IN-LINE SKATES, SKATEBOARDS
      
73.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
      
74.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
75.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definitions
   
70.02   Authority of police and fire department officials
   
70.03   Obedience to police and fire department officials
   
70.04   Persons propelling push carts or riding animals to obey traffic
regulations
   
70.05   Use of coasters, roller skates and similar devices restricted
   
70.06   Public employees to obey traffic regulations
   
70.07   Duty of Police Department
   
70.08   Police Department to investigate accidents
   
70.09   Traffic accident studies
   
70.10   Emergency and experimental regulations
Traffic-Control Devices
   
70.20   Authority to install traffic-control devices
   
70.21   Specifications for traffic-control devices
   
70.22   Obedience to official traffic-control devices
   
70.23   When traffic devices required for enforcement purposes
   
70.24   Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings
   
70.25   Interference with official traffic- control devices
   
70.26   Authority to establish play streets
   
70.27   Traffic lanes
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLEY. A thoroughfare through the middle of a block.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the fire department, police
vehicles, and the ambulances and emergency vehicles of municipal departments or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the Chief of
Police.
   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is over 20 inches in diameter.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
within 600 feet along the highway there are buildings in use for business or
industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks, or office
buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on one side or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
   COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE. Any of the following motor vehicles that are
designed or used to transport passengers or property:
      (1)   A Class A motor vehicle that has a combined GVWR of at least 26,001
pounds and includes as part of the combination a towed unit that has a GVWR of
at least 10,001 pounds.
      (2)   A Class B motor vehicle.
      (3)   A Class C motor vehicle that meets either of the following
descriptions:
         (a)   Is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the
driver.
         (b)   Is transporting hazardous materials and is required to be
placarded in accordance with 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F.
      (4)   Any other motor vehicle included by federal regulation in the
definition of commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 U.S.C. Appendix. § 2716.
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street, or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have
no legal right of access to or from the same, except at points only and in the
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
the highway, street, or roadway.
   CROSSWALK. That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs from the edges of
the traversable roadway. Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or
elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markers on the surface.
   CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.
   DRIVER. The operator of a vehicle, as defined in this section. The terms
DRIVER and OPERATOR and their cognates are synonymous.
   FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers.
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curb
lines, or, if none, then the lateral edge of roadway lines of two or more
highways which join one another at any angle whether or not one such highway
crosses the other.
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event that such
intersecting highway also includes two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of two roadways of the highways shall be regarded as a separate
intersection.
   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
   MOTORCYCLE. Vehicles having a saddle for the use of the rider and designed
to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, including
motor scooters and motor-driven bicycles, but excluding tractors and utility
vehicles equipped with an additional form of device designed to transport
property, three-wheeled vehicles while being used by law-enforcement agencies
and mopeds as defined in G.S. § 105-164.3.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self- propelled and every vehicle
designed to run upon the highways which is pulled by a self-propelled vehicle.
This shall not include mopeds as defined in G.S. § 20-4.01(27)d1.
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall
mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in this
town.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings, and devices
not inconsistent with this part placed or erected by authority of a public body
or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or
guiding traffic.
   OPERATOR. A person in actual physical control of a vehicle which is in
motion or which has the engine running. The terms OPERATOR and DRIVER and their
cognates are synonymous.
   PARK. When prohibited means the standing of a vehicle whether occupied or
not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged
in loading or unloading.
   PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE. A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the
exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot.
   PERSON. Every individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental agency, or combination thereof of whatsoever form or character.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the municipal police department or any
officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for
violations of traffic regulations.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every road or driveway not open to the use of the
public as a matter of right for the purpose of vehicular traffic.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contig uous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district when the property on the highway for a distance
of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residence or residences and
buildings in use for business.
   RIGHT OF WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two or more separate roadways the term “roadway” as used herein shall
refer to any roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set aside within a highway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is so plainly marked or indicated by
proper signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety
zone.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   STOP. When required means complete cessation of movement.
   STOP, STOPPING, or STANDING. When pro hibited means any stopping or standing
of a vehicle whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic-control sign or signal.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel.
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every street or high way or portion thereof at the
entrances to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required by law to stop before
entering or crossing the same and when stop signs are erected as provided in
this part.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden animals, vehicles, and other conveyances either
singly or together while using any street for purposes of travel.
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically, or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power
or used exclusively upon fixed rails or tracks; provided, that for the purposes
of this Traffic Code bicycles shall be deemed vehicles and every rider of a
bicycle upon a highway shall be subject to the provisions of this Traffic Code
applicable to the driver of a vehicle except those which by their nature can
have no application. This term shall not include a device which is designed for
and intended to be used as a means of transportation for a person with a
mobility impairment, is suitable for use both inside and outside a building,
and whose maximum speed does not exceed 12 miles per hour when the device is
being operated by a person with a mobility impairment.
('76 Code, § 7-1001)
Statutory references:
   Authority to enact traffic regulations, see G.S. § 160A-296 et seq.
§ 70.02 AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department or the
officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police to enforce all street traffic
laws and all of the State vehicle laws applicable to street traffic.
   (B)   Officers of the Police Department or the officers as are assigned by
the Chief of Police are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand,
or signal in conformance with traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a
fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the Police Department may direct traffic as conditions may require
notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws.
   (C)   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate
vicinity.
('76 Code, § 7-1021)
§ 70.03 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALS.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of a police officer or fire department official.
('76 Code, § 7-1022) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.04 PERSONS PROPELLING PUSH CARTS OR RIDING ANIMALS TO OBEY TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS.
   Every person propelling any push cart or rid ing an animal upon a roadway,
and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the
provisions of this part applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions of this part which by their very nature can have no application.
('76 Code, § 7-1023) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.05 USE OF COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES RESTRICTED.
   No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street on a crosswalk and when so crossing the person shall be granted all of
the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street
as authorized by ordinance.
('76 Code, § 7-1024) (Am. Ord, passed 10-3-88) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.06 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this part shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned
by or used in the service of the United States Government, this State, County,
or Town, and it shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any of the
provisions of this part, except as otherwise permitted in this part or by state
statute.
('76 Code, § 7-1025) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.07 DUTY OF POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the police department to enforce the street traffic
regulations and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic, to
make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate
with the town officials in the administration of the traffic laws and in
developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those
duties specially imposed upon the department by this chapter.
('76 Code, § 7-1011)
§ 70.08 POLICE DEPARTMENT TO INVESTIGATE ACCIDENTS.
   It shall be the duty of the Police Department to investigate traffic
accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged
with violations of law causing or contributing to the accidents.
('76 Code, § 7-1012)
§ 70.09 TRAFFIC ACCIDENT STUDIES.
   Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the
Police Department shall conduct studies of the accidents and determine remedial
measures.
('76 Code, § 7-1013)
§ 70.10 EMERGENCY AND EXPERIMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   The Chief of Police is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to
make effective the provisions of the traffic ordinances and to make and enforce
temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special
conditions for periods not to exceed 30 days; provided he shall report the
results of experimental regulations to the Board of Aldermen.
('76 Code, § 7-1014)
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.20 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC- CONTROL DEVICES.
   The town shall place and maintain traffic- control signs, signals, and
devices when and as required under the traffic ordinances to make effective the
provisions of the ordinances, and may place and maintain the additional
traffic-control devices to regulate traffic under the traffic ordinances of
this town or under State law.
('76 Code, § 7-1031)
§ 70.21 SPECIFICATIONS FOR TRAFFIC- CONTROL DEVICES.
   All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to State
regulations. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular purpose
shall so far as practicable be uniform as to type and location. All traffic-
control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of State
law or this part shall be official traffic-control devices.
('76 Code, § 7-1032)
§ 70.22 OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC- CONTROL DEVICES.
   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with the traffic
ordinances, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the
exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle in this part
or by applicable State or local laws.
('76 Code, § 7-1033) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.23 WHEN TRAFFIC DEVICES REQUIRED FOR ENFORCEMENT PURPOSES.
   No provision of this part for which signs are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged violation
an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen
by an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state
that signs are required, the section shall be effective even though no signs
are erected or in place.
('76 Code, § 7-1034)
§ 70.24 DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS; SIGNALS OR MARKINGS.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be
or is in imitation of or resembles an official traffic- control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   (B)   No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority
permit upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
   (C)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information
and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (D)   Every prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to be a
public nuisance and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is
hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice.
('76 Code, § 7-1038) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.25 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in fact alter,
deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control device or
any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any other part thereof.
('76 Code, § 7-1039) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.26 AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH PLAY STREETS.
   (A)   The Board shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a
play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating
and helping to protect the same.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part
thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any street or
portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences
are within the closed area, and then any driver shall exercise the greatest
care in driving upon any street or portion thereof.
('76 Code, § 7-1040) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.27 TRAFFIC LANES.
   Where traffic lanes have been marked, it shall be unlawful for the operator
of any vehicle to fail or refuse to keep the vehicle within the boundaries of
any lane except when lawfully passing another vehicle or preparatory to making
a lawful turning movement.
('76 Code, § 7-1041) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   In addition to any other remedies cited in this Traffic Code for
the enforcement of the provisions of this Traffic Code, the regulations and
standards contained in this Traffic Code may be enforced through the issuance
of citations by the designated town official. These citations shall be in the
form of a civil penalty. The town may recover this penalty in a civil action in
the nature of a debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within 72 hours
after being cited for a violation. In addition, failure to pay the civil
penalty within 72 hours may subject the violator to criminal charges of not
more than $50 or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, as set forth in G.S. §
14-4(a). The following civil penalties are established for violations under
this section:
         (a)   Warning citation: correct violation within ten days.
         (b)   First citation, $25.
         (c)   Second citation for same offense, $100.
         (d)   Third and subsequent citation for same offense, $200.
      (2)   These civil penalties are in addition to any other penalties which
may be imposed by a court for violation of the provisions of this Traffic Code.
   (B)   In addition to the foregoing enforcement provisions, this chapter may
be enforced by any remedy provided in G.S. § 160A-175 including, but not
limited to, all appropriate equitable remedies issued from a court of complete
jurisdiction as provided in
G.S. § 160A-175(e). This section specifically provides that each day's
continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct offense.
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC RULES
Section
General Provisions
   
71.01   Driving through funeral or other procession
   
71.02   Drivers in a procession
   
71.03   Vehicles shall not be driven on a sidewalk
   
71.04   Limitations on backing
   
71.05   Clinging to vehicles
   
71.06   Controlled access
   
71.07   Muffler required
   
71.08   Speed limits
   
71.09   One-way streets and alleys
Turning Movements
   
71.20   Required position and method of turning at intersections
   
71.21   Turning markers
   
71.22   Obedience to no-turn signs
Special Stops Required
   
71.35   Authority to erect stop signs
   
71.36   Signs to bear the word “stop”
   
71.37   Vehicles to stop at stop signs
   
71.38   Emerging from alley, driveway or building
   
71.39   Stop when traffic obstructed
Pedestrians' Rights and Duties
   
71.50   Pedestrians subject to traffic- control signals
   
71.51   Pedestrians' right of way in crosswalk
   
71.52   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalk
   
71.53   Crossing at right angles
   
71.54   When pedestrian shall yield
   
71.55   Prohibited crossing
   
71.56   Pedestrians walking along roadways
   
71.57   Pedestrians soliciting rides or business
   
71.58   Drivers to exercise due care
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 71.01 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION.
   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral
or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles
are conspicuously designated as required in this chapter. This provision shall
not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic- control
signals or police officers.
('76 Code, § 7-1091) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.02 DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION.
   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the
right-hand edge of the roadway as practical and shall follow the vehicle ahead
as close as is practical and safe.
('76 Code, § 7-1092)
§ 71.03 VEHICLES SHALL NOT BE DRIVEN ON A SIDEWALK.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a
permanent or temporary driveway.
('76 Code, § 7-1093) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.04 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless the movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic.
('76 Code, § 7-1094) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.05 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person, riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
('76 Code, § 7-1095) (Ord. passed 7-12-12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.06 CONTROLLED ACCESS.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access roadway
except at the entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
('76 Code, § 7-1096) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.07 MUFFLER REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate or run the engine of a motor vehicle without using a
complete muffler to suppress and reduce the sound of the vehicle.
('76 Code, § 7-1097) (Ord. passed 8-12-15) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.08 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful to
operate a vehicle in excess of 35 miles per hour inside the municipal corporate
limits.
('76 Code, § 7-1051)
Statutory reference:
   Statewide speed limits unless local ordinance provides otherwise, see G.S. §
20-141
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle in excess of the speeds
listed below upon the streets or portions of streets of the State Highway
System listed in each designated section in
Chapter 74, Schedule II, hereby made a part hereof:
      (1)   Twenty miles per hour in
Chapter 74, Schedule II(A).
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in
Chapter 74, Schedule II(B).
      (3)   Forty-five miles per hour in
Chapter 74, Schedule II(C).
('76 Code, § 7-1052) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.09 ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance designates any one-way street or alley there
shall be signs giving notice thereof, and no regulation shall be effective
unless the signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic
movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the
opposite direction is prohibited.
('76 Code, § 7-1071)
   (B)   Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys described
in
Chapter 74 Schedule I, hereby made a part hereof, vehicular traffic shall move
only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic
are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite
direction is prohibited.
('76 Code, § 7-1072)
TURNING MOVEMENTS
§ 71.20 REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as
follows:
   (A)   Right turns. Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall
be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (B)   Left turns on two-way roadways. At any intersection where traffic is
permitted to move in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection,
an approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of
the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of the
center line where it enters the intersection and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the
right of the center line of the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the
left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the
center of the intersection.
   (C)   Left turns on other than two-way roadways. At any intersection where
traffic is restricted to one direction on one or more of the roadways, the
driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection shall approach
the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in the direc tion of travel of the vehicle and after entering the
intersection the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as
nearly as practicable, in the left- hand lane lawfully available to traffic
moving in the direction upon the roadway being entered.
('76 Code, § 7-1061)
§ 71.21 TURNING MARKERS.
   When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an
intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat,
no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indications.
('76 Code, § 7-1062)
§ 71.22 OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-
turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any
sign.
('76 Code, § 7-1063) Penalty, see §
70.99
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
§ 71.35 AUTHORITY TO ERECT STOP SIGNS.
   Whenever any ordinance designates and de scribes a through street, there
shall be a stop sign on each and every street intersecting the through street
or intersecting that portion described and designated as by any ordinance
unless traffic at any intersection is controlled at all times by traffic-
control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two through
streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street
not so designated, stop signs shall be erected by the approaches of either of
the streets.
('76 Code, § 7-1081)
§ 71.36 SIGNS TO BEAR THE WORD “STOP”.
   Every sign erected pursuant to this chapter shall bear the word “Stop” in
letters not less than eight inches in height. Every stop sign shall be located
as near as practicable at the nearest line of the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, if none, at the nearest line of the roadway.
('76 Code, § 7-1082)
§ 71.37 VEHICLES TO STOP AT STOP SIGNS.
   Where stop signs are erected as herein autho rized at or near the entrance
to any intersection, every driver of a vehicle shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or in the event there is no
crosswalk shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-
control signal.
('76 Code, § 7-1083)
§ 71.38 EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY OR BUILDING.
   The driver of a vehicle within a business or residence district emerging
from an alley, driveway, or building shall stop the vehicle immediately prior
to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway or driveway, yielding the right of way to any pedestrian as may be
necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the
right of way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
('76 Code, § 7-1084)
§ 71.39 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
('76 Code, § 7-1085)
PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES
§ 71.50 PEDESTRIANS SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC- CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic-control signals as heretofore
declared in §§
70.24 and
70.26 of this title, but at all other places pedestrians shall be granted those
rights and be subject to the restrictions stated in this chapter.
('76 Code, § 7-1101)
§ 71.51 PEDESTRIANS' RIGHT OF WAY IN CROSSWALK.
   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger, but no pedestrian shall suddenly leave
a curb or other place of safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle,
which is so close that it is impossible for the driver to yield.
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
('76 Code, § 7-1102)
§ 71.52 PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALK.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
('76 Code, § 7-1103)
§ 71.53 CROSSING AT RIGHT ANGLES.
   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway at any place other than by a route at
right angles to the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb except
in a crosswalk.
('76 Code, § 7-1104) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.54 WHEN PEDESTRIAN SHALL YIELD.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right of way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   The foregoing rule in this section has no application under the
conditions stated in §
71.55 of this subchapter when pedestrians are prohibited from crossing at
certain designated places.
('76 Code, § 7-1105)
§ 71.55 PROHIBITED CROSSING.
   (A)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any
business district.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to cross Main Street at any place
west of its intersection with Porter Street except at marked crosswalks.
('76 Code, § 7-1106) (Ord. passed 7-6-70; Am. Ord. 2017-002, passed 2-6-17)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.56 PEDESTRIANS WALKING ALONG ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided any pedestrian walking along and upon
a highway shall when practicable walk only on the left side of the roadway or
its shoulder facing traffic which may approach from the opposite direction.
('76 Code, § 7-1107) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.57 PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS.
   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride or
business from the occupant of any vehicle.
('76 Code, § 7-1108) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.58 DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this chapter every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any
roadway; shall give warning by sounding the horn when necessary; and shall
exercise proper precaution upon observing any child or any confused or
incapacitated person upon a roadway.
('76 Code, § 7-1109)
CHAPTER 72: USE OF BICYCLES, IN-LINE SKATES, SKATEBOARDS
Section
   
72.01   Effect of regulations
   
72.02   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles
   
72.03   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
72.04   Manner of riding
   
72.05   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
   
72.06   Speed
   
72.07   Emerging from alley or driveway
   
72.08   Carrying articles
   
72.09   Parking
   
72.10   Riding on sidewalks
   
72.11   Lamps and other equipment on bicycles
   
72.12   Hazardous recreational activities
§ 72.01 EFFECT OF REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not
authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   These regulations applicable to bicycles shall apply whenever a
bicycle is operated upon any street or upon any public path set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles, subject to those exceptions stated herein.
('76 Code, § 7-1111) (Am. Ord. 2022-002, passed 1-3-23)
§ 72.02 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be granted all of the
rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by the laws of this State declaring rules of the road applicable to
vehicles or by this chapter applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to
special regulations in this article and except as to those provisions of laws
and ordinances which by their nature can have no application.
('76 Code, § 7-1112)  (Am. Ord. 2022-002, passed 1-3-23)
§ 72.03 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instruction of official
traffic-control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or U turn is permitted, no persons operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of any sign, except where the person dismounts from the bicycle to
make any turn, in which event the person shall then obey the regulations
applicable to pedestrians.
('76 Code, § 7-1113)  (Am. Ord. 2022-002, passed 1-3-23)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.04 MANNER OF RIDING.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than astride a
permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
('76 Code, § 7-1114)  (Am. Ord. 2022-002, passed 1-3-23) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.05 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as near to
the right-hand side of the roadway as practicable, exercising due care when
passing a standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles upon a roadway shall not ride more than two
abreast except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles.
   (C)   Whenever a usable path for bicycles has been provided adjacent to a
roadway bicycle riders shall use the path and shall not use the roadway.
('76 Code, § 7-1115)  (Am. Ord. 2022-002, passed 1-3-23)
§ 72.06 SPEED.
   No persons shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable and
prudent under the conditions then existing.
('76 Code, § 7-1116)  (Am. Ord. 2022-002, passed 1-3-23)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.07 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, or building,
shall upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area extending across any
alleyway, yield the right of way to all pedestrians approaching on the sidewalk
or sidewalk area, and upon entering the roadway shall yield the right of way to
all vehicles approaching on the roadway.
('76 Code, § 7-1117)  (Am. Ord. 2022-002, passed 1-3-23)
§ 72.08 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article
which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the handle bars.
('76 Code, § 7-1118)  (Am. Ord. 2022-002, passed 1-3-23)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.09 PARKING.
   No person shall park a bicycle upon a street other than upon the roadway
against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle or
against a building or at the curb, in a manner as to afford the least
obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
('76 Code, § 7-1119)  (Am. Ord. 2022-002, passed 1-3-23)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.10 RIDING ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)    No person shall ride a bicycle, roller skates, inline skates,
skateboard, or similar recreational vehicle upon a sidewalk within the downtown
C-1 Commercial business district.
   (B)   The Chief of Police is authorized to erect signs on any roadway
prohibiting the riding of bicycles thereon by any person and when the signs are
in place no person shall disobey the same.
   (C)   Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the persons
shall yield the right of way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal
before overtaking and passing the pedestrian.
('76 Code, § 7-1120) (Am. Ord. 2022-002, passed 1-3-23)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.11 LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear of a type which
shall be visible from all distances from 50 feet to 300 feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful upper beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp
emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be
used in addition to the red reflector.
   (B)   No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a bell or
other device capable of giving a signal audible for a distance of at least 100
feet, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall persons use
upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.
   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will enable the
operator to make the braked wheel skid on dry, level, clean pavement.
('76 Code, § 7-1121)  (Am. Ord. 2022-002, passed 1-3-23)
§ 72.12 HAZARDOUS RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   The town has provided recreational areas for the enjoyment of
hazardous recreational activities, including but not limited to skateboarding,
inline skating, and freestyle bicycling. Any person who participates in or
assists in hazardous recreational activities assumes the known and unknown
inherent risks in these activities, irrespective of age, and is legally
responsible for all damages, injury, or death to himself or other persons or
property that result from these activities.
   (B)   The town does not provide regular supervision of hazardous
recreational activity facilities.
   (C)   Any person riding a skateboard at a municipal skatepark facility shall
wear all of the following safety equipment:
      (1)   Helmet;
      (2)   Elbow pads; and
      (3)   Kneepads.
   (D)   Signs shall be posted at the facility, affording reasonable notice
that any person riding a skateboard in the facility must wear a helmet, elbow
pads, and kneepads.
   (E)   In addition to the penalties provided for in §
10.99 of this Code, any person who violates the provisions of the article may
be subject to sanctions imposed by the town including, but not limited to
temporary suspension or permanent revocation of the privilege to skate anywhere
within any town parks or recreation areas.
(Ord. 2022-002, passed 1-3-23)
CHAPTER 73: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
Method of Parking
   
73.01   Standing or parking close to curb
   
73.02   Signs or markings indicating angle parking
   
73.03   Obedience to angle-parking, signs or markings
   
73.04   [Reserved]
   
73.05   Town regulated parking lots
Parking Meters
   
73.15   Definitions
   
73.16   Zones
   
73.17   Installation
   
73.18   Operation
   
73.19   Presumptions
   
73.20   Offenses
Loading and Unloading
   
73.30   Deliveries on Main Street
Stopping, Standing or Parking Prohibited
or Restricted in Specified Places
   
73.40   Locations where no signs required
   
73.41   Parking not to obstruct traffic
   
73.42   Parking in alleys
   
73.43   Parking adjacent to schools
   
73.44   Standing or parking on one-way roadways
   
73.45   No stopping, standing, or parking near hazardous or congested places
   
73.46   Obstruction of driveway
   
73.47   Stopping, standing or parking restricted or prohibited on certain
streets
   
73.48   Disabled parking
METHOD OF PARKING
§ 73.01 STANDING OR PARKING CLOSE TO CURB.
   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than
parallel with the edge of the roadway headed in the direction of lawful traffic
movement and with the right-hand wheels of the vehicle within 18 inches of the
curb or edge of the roadway except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
Vehicles parked in spaces marked for angle parking shall be headed in the
direction of lawful traffic with the front wheel of the vehicle corresponding
with the side of the street on which the angled parking space is marked within
18 inches of the curb or edge of the roadway.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within a zone
covered by parking spaces indicated by white lines on the pavement, except in
the space between two of the lines. No vehicle shall be parked so as to be
partly in one space and partly in another. All vehicles must be placed in a
position parallel with the markings.
('76 Code, § 7-1131) (Ord. passed 6-12-23; Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19;
Am. Ord. 2023-008, passed 11-6-23) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.02 SIGNS OR MARKINGS INDICATING ANGLE PARKING.
   (A)   The Town Council shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall
be permitted and shall mark or sign the streets, which are specified in
Chapter 75, Schedule III, hereby made a part hereof.
   (B)   Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where
passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side
of the street.
('76 Code, § 7-1132) (Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19)
§ 73.03 OBEDIENCE TO ANGLE-PARKING, SIGNS OR MARKINGS.
    Upon those streets which have been signed or marked for angle parking, no
person shall park or stand a vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or
edge of the roadway indicated by the signs or markings, oriented such that the
front of the vehicle is closest to the curb.
('76 Code, § 7-1133) (Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19; Am. Ord. 2023-008,
passed 11-6-23) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.04 [RESERVED].
§ 73.05 TOWN REGULATED PARKING LOTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, per sons, or corporations to park
and leave unattended for more than 24 hours any vehicle on any restricted
street or on any town regulated parking lot.
   (B)   Any overtime parking violation under this section shall raise the
presumption that the vehicle involved was operated by the person in whose name
the vehicle was registered.
   (C)   Any vehicle left parked on any restricted street or town regulated
parking lot, in violation of this section, shall be towed to a designated
storage area at the expense of the vehicle owner and held in storage until
towing charges and storage fees have been paid.
   (D)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARKING. It shall mean the stopping of a vehicle upon a restricted street or
town regulated parking lot otherwise than in obedience to traffic regulations
or traffic signs or signals for a period longer than reasonably necessary to
load or unload passengers or freight.
   RESTRICTED STREET. It shall mean that part of any public street, avenue,
road, boulevard, highway, or other public place established for the use of
vehicles within the town and restricting parking to a limited time only.
   TOWN REGULATED PARKING LOT. It shall mean any public or private lot used for
the parking of vehicles, located within the town upon which the town has the
lawful authority to regulate parking.
   VEHICLE. It shall mean any device in, upon, or by which any person or
property is or may be transported upon a highway.
('76 Code, § 7-1135) (Ord. passed 5-1-72; Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19)
Penalty, see §
70.99
PARKING METERS
§ 73.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARKING. It shall mean the stopping of a vehicle upon a restricted street
otherwise than in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals
for a period longer than reasonably necessary to load or unload passengers or
freight.
   PARKING METER. It shall mean that mechan ism having a visible time
indicator, a coin receiving and a coin actuating mechanism all enclosed and
mounted on top of a post which shall, under no condition, be higher than 4½
feet overall and at no point shall the post or mechanism thereon be over 8
inches wide. Each parking meter installed shall indicate by proper legend the
legal parking time established by the town, and when operating shall at all
times indicate the balance of the period of legal parking, and at the
expiration of the period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
   PARKING METER ZONE. It shall mean any re stricted street upon which parking
meters are installed and in operation.
   RESTRICTED STREET. It shall mean that part of any public street, avenue,
road, boulevard, highway, or other public place established for the use of
vehicles within the city and restricting parking to a limited period only.
   VEHICLE. It shall mean any device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported upon a highway.
('76 Code, § 7-1136) (Ord. passed 8-4-47; Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19)
§ 73.16 ZONES.
   Parking meters shall be installed, operated, maintained, policed and
supervised on the restricted streets at places and in the manner as the town
Manager (or whatever the case may be) shall direct and the parking meter shall
be so devised and regulated as to provide for parking periods not in excess of
the legal time within restricted streets.
('76 Code, § 7-1137) (Ord. passed 8-4-47; Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19)
§ 73.17 INSTALLATION.
   In every parking meter zone one parking meter shall be installed within the
curb line adjacent to each space conspicuously designated by lines painted on
the surface of the curb or street as a parking place for one vehicle. It shall
be a violation of the provisions of this chapter to park any vehicle of a
lesser overall length than the designated area in a position that the same
shall not be completely within the space provided for one vehicle. Suitable
signs indicating the parking restrictions and regulations applicable in parking
meter zones shall be conspicu ously posted.
('76 Code, § 7-1138) (Ord. passed 8-4-47; Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19)
§ 73.18 OPERATION.
   Parking a vehicle within any parking meter zone for beyond the established
legal parking time for the zone is unlawful. Parking a vehicle within a parking
zone for a period of not longer than the established time limit shall be
permitted only upon the payment of a coin or coins of the United States as
designated on the parking meter, which payment shall be made by depositing the
coin or the coins in the parking meter adjacent to the space occupied by the
vehicle and by setting the time device upon the parking meter in operation. The
coin or coins re quired to be deposited in parking meters as provided herein
are hereby levied and assessed as fees for the sole purpose of providing for
the cost of proper supervision and regulation of parking vehicles in the
parking meter zones, and to cover the cost of purchase, supervision,
protection, inspection, installation, operation, maintenance, control, and use
of the parking meter described herein. It is further provided that the
installation of parking meters shall in no manner obligate the town to pay for
the same from any source than that hereinbefore set out.
('76 Code, § 7-1139) (Ord. passed 8-4-47; Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.19 PRESUMPTIONS.
   (A)   The fact that the time device on any parking meter is not in operation
shall be presumptive evidence that the person who parked the vehicle then found
standing in the parking space adjacent to the meter failed to deposit a coin or
coins as required therein; and the indication by the meter of illegal parking
shall be presumptive evidence of overtime parking.
   (B)   Any overtime parking violation under this article shall raise the
presumption that the vehicle involved was operated by the person in whose name
the vehicle was registered.
('76 Code, § 7-1140) (Ord. passed 8-4-47; Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19)
§ 73.20 OFFENSES.
   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this article:
   (A)   For any person to deposit in a parking meter a coin or coins for the
purpose of increasing or extending the parking meter time of any vehicle beyond
the legal parking time limit.
   (B)   For any person to allow a vehicle operated by him to be parked
overtime or beyond the period of legal parking time established for any parking
meter zone.
   (C)   To deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug,
device or metallic substitute for a coin or coins of the United States.
   (D)   For any person to deface, injure, tamper with, open, or willfully
break, destroy, or impair the usefulness of any parking meter installed under
the provision of this subchapter.
('76 Code, § 7-1141) (Ord. passed 8-4-47; Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19)
Penalty, see §
70.99
LOADING AND UNLOADING
§ 73.30 DELIVERIES ON MAIN STREET.
   All trucks delivering merchandise on Main Street shall drive to the back of
buildings for loading and unloading or in designated loading zones. The penalty
for violation of this section is set forth in §
70.99 of this code.
('76 Code, § 7-1161) (Am. Ord. 2017-002, passed 2-6-17; Am. Ord. 2019-006,
passed 3-4-19)
STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED OR RESTRICTED IN SPECIFIED PLACES
§ 73.40 LOCATIONS WHERE NO SIGNS REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the
directions of a police officer or traffic-control device, in any of the
following places:
      (1)   On a sidewalk;
      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;
      (3)   Within an intersection;
      (4)   Within 10 feet of a fire hydrant;
      (5)   On a crosswalk;
      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
      (7)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign,
or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless signs
or markings indicate a different length;
      (9)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on
the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet
of the entrance (when property signposted);
      (10)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
      (11)   On a roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;
      (12)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel;
      (13)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
such prohibited area or away from a curb the distance as is unlawful.
('76 Code, § 7-1151) (Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.41 PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.
   No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in a
manner or under conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width
of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
('76 Code, § 7-1152) (Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.42 PARKING IN ALLEYS.
   No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in a manner or under
conditions as to leave available less than 10 feet of the width of the roadway
for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or
park a vehicle within an alley, in a position as to block the driveway entrance
to any abutting property.
('76 Code, § 7-1153) (Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.43 PARKING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.
   When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a
street adjacent to any school property as authorized herein, no person shall
park a vehicle in any designated place.
('76 Code, § 7-1154) (Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.44 STANDING OR PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAYS.
   In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is
restricted to one direction upon any roadway, no person shall stand or park a
vehicle upon the left-hand side of the one-way roadway unless signs are erected
to permit the standing or parking. The penalty for violation of this section is
set forth in §
70.99 of this code.
('76 Code, § 7-1155) (Am. Ord. 2017-002, passed 2-6-17; Am. Ord. 2019-006,
passed 3-4-19)
§ 73.45 NO STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING NEAR HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES.
   When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places no person
shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any designated place.
('76 Code, § 7-1156) (Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.46 OBSTRUCTION OF DRIVEWAY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or maliciously stop up or
obstruct with a vehicle or otherwise, the driveway or entrance leading from a
public street in the town to or from any residence or place of business.
('76 Code, § 7-1157) (Ord. passed 1-5-70; Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19)
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.47 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING RESTRICTED OR PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN
STREETS.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the standing or parking of
a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as
indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or official traffic-control device.
('76 Code, § 7-1171)
   (B)   Whenever by this or any ordinance any parking time limit is imposed or
parking is prohibited on designated streets there shall be appropriate signs
giving notice thereof and no regulations shall be effective unless the signs
are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense.
('76 Code, § 7-1174)
   (C)   The penalty for violation of this section is set forth in §
70.99 of this code.
(Am. Ord. 2017-002, passed 2-6-17; Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19)
§ 73.48 DISABLED PARKING.
   (A)   It shall be prohibited for any person to park or leave standing any
vehicle in a space designated for disabled persons or visually impaired persons
when the vehicle does not display the distinguishing license plate, placard, or
identification card or a disabled veteran registration plate as provided by
state law.
   (B)   It shall be prohibited for any person not qualifying for the rights
and privileges extended to disabled or visually impaired persons to exercise or
attempt to exercise such rights or privileges by the unauthorized use of a
distinguishing license plate, placard, or identification card.
   (C)   Violation of this section shall subject the offender to a civil
penalty in the amount of $100 per violation, to be enforced and collected as
set forth in §
70.99 of this code.
(Ord. passed 3-7-16; Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19)
CHAPTER 74: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Section
   
I.   One-way streets
   
II.   Speed limits
   
III.   Truck traffic prohibited
SCHEDULE I: ONE-WAY STREETS.
   (A)   Main Street from the intersection of East Main Street and South Palmer
Street to the intersec tion of West Main Street and Harrison Avenue; all
vehicular travel upon the street shall proceed westerly.
   (B)   Palmer Street from its intersection with Porter Street to its
intersection with East Main Street; all vehicular travel upon the same shall
proceed in an easterly direction.
   (C)   Bidwell Street from its intersection with Lyle Street to its
intersection with Harrison Avenue; all vehicular travel upon the same shall
proceed in a northerly direction.
   (D)   Watauga Street from the area between: the intersection of the
easternmost margin of the westernmost driveway of East Franklin School and
Watauga Street at the stop sign, and the westernmost margin of the next
driveway into the East Franklin School lying to the east; all vehicular travel
upon the same shall proceed in a westerly direction.
   (E)   Macon Avenue from its intersection with Church Street and West Main
Street; all vehicular travel upon the same shall proceed in a southerly
direction.
   (F)   Stewart Street from its intersection with Phillips Street to an
unnamed driveway that connects northerly from East Palmer Street to Stewart
Street; all vehicular travel upon the same shall proceed in an easterly
direction.
('76 Code, App. I, § 104) (Ord. passed 10-9-56; Am. Ord. passed 11-1-93; Am.
Ord. passed 12-20-95; Am. Ord. passed 1-2-96; Am. Ord. passed 9-9-96; Am. Ord.
passed 2-8-99; Am. Ord. 2025-005, passed 4-7-25)
SCHEDULE II: SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Twenty miles per hour speed limit on the following streets:
Street Location Ord. No. Ord. Date(s)
Street                    Location                        Ord. No. Ord. Date(s)
Anderson Street           From Green Street to Harrison   2017-003 3-6-17
                          Avenue
Bidwell Street            From West Main Street to                —
                          Harrison Avenue (NC 28)
Cherry Street             From First Street to Van Raalte —      10-3-16
                          Street
Clyde Street              From Watauga Street to its      2017-003 3-6-17
                          terminus
Cove Crossing             From Baird Cove Road to its     2017-003 3-6-17
                          terminus
Fox Ridge Road            From NC 28 to its terminus      2017-003 3-6-17
Grandview Drive           From Lakeside Drive to Clyde    2017-003 3-6-17
                          Street
Green Street              From Trimont Trail to West Main 2017-003 3-6-17
                          Street
                          From Main Street (US 441
Iotla Street (SR 1323)    Business NC-28) to Church       —      5-6-74
                          Street
Lakeview Drive            From Riverview Heights Street   2017-003 3-6-17
                          to its terminus
East Main Street (US 441  From Iotla Street (SR 1323) to
Business-NC 28)           Palmer Street (US 441 Business- —      5-6-74
                          NC 28)
West Main Street (US 441  From Porter Street (US 441
Business-NC 28)           Business-NC 28) to Iotla Street —      5-6-74
                          (SR 1323)
McCollum Drive            US 441 Business to Panther      2017-003 3-6-17
                          Drive
Mimosa Drive              From Palmer Street (SR 1442) to 2017-003 4-3-17
                          East Mimosa Drive
Palmer Street (SR 1442)   From Maple Street to Porter     —      5-6-74
                          Street (US 441 Business-NC 28)
                          From Porter Street (US 551
Palmer Street (US 441     Business northbound- NC 28)
Business-NC 28)           east to a point 0.13 mile east  —      5-6-74
                          of SR 1718/1699 (Phillips
                          Street)
                          From Palmer Street (US 441               6-5-72;
Phillips Street (SR 1699) Business-NC 28) to Main Street  —      5-6-74
                          (US 441 Business-NC 28)
Porter Street (US 441     From Maple Street to Porter     —      5-6-74
Business-NC 28)           Street (US 441 Business-NC 28)
Summit Drive              From W. Dogwood Drive to its    2017-003 3-6-17
                          terminus
Tallent Street            From Womack Street to its       2017-003 3-6-17
                          terminus
Third Street              From Cherry Street to Sloan     2017-003 3-6-17
                          Street
Van Raalte Street         From Cherry Street to First     —      10-3-16
                          Street
West Boulevard                                           2017-003 3-6-17
White Oak Circle                                         2017-003 3-6-17
 
('76 Code, App. I, § 105) (Am. Ord. passed 12-3-90; Am. Ord. passed 11-6-95)
   (B)   Twenty-five miles per hour speed limit on the following streets:
Street Location Ord. No. Ord. Date(s)
Street                    Location                     Ord. No. Ord. Date(s)
                          From a point 0.07 miles west
Baird Cove Road (SR 1319) of SR 1442, eastward to SR   —      2-3-92
                          1442
Edgewood Avenue           From US 441 Business to its  2017-003 3-6-17
                          terminus
First Street              From NC 28 to Old Cat Creek  2017-003 3-6-17
                          Road
Forest Hills Drive        From Palmer Street (SR 1442) 2017-003 3-6-17
                          to Womack Street (SR 1158)
Gaston Street             From West Main Street to its 2017-003 3-6-17
                          terminus
Hillcrest Avenue          From US 441 to Porter Street 2017-003 3-6-17
Hurst Circle              From Harrison Avenue to      2017-003 3-6-17
                          Mashburn Street
Iotla Street (SR 1323)    From Church Street to        —      5-6-74
                          Riverview Street (SR 1323)
                          From US 441 Business
Lakeside Drive (SR 1324)  northward to a point 0.53    —      10-29-92
                          miles north of US 441
                          Business
Love Street               From Harrison Avenue to its  2017-003 3-6-17
                          terminus
Lyle Street               From Harrison Avenue to      2017-003 3-6-17
                          Green Street
Maple Street              From Palmer Street (SR 1442) 2017-003 3-6-17
                          to US 441 Business
Pauline Avenue            From Ulco Drive to its       2017-003 3-6-17
                          terminus
Riverview Heights Street  NC 28 to its terminus        2017-003 3-6-17
Riverview Street          From US 441 Business to SR   —      —
                          1323
Town Mountain Drive       From Lakeside Drive to its   2017-003 3-6-17
                          terminus
Trimont Trail             From Harrison Avenue to      2017-003 3-6-17
                          Wilkie Street
Ulco Drive                From Wayah Street to Wells   2017-003 3-6-17
                          Grove Road
Watauga Street            From US 441 to Lakeside      2017-003 3-6-17
                          Drive
                          From Porter Street (US 441
Wayah Street (SR 1695)    Business) to Depot Street    —      8-24-70; 5-6-74
                          (SR 1659)
White Oak Street          From Iotla Street to         2017-003 3-6-17
                          Riverview Street
North Womack Street       From Womack Street to its    2017-003 3-6-17
                          terminus
                          From a point 0.20 miles east
SR 1157                   of US 441 Business, eastward —      11-4-02
                          to US 441 Business
SR 1718                   From SR 1719 northward to US —      2-3-92
                          441 Business
                          From SR 1718 eastward to a
SR 1719                   point 0.34 miles east of SR  —      2-3-92
                          1718
 
('76 Code, App. I, § 106)
   (C)   Forty-five miles per hour speed limit on the following streets:
 
Street  Location                                                   Ord. Date
NC 28   From SR 1571 to the eastern corporate limit, eastern       5-6-74
        corporate limit, approximat ely 1.02 miles east of SR 1571
SR 1323 From Iotla Street northward to a point .536 mile north of  6-21-10
        Iotla Street (Franklin Corporate Limits)
 
('76 Code, App. I § 107) (Am. Ord. 2010-06, passed 6-21-10)
SCHEDULE III: TRUCK TRAFFIC PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to drive any truck of one ton or greater size
except for the purposes of making a delivery or to a destination within the
designated areas, on the following streets, which are to be designated by
properly posted signs:
 
Street                                                     Ord. Date
Riverview Street from White Oak Street to Iotla Street     9-5-78
On Green Street from West Main Street to Harrison Avenue   9-5-78
On Bidwell Street from West Main Street to Harrison Avenue 9-5-78
 
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this
ordinance for any person to operate a truck on any of the streets above
mentioned, within the designated areas specified, unless making a delivery
within the designated area, or proceeding to a destination within the
designated area.
   (C)   A violation of this ordinance shall constitute a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine not to exceed $50 or a prison sentence of not more than 30
days.
(Ord. passed 9-5-78)
CHAPTER 75: PARKING SCHEDULES
Section
   
I.   Parking prohibited at all times
   
II.   Parking time limited
   
III.   Marked parking
SCHEDULE I: PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES.
   (A)   Parking shall be prohibited at all times on the following streets:
Street Location Ord. Date
Street                            Location                            Ord. Date
                                  Right hand side of Harrison Avenue,
Harrison Avenue                   going out of town, from its         6-9-88
                                  intersection with Church Street to
                                  its intersection with Bidwell
                                  From its intersection with Palmer
Phillips Street                   Street to its intersection with     ——
                                  Wayah Street
Derby Street                      West side between Main and Palmer   ——
                                  The Public Square, except in spaces
                                  designated for parking by painted
The Public Square and Main Street lines, and on Main Street within 15  
                                  feet of the cross streets entering
                                  the square
                                  Between its intersection with
Wayah Street                      Porter Street on the west and its   ——
                                  intersection with Depot Street on
                                  the east
                                  W Main Street to Lyle Street then
Bidwell Street                    on right side from Lyle Street to   3-4-19
                                  Harrison Avenue
Macon Avenue                      West side of street from Church     3-4-19
                                  Street to W Main Street
East Palmer Street                South side of the street from       9-3-19
                                  Phillips Street to Patton Avenue
 
   (B)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any farm tractor,
house trailer or mobile home, semi- trailer, trailer or road tractor, truck
tractor, motor truck larger than a small pickup truck, property hauling
vehicles, or special mobile equipment, on Main Street in the town; provided
this shall not prohibit the parking of trucks and other property hauling
vehicles for a reasonable length of time for the purpose of loading and
unloading.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle, truck, trailer or tractor
within the spaces in the town marked, “NO PARKING,” except for a reasonable
time for the purpose of loading and unloading.
      (3)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
guilty assessed a civil penalty as provided in §
70.99 of the Traffic Code..
(Ord. passed 1-5-70; Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19)
   (C)   Every place designated as a bus stop.
   (D)   Phillips Street from Main to Palmer (one ton trucks or larger).
('76 Code, App. I, § 101) (Am. Ord. passed 11-7-22)
SCHEDULE II: PARKING TIME LIMITED.
   Parking shall be limited to the specified number of minutes at the following
location:
 
Location                           Time Limit                    Ord. Date
Marked space in front of Town Hall Parking limited to 20 minutes 3-14-19
 
('76 Code, App. I, § 102) (Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19)
SCHEDULE III: MARKED PARKING.
   All vehicles shall be parked within the marked parking spots on the
following streets or portions thereof:
Description Ord. Date
Description                                                           Ord. Date
Main Street, from Derby Street at the east end thereof to the top of  —
the hill at the west end thereof.
Iotla Street from the public square to Church Street                  3-14-19
Phillips Street on west side of street from public square to E Palmer 3-14-19
Street
E Palmer Street from beginning to Patton Avenue                       3-14-19
Church Street from Iotla Street to Harrison Avenue                    3-14-19
Macon Avenue from Church Street to W Main Street on east side of      3-14-19
street
Stewart Street on south side along municipal lot                      3-14-19
 
('76 Code, App. I, § 103) (Am. Ord. 2019-006, passed 3-4-19)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   JUNKED OR ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   FIRE PREVENTION
      
93.   GENERAL HEALTH REGULATIONS
      
94.   NUISANCES
      
95.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
96.   LITTLE TENNESSEE RIVER GREENWAY
CHAPTER 90: JUNKED OR ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
   
90.01   Definitions
   
90.02   Administration
   
90.03   Vehicles exempt
   
90.04   Abandoned vehicles prohibited; removal authorized
   
90.05   Nuisance vehicles prohibited
   
90.06   Junked motor vehicles regulated; removal authorized
   
90.07   Removal of vehicles in violation; towing notice requirements
   
90.08   Exceptions to prior notice requirement
   
90.09   Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of
vehicle
   
90.10   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings
   
90.11   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle
   
90.12   Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property
   
90.13   Protection against criminal or civil liability
   
90.14   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle
§ 90.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. As authorized and defined in G.S. § 160A-303, an
abandoned vehicle is one that is left:
      (1)   Upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or ordinance
prohibiting parking; or
      (2)   On property owned or operated by the town, for longer than 24
hours; or
      (3)   On private property without the consent of the owner, occupant or
lessee thereof, for longer than two hours; or
      (4)   On a public street or highway, and is either:
         (a)   Left for longer than seven days; or
         (b)   Determined by law enforcement to be a hazard to the motoring
public.
   AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL. The supervisory employee of the Police Department or
the Code Enforcement Officer, respectively, designated to authorize the removal
of vehicles under the provisions of this chapter.
   ENCLOSED AREA. An area shall be deemed an enclosed area when surrounded by a
fence, wall or other structure that is at least seven feet tall measured from
the ground, is constructed of an opaque material, and surrounds the area on all
sides, such that abandoned or junked vehicles behind the said fence, wall or
other structure are not visible from the public right-of-way or other private
or public property.
   ENCLOSED STRUCTURE. A garage or building structure erected pursuant to the
lawful issuance of a building permit, constructed in accordance with all
applicable zoning and building code regulations and which provides a complete
enclosure such that abandoned or junked vehicles are not visible from the
public right-of-way or other private or public property.
   HIGHWAY. Defined, pursuant to G.S. § 20-4.01(13), as the entire width
between property or right-of-way lines of every way or place of whatever
nature, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of
right for the purposes of vehicular traffic. The terms HIGHWAY, STREET, ROAD
and other cognates are included within the foregoing definition.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. As defined by G.S. § 160A-303.2, a vehicle which does
not display a current license plate and that:
      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or
      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it
originally was intended to move; or
      (3)   Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less than $500.
   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. Any machine designed or intended to travel over
land or water by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled
vehicle.
   NUISANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle on public or private property that is determined
and declared to be a safety hazard, a public nuisance and unlawful, including a
vehicle found to be:
      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats or
other pests;
      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over
eight inches in height;
      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;
      (4)   A point of concentration of quantities of gasoline, oil or other
flammable or explosive materials as evidenced by odor;
      (5)   One which has areas of confinement which cannot be operated from
the inside, such as trunks, hoods and the like;
      (6)   So situated or located that there is a danger of it falling or
turning over;
      (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food or animal
waste, or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind;
      (8)   One which is a place in which debris, bottles or other solid waste
is discarded and is present within the vehicle;
      (9)   One which has sharp parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp
edges of metal or glass; and/or
      (10)   Any vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard and a
public health nuisance by the Macon County Department of Health.
(Ord. passed 12-3-12; Am. Ord. 2024-005, passed 4-1-24)
§ 90.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Police Department and Town Code Enforcement Officer shall be responsible
for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. The Police Department
shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition of vehicles
determined to be abandoned on the public streets and highways within the town,
and on property owned by the town. The Code Enforcement Officer shall be
responsible for administering the removal and disposition of abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicles located on private property. The town may, on
an annual basis, contract with private tow truck operators or towing businesses
to remove, store, and dispose of abandoned vehicles, nuisance vehicles and
junked motor vehicles in compliance with this chapter and applicable state
laws. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the legal authority
or powers of officers of the Town Police Department or Fire Department in
enforcing other laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties.
(Ord. passed 12-3-12)
§ 90.03 VEHICLES EXEMPT.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle which is:
   (A)   Located in a bona fide automobile graveyard or junk yard as defined in
G.S. § 136-143, in accordance with the Junk Yard Control Act, the same being
G.S. §§ 136-141 et seq, and in compliance with applicable zoning standards;
   (B)   In an enclosed building;
   (C)   Within either:
      (1)   An enclosed area on private property; or
      (2)   An enclosed area in the rear or side yard of the place of business
of an automobile repair business properly licensed pursuant to
Chapter 110 of this Code; provided:
         (a)   The vehicle is being kept pursuant to the operation of that
business, provided that this exception shall expire after a vehicle has been on
the property for a period of 180 days; and further;
         (b)   The movement of a vehicle from the enclosed area to an
unenclosed area at the same location shall not be considered removal of the
vehicle from the enclosed area;
   (D)   In an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful
place and manner by the town; or
   (E)   Covered with a fitted car cover designed for that vehicle and parked
on property so that the vehicle cannot be seen from a public street or abutting
property.
(Ord. passed 12-3-12)
§ 90.04 ABANDONED VEHICLES PROHIBITED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a motor vehicle to cause or allow the vehicle to be abandoned as
the term is defined in §
90.01 above.
   (B)   Upon investigation, proper authorizing officials of the town may
determine that a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed.
(Ord. passed 12-3-12)
§ 90.05 NUISANCE VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to
remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle.
   (B)   Upon investigation, the Code Enforcement Officer may determine and
declare that a vehicle is a health and/or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle
as defined above and order the vehicle removed.
(Ord. passed 12-3-12)
§ 90.06 JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES REGULATED; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of
the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered
removed.
   (B)   The Code Enforcement Officer may order the removal of a junked motor
vehicle, as defined in this chapter after finding, in writing, that the
aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the
private property owner. The finding shall be based on a balancing of the
monetary loss of the apparent owner against the corresponding gain to the
public by promoting or enhancing community, neighborhood or area appearance.
The following, among other relevant factors, may be considered:
      (1)   Protection of property values;
      (2)   Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities;
      (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;
      (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and
      (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of area
residents.
(Ord. passed 12-3-12)
§ 90.07 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES IN VIOLATION; TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as set forth in §
90.08 below, an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which is to be removed
shall be towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of the vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked motor
vehicle, if the names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person
entitled to the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee or occupant of
the real property upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class
mail. The person who mails the notice shall retain a written record to show the
names and addresses to which it was mailed, and the date mailed. If the names
and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle to be removed is an
abandoned motor vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on the windshield or
some other conspicuous place on the vehicle a notice indicating that the
vehicle will be removed by the town on a specified date, but no sooner than
seven days after the notice is affixed. Whether notice is by first class mail
or by posting as provided above, the notice shall state that the vehicle will
be removed by the town on a specified date, not sooner than seven days after
the notice is affixed or mailed, unless the vehicle is removed by the owner or
legal possessor prior to that time.
   (B)   With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property, nuisance
vehicles and junked motor vehicles to which notice is required to be given, if
the registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the
vehicle but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned
or is a nuisance vehicle, or in the case of a junked motor vehicle that the
aesthetic benefits of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens, the appeal
shall be made to the Town Manager in writing, who shall set a time for the
appeal and hear it within a reasonable amount of time, not less than ten nor
more than 30 days after receiving the request for the appeal. Further
proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and
decided. The decision of the Town Manager shall be appealable to District
Court.
   (C)   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which has been ordered
removed may, as directed by the Town, be removed to a storage garage or area by
the tow truck operator or towing business contracting to perform the services
for the town. Whenever a vehicle is removed, the authorizing town official
shall immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle, and
the notice shall include the following:
      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;
      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;
      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
      (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and
      (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause
hearing on the removal.
   (D)   The town shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by
telephone. However, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written
notice, including the information set forth in divisions (C)(1) through (C)(5)
above, shall also be mailed to the registered owner's last known address,
unless this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or the owner's
agent.
   (E)   If the vehicle is registered in the state of North Carolina, notice
shall be given within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state
of North Carolina, notice shall be given to the registered owner within 72
hours form the removal of the vehicle.
   (F)   Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle is removed,
and the vehicle has no valid registration or registration plates, the
authorizing town official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the
vehicle identification number, to determine the last known registered owner of
the vehicle and to notify the owner of the information set forth in divisions
(C)(1) through (C) (5) above.
(Ord. passed 12-3-12)
§ 90.08 EXCEPTIONS TO PRIOR NOTICE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an
abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle may, as determined by the
authorizing official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a
special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to
otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare.
   (B)   The findings shall, in all cases, be entered by the authorizing
official in the appropriate daily records. Circumstances justifying removal of
vehicles without prior notice include:
      (1)   Vehicles abandoned on the public streets and highways, for which
the Board hereby determines that immediate removal of the same may be warranted
when they are:
         (a)   Obstructing traffic;
         (b)   Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting
parking;
         (c)   Parked in a no stopping or standing zone;
         (d)   Parked in a loading zone;
         (e)   Parked in a bus zone; or
         (f)   Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed
under
Chapter 73 of this Code.
      (2)   Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles, and with respect to abandoned
or nuisance vehicles left on town-owned property other than the streets and
highways, and on private property, the vehicles may be removed without giving
prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing town official
finds a special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public
health, safety and welfare. By way of illustration and not of limitation, the
circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to
businesses and residences, vehicles parked in a location or manner so as to
pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing damage to public or private
property.
(Ord. passed 12-3-12)
§ 90.09 RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OR FINAL DISPOSITION OF
VEHICLE.
   After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, nuisance vehicle or junked motor
vehicle, the owner or any other person entitled to possession is entitled to a
hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing
the vehicle. A request for hearing must be filed in writing with the County
Magistrate designated by the Chief District Court Judge to receive the hearing
requests. The Magistrate will set the hearing within 72 hours of receipt of the
request, and the hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
G.S. § 20-219.11.
(Ord. passed 12-3-12)
§ 90.10 REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.
   At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the
towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double the
amount of the fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing business
having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of a vehicle,
the owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle shall not allow
or engage in further violations of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-3-12)
§ 90.11 SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.
   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle which is not claimed by the
owner or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the tow
truck operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of
the vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the town and in
accordance with G.S. §§ 44A-1 et seq.
(Ord. passed 12-3-12)
§ 90.12 CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   As a general policy, the town will not remove a vehicle from private
property if the owner, occupant or lessee of the property could have the
vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a
vehicle be removed by the town from private property without a written request
of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a vehicle is a
nuisance vehicle or is a junked motor vehicle which has been ordered removed by
the Code Enforcement Officer. The town may require any person requesting the
removal of an abandoned, nuisance or junked motor vehicle from private property
to indemnify the town against any loss, expense or liability incurred because
of the removal, storage or sale thereof. The town will not remove or dispose of
any motor vehicle that is used on a regular basis for business or personal use.
(Ord. passed 12-3-12)
§ 90.13 PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.
   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any
owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked motor vehicle, for disposing of the vehicle as provided in
this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-3-12)
§ 90.14 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any
storage facility designated by the town any vehicle which has been impounded
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless and until all towing and
impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of the fees, have been paid.
(Ord. passed 12-3-12)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Animals at large
   
91.02   Hogs
   
91.03   Fowl
   
91.04   Dead animals
Dogs
   
91.15   Reserved
   
91.16   Habitual barking; investigation of complaints
Animal Control
   
91.25   Enforcement of Macon County Animal Control Ordinance
 
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 ANIMALS AT LARGE.
   No animal shall be permitted to run at large within the town limits. The
owner of any animal caught running at large shall be cited for violation of
this chapter and assessed a penalty pursuant to §
10.99 of this code.
('76 Code, § 8-2001) (Am. Ord. 2019-010, passed 10-7-19) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.02 HOGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to keep, maintain,
harbor a hog, swine, sow or boar within 500 feet of any dwelling house,
apartment house, hotel or other structure occupied as living quarters by any
person and within the corporate limits of the town. Any person violating the
provisions of this chapter shall be fined $1 for each and every day that any
one of the animals is kept, maintained or harbored.
('76 Code, § 8-2003) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 FOWL.
   (A)   There shall be no chicken, turkeys, or other fowl grown or kept on a
commercial scale within the corporate limits of the town. Commercial status
shall be determined by a flock size of more than 50.
   (B)   Flocks of less than 50 creating a nuisance will upon order of the Town
Council, after recommendations of the County Health Officer, be removed within
30 days of official notice from the Town Council.
('76 Code, § 8-2004) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.04 DEAD ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall permit any dead animal that belonged to him or was in
his care to remain unburied within the corporate limits of the town longer than
24 hours after he is notified thereof.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to bury any dead animal within the
town except in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations.
('76 Code, § 8-2005) Penalty, see §
91.99
DOGS
§ 91.15 RESERVED.
§ 91.16 HABITUAL BARKING; INVESTIGATION OF COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   Any person keeping within the corporate limits of the Town of
Franklin, one or more dogs which, by prolonged and habitual barking, howling or
whining cause serious annoyance to neighboring residents and interfere with the
reasonable use and enjoyment of the premises occupied by the residents shall be
guilty of maintaining a nuisance.
   (B)   Investigations shall be conducted and penalties assessed for violation
of this section pursuant to the noise control provision s set forth in §§
94.15 through
94.20.
(Ord. passed 9-14-88; Am. Ord. 2018-005, passed 8-21-18) Penalty, see §
91.99
ANIMAL CONTROL
§ 91.25 ENFORCEMENT OF MACON COUNTY ANIMAL CONTROL ORDINANCE.
   The town requests, authorizes and permits Macon County, North Carolina, to
enforce the Macon County Animal Control Ordinance set forth in Chapter 90,
Animal Control, of the Code of Ordinances of the County of Macon, North
Carolina, as amended, within the town corporate limits, and the same shall be
applicable within the town.
(Res. passed 11-2-15)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Any person failing or refusing to abate the nuisance declared herein within
24 hours from the time of notification shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor
and upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $50, or
imprisoned not exceeding 30 days, as provided by G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. passed 9-14-88)
CHAPTER 92: FIRE PREVENTION
Section
   
92.01   State Fire Code adopted by reference
   
92.02   Lots kept free from fire hazards
   
92.03   Regulating outdoor burning
   
92.04   Placement and maintenance of fire hydrants
   
92.05   Knox boxes requirements
Cross-reference:
   For provisions concerning fire limits, see
Chapter 150
§ 92.01 STATE FIRE CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The State Fire Code is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set forth
herein.
§ 92.02 LOTS KEPT FREE FROM FIRE HAZARDS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or suffer rubbish, refuse or
articles of combustible or inflammable nature to accumulate or remain on any
lot or premises.
('76 Code, § 3-2014) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.03 REGULATING OUTDOOR BURNING.
   (A)   The only material allowed to be burned within limits is vegetation in
its natural state (leaves, brush and other vegetation matter).
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for a person or persons to burn natural
vegetation within the town limits without first obtaining a burn permit from
the North Carolina or U.S. Forestry Service. The burning of said vegetation
shall only be permissible within the dates listed on the permit.
   (C)   All burning will be performed only when the persons have on and
connected to their water systems sufficient garden hose to reach the points of
burning to extinguish the flame in case of high winds arising after burning
starts.
   (D)   Persons who violate this chapter will be subject to a fine pursuant §
10.99 of this code and the cost of dispatching the Fire Department to the scene
of the burning.
(Ord. passed 11-6-78; Am. Ord. 2023-006, passed 10-2-23) Penalty, see §  
10.99
§ 92.04 PLACEMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   The Fire Chief shall consult with the Town Manager and Director of Public
Works on the placement and maintenance of fire hydrants. The maintenance
policies and practices adopted according to this section shall specify a
minimum clear space of at least three feet by three feet around and at least 18
inches from ground level around each fire hydrant. Where a hydrant is placed on
private property, the property owner must keep the area around the hydrant
clear, as listed above. Citizens should take notice that, if for any reason it
becomes necessary for town employees to clear around a hydrant area, that the
town will not be responsible for damage to plantings, structures, or other
objects left within the area required to be kept clear pursuant to this
section.
(Ord. 2019-004, passed 1-7-19; Am. Ord. 2023-006, passed 10-2-23) Penalty, see
§
10.99
§ 92.05 KNOX BOXES REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A Knox Box key entry system is required in all new construction and
major up-fits for commercial and multi-tenant residential structures containing
automatic sprinkler systems or fire alarm systems.
   (B)   An authorization order form can be obtained from the Fire Department
or the applicant can go online to: www.knoxbox.com to place their order for an
approved Knox Box.
   (C)   The owner and/or tenant of the building is responsible for ensuring
that all required and current entry keys for that business are in the Knox Box
at all times.
(Ord. 2023-001, passed 1-3-23)
CHAPTER 93: GENERAL HEALTH REGULATIONS
Section
   
93.01   Unlawful to violate county health regulations
   
93.02   Unlawful to interfere with health officer
   
93.03   Burial regulated
§ 93.01 UNLAWFUL TO VIOLATE COUNTY HEALTH REGULATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any
lawfully adopted rule or regulation of the County Board of Health. The
enforcement of this subchapter shall be under the supervision of the County
Health Officer.
('76 Code, § 8-5001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.02 UNLAWFUL TO INTERFERE WITH HEALTH OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct or delay the Health
Officer or any of his assistants in the lawful discharge of their duties.
('76 Code, § 8-5002) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.03 BURIAL REGULATED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to bury any human being on any lot or
premises within the corporate limits except within an approved cemetery and in
accordance with all applicable laws and regulations.
('76 Code, § 8-5005) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 94: NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
94.01   Creation of public nuisances unlawful
   
94.02   Public nuisances enumerated
   
94.03   Notice and order to abate nuisance
   
94.04   Appeal
   
94.05   Abatement of nuisances by town
   
94.06   Charges for abatement by town; lien
   
94.07   Chronic violators
Noise
   
94.15   Designation of subchapter
   
94.16   Noises prohibited
   
94.17   Exceptions
   
94.18   Maximum permitted sound level
   
94.19   Permits to exceed limits
   
94.20   Complaint and investigation
 
   
94.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 94.01 CREATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCES UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, or occupant of any
property to create, maintain, permit or fail to abate any public nuisance as
defined in this chapter on such property.
   (B)   Every owner, lessee, or occupant of any property within the town shall
keep such property clean and clear of the nuisances enumerated in this chapter,
including without limitation all weeds, and any wild growth thereon, including
grass over ten inches in height. Every owner, lessee, or occupant shall also
keep such property free and clear of all filth, open wells or containers, and
all refuse materials of every kind and description.
   (C)   The obligations set forth in this chapter shall extend to the area
between the property line of a lot and curb-line or edge of the roadway.
(Ord. passed 3-4-13)
§ 94.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES ENUMERATED.
   (A)   The existence of any of the following conditions on any parcel of land
within the corporate limits of the town, whether on public or private property
and whether such property is improved or unimproved, is hereby declared to be
dangerous and prejudicial to the public health and/or safety, and to constitute
a public nuisance.
      (1)   The uncontrolled growth of weeds or grass to a height of ten inches
or more within 100 feet of any principal structure or public right-of-way.
      (2)   Any accumulation of animal or vegetable matter that is offensive by
virtue of odors or vapors or which is inhabited by rats, mice, snakes or vermin
of any kind, which is or may be prejudicial to the public health.
      (3)   Any accumulation of trash garbage, or other waste not in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
      (4)   Any accumulation of hazardous refuse or concentration of
combustible items such as mattresses, carpet, boxes, paper, automobile tires,
old clothes, or any other combustible materials or objects of like nature.
      (5)   Open wells.
      (6)   Any accumulation of stagnant water causing or threatening to cause
the inhabitation thereof by mosquitos.
      (7)   The open storage of any item detrimental to the public health or
safety, including but not limited to any furniture, appliance, refrigerator,
freezer, stove, automobile tire(s), glass, building materials, or building
rubbish.
      (8)   Any condition detrimental to the public health which violates the
rules and regulations of the County Health Department.
      (9)   The presence of any debris from the demolition of any structure on
the property, including but not limited to partially demolished walls,
foundations, basements, building materials and rubbish, after the cessation of
all active demolition activity on the property.
   (B)   When any of the following conditions exist on a public right-of-way
between the property line and the curb or edge of the roadway and threatens,
limits, impairs or creates a hazard to the use of the right-of-way by vehicles
or pedestrians, such condition is declared to be dangerous and prejudicial to
the public health and safety and to constitute a severe nuisance:
      (1)   Any accumulation of animal or organic matter that is offensive by
virtue of odors or vapors or which is inhabited by rats, mice, snakes or vermin
of any kind, which is or may be prejudicial to the public health.
      (2)   Any accumulation of trash, garbage or other waste not in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   Any accumulation of hazardous refuse or concentration of
combustible items such as mattresses, carpet, boxes, paper, house-wares, tires,
clothes or furniture.
      (4)    Any accumulation of appliances, glass, building materials,
demolition materials or rubbish.
   (C)   The deposition or accumulation of any grass clippings or other yard
waste, gravel, dirt, sediment or other inorganic debris upon public streets and
sidewalks is declared to be a public nuisance. No person or property owner
shall allow such debris to be washed or blown into a public street or sidewalk,
nor shall any such debris be allowed to remain on any public street or
sidewalk.
(Ord. passed 3-4-13; Am. Ord. 2025-008, passed 7-7-25)
§ 94.03 NOTICE AND ORDER TO ABATE NUISANCE.
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, the respondent is the person in
possession of the property where a public nuisance, as described in §
94.02, is located, as well as the owner of such property, if different from the
former.
   (B)   Upon determination by the town's Land Use Administrator that there
exists on any property conditions constituting a public nuisance, as described
in §
94.02, the Land Use Administrator shall notify the respondent by certified and
first class mail of such conditions and shall order the abatement thereof
within 15 days of the date of such notice. If, after due diligence, the
respondent's correct address cannot be determined, then the required notice
shall be hand delivered by a designated representative of the town or shall be
posted conspicuously on the offending property. The notice shall order the
abatement of the nuisance within 15 days of the delivery or posting of the
notice.
   (C)   Upon determination by the Land Use Administrator that there exists on
the public right-of-way conditions constituting a severe nuisance, the
inspector shall notify the owner of the property abutting the right-of-way of
such conditions and shall order the abatement thereof within 24 hours of such
notice. This notice shall, if feasible, be given by telephone. Whether or not
the owner is reached by telephone, notice shall be mailed by first class mail
to the owner's last known address unless the landowner or the landowner's agent
receive this notice in writing by personal delivery.
(Ord. passed 3-4-13)
§ 94.04 APPEAL.
   (A)   At any time before the expiration of the 15 day abatement period
described in §
94.03, the respondent may request a hearing before the Town Manager to appeal
the finding of the Land Use Administrator that a public nuisance as defined in
this chapter exists on the premises. Upon completion of the hearing, the Town
Manager shall consider the evidence before him or her and shall, within seven
days, either revoke the initial order, issue a final order which differs from
the initial order, or reinstate the initial order as a final abatement order.
   (B)   If the town has caused the abatement of a severe nuisance as defined
in §
94.02(B), at any time within 30 days of the owner's receipt of a statement of
charges from the town for the removal of the conditions, the property owner may
request a hearing before the Town Manager to appeal the charges and the finding
of the Land Use Administrator that a severe nuisance existed on the premises
right-of-way. Upon completion of the hearing, the Town Manager shall consider
the evidence before him or her and shall, within seven days, either uphold,
modify or revoke the charges resulting from the abatement by the town.
   (C)   Any request for a hearing pursuant to this section must be in writing
and must be filed in the office of the Town Manager. The Town Manager shall fix
a time for the hearing, and the initial abatement order or the accrual of
interest on the statement of charges shall be temporarily suspended pending
such hearing. The hearing must be held by the Town Manager within 31 calendar
days following the receipt of the request for a hearing by the office of the
Town Manager. At the hearing, the individual affected by the order shall be
given the opportunity to present evidence to refute the findings that supported
the abatement order or the removal of the nuisance condition.
(Ord. passed 3-4-13)
§ 94.05 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES BY TOWN.
   Upon the occurrence of any of the following conditions, the Land Use
Administrator shall cause such condition to be removed or otherwise remedied by
having employees of the town go upon such premises and remove or otherwise
abate such nuisance under the supervision of an officer or employee designated
by the Land Use Administrator:
   (A)   A hearing requested under §
94.04 results in either a final order with modifications or the reinstatement
of the initial order as a final order, and such order is not complied with
within 15 days from adjournment of the hearing.
   (B)   No hearing is requested or held, and the respondent having been
ordered to abate such public nuisance fails, neglects or refuses to abate or
remove the condition constituting the nuisance within 15 days of such order.
   (C)   The property owner fails to abate conditions constituting a severe
nuisance within ten days of notification of the owner of such conditions.
(Ord. passed 3-4-13)
§ 94.06 CHARGES FOR ABATEMENT BY TOWN; LIEN.
   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-193, the actual cost incurred by the town in
removing or otherwise remedying a public nuisance pursuant to §
94.05 shall be charged to the owner of the offending property and shall be a
lien upon the land or premises where the public nuisance existed and shall be
collected as unpaid taxes.
   (B)   If charges for the removal or abatement of a public nuisance are not
paid within 30 days after the receipt of a statement of charges from the town,
such charges shall bear interest at the rate of 8% per annum until paid.
(Ord. passed 3-4-13)
§ 94.07 CHRONIC VIOLATORS.
   A chronic violator is a person who owns property within the town whereupon,
in the previous calendar year, the town gave notice of violation at least three
times under any provision of this chapter. The town may notify any chronic
violator that, if the chronic violator’s property is found to be in violation
of this chapter, the town shall without further notice in the calendar year in
which the notice is given, take action to remedy the violation, and the expense
of the action shall become a lien upon the property and shall be collected as
unpaid taxes.
(Ord. passed 7-7-14)
NOISE
§ 94.15 DESIGNATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   This subchapter shall be known as the "Noise Control Ordinance for the Town
of Franklin."
(Ord. 2017-015, passed 1-2-18)
§ 94.16 NOISES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   General prohibitions. It shall be unlawful to create, cause or allow
the continuance of any unreasonably loud, disturbing, or frightening noise,
particularly during the nighttime, which substantially interferes with
neighboring residents' reasonable use and enjoyment of their properties. For
purposes of this subchapter, NIGHTTIME is defined as the time between 11:00
p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
   (B)   Specific prohibitions. The following acts are prohibited and shall be
considered nuisance acts:
      (1)   Horns and signaling devices. The intentional sounding of any horn
or signaling device of a motor vehicle on any street or public place
continuously or intermittently, except as a danger or emergency warning.
      (2)   Motor vehicles. Operating or permitting the operation of any motor
vehicle or motorcycle not equipped with a muffler or other device in good
working order so as to effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
      (3)   Exterior loudspeakers. Operating or permitting the operation of any
mechanical device or loudspeaker, without a permit to do so, in a fixed or
moveable position exterior to any building, or mounted on any aircraft or motor
vehicle in such a manner that the sound therefrom is in excess of the maximum
permitted sound level as defined in §
94.18.
      (4)   Power equipment. Operating or permitting the operation of any power
saw, sander, drill, grinder, leaf blower, lawn mower, or other garden
equipment, or tools of a similar nature, outdoors during nighttime.
      (5)   Explosives. The use or firing of explosives, firearms, fireworks or
similar devices which create impulsive sound.
      (6)   Security alarms. The sounding of a security alarm, for more than 20
minutes after being notified by law enforcement personnel that the alarm has
been activated.
      (7)   Dogs and other animals. Allowing one or more dogs or other animals
to bark or make disturbing noises continuously or intermittently for more than
30 minutes.
      (8)   Motor vehicle speakers or speakers located in or on a motor
vehicle. Operating or permitting the operation of any speaker or sound in or on
a motor vehicle in such a manner that the sound therefrom is in excess of the
maximum permitted sound level as defined in §
94.18.
      (9)   Musical instruments or sound amplification equipment. The playing
of any musical instrument or electronic sound amplification equipment outdoors
or from a motor vehicle during the nighttime that can be heard from an
adjoining property or at a distance of greater than 20 feet from the source of
the sound. This prohibition shall also apply to sounds produced and/or
amplified by equipment located indoors, in the event that the sound propagates
to the outside through the building so as to be heard as provided in this
division.
(Ord. 2017-015, passed 1-2-18)
§ 94.17 EXCEPTIONS.
   The following are exempt from the provisions of this subchapter:
   (A)   Sound emanating from regularly scheduled outdoor athletic events on
the campus of schools within the town's corporate limits.
   (B)   Construction operations from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. weekdays and 8:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on weekends for which building permits have been issued, or
construction operations at any time for projects not requiring permits due to
ownership of the project by an agency of the government, or any applicable
exemption from permitting requirements. Provided, however, that all equipment
used in connection with construction operations not requiring a permit shall be
operated in accord with the manufacturer's mufflers and noise-reducing
requirement is in use and in proper operating condition.
   (C)   Noises of safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure relief
values, and all church bells.
   (D)   Noise resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle when responding
to any emergency call or acting in time of emergency.
   (E)   Any other noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration
permitted by law, and for which a license or permit shall be according to the
conditions and limits stated on the permit and contained above.
   (F)   Unamplified and amplified sound at festivals and parades permitted
pursuant to
Chapter 95 of this code.
   (G)   Parades and demonstrations exempted from permitting requirements
pursuant to
Chapter 95 of this code, including funeral processions, any governmental agency
acting within the scope of its functions, and students going to or from school
classes or participating in educational or recreational activity where the
activity is under the supervision and direction of proper school authorities.
   (H)   All noises coming from the normal operations of properly equipped
aircraft (not including scale model aircraft).
   (I)   All noises coming from the normal operation of motor vehicles properly
equipped with the manufacturer's standard mufflers and in good working order.
   (J)   Noise from lawful fireworks and noisemakers on holidays and at
religious ceremonies.
   (K)   Lawnmowers, agricultural equipment, and landscape maintenance
equipment used between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. when operated with
all the manufacturer's standard mufflers and noise-regulating equipment in use
and proper operating condition.
   (L)   Musical accompaniment or firearm discharge related to military
ceremonies.
   (M)   Sound amplification equipment used in conjunction with
telecommunications systems on business properties to notify employees of
incoming phone calls, providing that the system may be used only between the
hours 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., and that any speakers attached to the system
shall be oriented toward the interior of the property.
   (N)   Emergency work necessary to respite property to a safe condition
following a fire, accident, or natural disaster, or to restore public
utilities, or to protect persons or property from imminent danger.
   (O)   Noises resulting from the provision of government services.
   (P)   Noises resulting from the provision of utility or sanitation services
between the hours 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(Ord. 2017-015, passed 1-2-18)
§ 94.18 MAXIMUM PERMITTED SOUND LEVEL.
   In addition to the requirements of §
94.17 above, and except as otherwise provided herein or in conjunction with
special events permits, it shall be unlawful for any person or group of
persons, regardless of number, to willfully make, continue or cause to be made
or continue any loud, raucous, and disturbing noise. For purposes of this
subchapter, LOUD, RAUCOUS, AND DISTURBING NOISE shall mean any sound which,
because of its volume level, duration, and character, annoys, disturbs, injures
or endangers the comfort, health, peace, or safety of  reasonable persons of
ordinary sensibilities within the corporate limits of the town. The prohibition
set forth in this section shall be limited to such loud, raucous, and
disturbing noises as are heard upon the public streets, in any public park, in
any school or public building or upon the grounds thereof while in use, in any
church or hospital or upon the grounds thereof while in use, upon any parking
lot open to members of the public as invitees or licensees, or in any occupied
residential unit which is not the source of the noise, or upon the grounds
thereof.
(Ord. 2017-015, passed 1-2-18)
§ 94.19 PERMITS TO EXCEED LIMITS.
   (A)   A person or group of persons may produce or cause to be produced sound
in excess of the levels authorized in §
94.18, only if a permit to exceed the limit for the time and place of the
activity has been obtained.
   (B)   Any person or group of persons desiring a permit shall apply as
provided herein, and shall provide all the information required. All
applications shall be submitted to the Chief of Police or his designee at least
five business days prior to the scheduled event. Failure to comply with this
requirement shall be grounds for denying the permit.
   (C)   The Chief of Police or his designee shall have authority to take final
action on all applications for permits specified in this subchapter. In
considering acting to approve or deny issuance of permits, the Chief of Police
or his designee shall consider, but shall not limit consideration to the
following: the timeliness of the application; the nature of the requested
activity; previous experience with the applicant; the nature of the event;
other activities in the vicinity of the location proposed; the frequency of the
application; the cultural or social benefit of the proposed activity; the
effect of the activity on the residential areas of the town; previous
violations of the requirements of this subchapter, if any, by the applicant.
   (D)   Permits to exceed limits shall specify the duration for which
noncompliance shall be permitted and may prescribe the conditions or
requirements necessary to minimize adverse effects upon the community or
surrounding neighborhood. The Chief of Police or his designee may require,
without limitation, the following:
      (1)   That no sound speakers shall be set up more than ten feet above the
ground;
      (2)   That the permit holders change the arrangement of loudspeakers or
sound instruments so as to minimize the disturbance to others resulting from
the position or orientation of the speakers or from atmospherically or
geographically caused dispersal of sound beyond the property lines.
   (E)   Permit holders shall agree to cooperate with the Police Department in
enforcing these noise control regulations by having signers of the permit
available at the site of the event during the entire time for which as permit
has been issued and capable of assisting the police in enforcing the noise
control ordinance. Failure of the permittee or designees to be present or to
assist the police in compliance with this subchapter will result in revocation
of the permit.
(Ord. 2017-015, passed 1-2-18)
§ 94.20 COMPLAINT AND INVESTIGATION.
   It is the intent of the Town Council that violations of this subchapter
should be investigated and administered by the Police Department in response to
citizen complaints. Notwithstanding this intent, this section shall not be
interpreted as prohibiting enforcement by the Police Chief or any Police
Officer upon finding a violation of this subchapter in the course of official
duties. In any event, the Police Chief or Police Officer enforcing this
subchapter shall investigate any alleged violation in person, so as to enable
the officer to personally attest to the violation.
(Ord. 2017-015, passed 1-2-18)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of any provision of §§
94.15 through
94.20 shall be grounds for immediate revocation of any permit issued pursuant
to §
94.19. In addition, a person violating any provision of §§
94.15 through
94.20 may be charged with either a civil fine or with a criminal misdemeanor.
   (A)   In the event the person is charged with a civil fine, the general
penalty set forth in §
10.99 of this code shall apply, including as provided therein a warning
citation, and monetary fines for the first citation increasing with each
additional citation within a period of 365 days. Provided, however, that any
person issued a warning citation shall immediately cease violation of §§
94.15 through
94.20.
   (B)   A criminal misdemeanor may be charged for violations of this chapter,
pursuant to G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. 2017-015, passed 1-2-18)
CHAPTER 95: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
95.01   Littering prohibited
   
95.02   Littering from vehicles
   
95.03   Tree trimmings, organic yard waste and inorganic materials
   
95.04   Snow and ice removal
   
95.05   Playing ball on streets prohibited
   
95.06   Moving structures upon streets
   
95.07   Use of nails and tacks restricted
   
95.08   Installation of banners and like sign
   
95.09   Mobile food vending within streets and sidewalks permitted
   
95.10   Outdoor seating areas on public sidewalks
Obstructing
   
95.20   Display of goods
   
95.21   Construction near sidewalk
   
95.22   Temporary structures
   
95.23   Private telephones regulated
Excavation and Repair
   
95.35   Permit to dig in streets
   
95.36   Application for permit; fees
   
95.37   Municipal liability
   
95.38   Street repair
   
95.39   Leaving excavations unprotected
   
95.40   Supervision and control
   
95.41   Disposition of fees
Naming and Addressing Streets and Roads
   
95.45   Purpose and intent
   
95.46   Definitions
   
95.47   Administration and application
   
95.48   Display of street and road address numbers
   
95.49   New street and road names
   
95.50   Renaming streets and roads
   
95.51   Numbers for future buildings
   
95.52   Enforcement
Parades and Demonstrations
   
95.55   Definitions
   
95.56   Permit required
   
95.57   Requirements and issuance of permits
   
95.58   Certain activities prohibited
   
95.59   Denial or revocation of permit
   
95.60   Interference prohibited
   
95.61   Additional regulations applicable to picketing
   
95.62   Exceptions
Charitable Solicitations
   
95.75   Permit required
   
95.76   Separate permit for each event or day
   
95.77   Application requirements
   
95.78   Application fee
   
95.79   Proof of liability insurance
   
95.80   Immunity and liability
   
95.81   Revocation of permit; order to cease solicitation
   
95.82   Other solicitations prohibited
Social District
   
95.90   Purpose and intent
   
95.91   Definitions
   
95.92   Application
   
95.93   Requirements for sale of alcoholic beverages
   
95.94   Requirements for possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages
   
95.95   Exceptions
 
   
95.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   For provisions concerning vehicles not to be driven on sidewalks, see §
71.03
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.01 LITTERING PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, organization or private
corporation to throw or deposit upon any street or sidewalk or other public
place, or upon any private property, except with written permission of the
owner or occupant of the private property any trash, refuse, garbage, building
material, cans, bottles, broken glass, paper, or any type of litter. The
penalty for violation of this section upon any street or sidewalk or other
public place is set forth in §
70.99 of this code.
('76 Code, § 6-2011) (Am. Ord. 2017-002, passed 2-6-17) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.02 LITTERING FROM VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person while a driver or a passenger in a
vehicle to throw or deposit litter upon any street or sidewalk or other public
place within the town, or upon private property. The penalty for violation of
this section upon any street or sidewalk or other public place is set forth in
§
70.99 of this code.
('76 Code, § 6-2012) (Am. Ord. 2017-002, passed 2-6-17) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.03 TREE TRIMMINGS, ORGANIC YARD WASTE AND INORGANIC MATERIALS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or allow to be placed any tree
trimmings or shrubbery on any street or sidewalk. It shall further be unlawful
for any person to cause or allow the deposition or accumulation of any grass
clippings or other yard waste, gravel, dirt, sediment or other inorganic debris
upon any public street or sidewalk.
('76 Code, § 6-2013) (Am. Ord. 2025-008, passed 7-7-25) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.04 SNOW AND ICE REMOVAL.
   Every occupant of a store building in front of which the sidewalk is paved
with stone, brick, asphalt or cement, shall remove snow, ice or other
obstruction from the sidewalk at the earliest possible time and as soon as the
weather permits.
('76 Code, § 6-2014)
§ 95.05 PLAYING BALL ON STREETS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall play baseball, softball, foot ball, soccer or any other game
of ball, nor shall any person throw or catch a ball on any of the streets of
the town.
('76 Code, § 6-2015) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.06 MOVING STRUCTURES UPON STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to move, or have
moved, any house, building or other structure upon the street, or streets of
the town without first obtaining from the town a permit to do so.
('76 Code, § 6-2016) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.07 USE OF NAILS AND TACKS RESTRICTED.
   It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to drive any nails or tacks in
the telephone, telegraph or electric light poles, or in any house or store
situated on any sidewalk or street of the town except with the permission of
the owner first had and obtained.
('76 Code, § 6-2017) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.08 INSTALLATION OF BANNERS AND LIKE SIGNS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to place, construct or install a banner or sign
over a street or a roadway in the town except as permitted pursuant to §
155.16 of the Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   No banner or sign, placed over the streets or roadways of the town
shall be anchored or either side of the street to an electric power pole,
except that such a banner or sign may be erected over the streets and roadways
of the town to power poles, when such sign or banner is installed by employees
of Nantahala Power and Light Company and/or Duke Power Company or is installed
with permission of the Nantahala Power and Light Company and/or Duke Power
Company and under the supervision of employees of Nantahala Power and Light
Company and/or Duke Power Company.
(Ord. passed 10-5-92; Am. Ord. passed 5-6-13; Am. Ord. passed 6-1-15)
§ 95.09 MOBILE FOOD VENDING WITHIN STREETS AND SIDEWALKS PERMITTED.
   (A)   Except as permitted within this section, mobile food vending shall be
prohibited upon the streets and sidewalks with the town.
   (B)   During special events in which the Town Council has declared closed
any portion of any street and/or sidewalk for any purpose, mobile food vending
shall be permitted during such time of closure within the town’s streets and
sidewalks; provided, however, that mobile food vendors shall obtain a permit to
vend at such special event, and shall comply with all applicable federal,
state, and local laws and regulations pertaining thereto, including but not
limited to the requirements set out in the town’s Unified Development
Ordinance, as amended from time to time.
   (C)   At all other times, mobile food vending shall be prohibited within the
traveled portion of any roadway, within any designated parking space, or upon
any sidewalk within the town. However, mobile food vending upon sidewalks in
the town shall be permitted at times other than during special events if, in
the sold discretion of the town’s Land Use Administrator, the mobile food
vending operation is permitted and intended to be operated in accordance with
the Unified Development Ordinance and will not create an undue burden upon
pedestrian traffic.
   (D)   All mobile food vendors shall operate at a noise level that complies
with the town’s noise ordinance in order to avoid creating a public nuisance,
and in no case shall utilize a generator rated to create a noise level greater
than 60 decibels, and shall maintain said generator such that no noise in
excess of 60 decibels is emitted. Sound absorbing devices may be used to
contain or deflect the noise from external generators.
(Ord. passed 11-2-15; Am. Ord. 2025-002, passed 4-7-25)
§ 95.10 OUTDOOR SEATING AREAS ON PUBLIC SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this section as
written unless context indicates or requires different meaning:
      MEANDERING PATH. When the placement of tables, chairs or other movable
object causes the pedestrian corridor to shift alignment in a horizontal manner
in either direction or otherwise substantially impedes continuous unobstructed
pedestrian travel.
      MEDALLION. A disc provided by the town that is affixed to the ground that
identifies the limits of the approved outdoor seating area.
      OPERATOR. Any person who owns, operates, or manages a business that uses
or applies to use an outdoor seating area.
      OUTDOOR SEATING AREA. A permitted seating area on a public sidewalk that
is used for seating purposes by a permit holder.
      PERMIT HOLDER. Any person who holds a current permit for an outdoor
seating area.
      PERMITTED BUSINESS. The business that regularly and customarily sells
food or drink and is allowed to use an outdoor seating area as authorized under
this section.
   (B)   Sidewalk use limited; outdoor seating area permit.
      (1)   No business may use a public sidewalk to seat its patrons without
first obtaining a permit for an outdoor seating area issued by the town. No
person shall place tables, chairs, or other seating on a public sidewalk in
conjunction with a business without first obtaining a permit for an outdoor
seating area that is issued by the town.
      (2)   A business that regularly and customarily sells food or drink may
obtain a permit from the town to operate an outdoor seating area on the terms
and conditions set out in this section. The permit shall specify the specific
area to be used for outdoor seating, the furniture to be used within the
outdoor seating area, and the proposed arrangement of the furniture.
      (3)   An outdoor seating area permit authorizes a limited use of the
public sidewalk so long as that private use does not interfere with the public
interest or public use of the sidewalk.
      (4)   The town may temporarily suspend a permit holder's use of an
outdoor seating area for any reason and for any length of time. During periods
of temporary suspension, the permit holder must remove its furnishings from the
outdoor seating area and shall not use the area. Outdoor seating areas may be
prohibited during special events, parades, group demonstrations, or pickets, or
for any other reason deemed appropriate by the town. The town will endeavor to
give permit holders reasonable advance notice before issuing a temporary
suspension, including a suspension related to a special event, parade, group
demonstration or picket.
      (5)   The town will endeavor to give permitted businesses a minimum of 24
hours advanced notice, using information as provided on the permit application
or renewal, of any construction, repair, pressure washing, or other maintenance
activity of the sidewalk to allow for the relocation of outdoor furniture.
   (C)   Sidewalk areas eligible for outdoor seating. An outdoor seating area
shall meet all of the following requirements:
      (1)   The building in which the permitted business operates must share a
common boundary line with a public sidewalk.
      (2)   The outdoor seating area shall not extend beyond the boundaries
fronting the permitted business.
      (3)   The operation of the outdoor seating area must be related to the
sale of food or drink from the permitted business.
      (4)   (a)   The outdoor seating area shall allow a minimum five-foot-wide
unobstructed pedestrian corridor at all times. Wider pedestrian corridors or
increased clearances may be required where warranted by pedestrian traffic or
other circumstances or to comply with the North Carolina Building Code,
Americans with Disabilities Act, or other laws. Furniture in an outdoor seating
area may be located next to the curb (with two feet clearance) and/or adjacent
to the building, so long as clearances are maintained.
         (b)   Where existing obstructions are present (such as fire hydrants,
streetlight poles or other utility structures), the corridor can be measured to
go around these obstructions, provided that the obstruction does not exceed one
foot in diameter. For tree grates, the outdoor seating area must be located at
least two feet from the outside edge of the tree grate, measured from the outer
edge of the grate.
         (c)   Pursuant to G.S. § 136-27.4, any tables, chairs, or other
furnishings of an outdoor seating area located within the right-of-way of any
component of the state highway system must be placed at lease six feet from any
travel lane. The maximum posted speed limited on the roadway adjacent to such a
right-of-way is 45 miles per hour. The operator shall enter into an agreement
with the town and NCDOT, as required by law.
      (5)   Outdoor seating areas must be positioned to allow a pedestrian path
to continue parallel to the street without causing a meandering path.
      (6)   Where curbside abuts on-street parking, curbside tables shall be
placed parallel to the street. A minimum two foot setback should be maintained
from the curb edge.
      (7)   A minimum clearance of five feet must be maintained between the
outdoor seating area and edge of driveways, alleys, and handicapped ramps. A
minimum clearance of two feet shall be maintained between the outdoor seating
area and any edge of a tree grate.
      (8)   Outdoor seating area at corners must not extend to within sight
triangles at street intersections or driveway entrances.
      (9)   Clear unobstructed height of seven feet must be maintained between
the sidewalk surface and overhead objects including umbrellas.
      (10)   The outdoor seating area must not block access to public amenities
like street furniture, trash receptacles, and way finding or directional signs.
      (11)   The occupancy of an outdoor seating area shall not exceed the
Maximum Floor Area Allowances pursuant to Table 1004.1.1 in the North Carolina
Building Code.
      (12)   Above-ground town public utilities infrastructure or
transportation infrastructure shall not be enclosed without written
authorization of the town.
      (13)   Furniture must be portable and made of commercial grade material
meant for outdoor use. The furniture located within the outdoor seating area
may not exceed a dimension of 42 inches tall, 42 inches wide and 42 inches in
depth. The permit holder shall keep the furniture clean, well maintained and
kept in good repair. No plastic, or unfinished or pressure treated wood
furniture is permitted. Furniture shall not be stacked within the outdoor
seating area or against the building facade.
      (14)   Umbrellas are not allowed on tables located within ten feet of
block corners. In other locations, there can be no more than two umbrellas per
table.
      (15)   Lighting must not cause glare to pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
      (16)   Lighting must not be affixed to town trees or streetlights without
a permit from the town.
      (17)   Outdoor seating areas must be placed in the following locations:
         (a)   For sidewalks at least 14 feet in width, the outdoor seating
area may be located directly in front of the building facade, at the street
edge, or in both locations.
         (b)   For sidewalks less than 14 feet but greater than ten feet in
width, the outdoor seating area may be located either directly in front of the
building facade or at the street edge.
         (c)   For sidewalks ten feet or less in width, the outdoor seating
area shall be located directly in front of the building facade.
   (D)   Application; permit requirements.
      (1)   A person owning, operating, or managing a business that regularly
and customarily serves food or drinks may apply for an outdoor seating area
permit on a form approved by the town. Applications shall be submitted to and
administered by the Town Planner. At a minimum, the application form shall
require:
         (a)   The name, address, and telephone number of the business desiring
to operate an outdoor seating area;
         (b)   The name, address and telephone number of each of the operators
of the business;
         (c)   The hours of operation of the business and the proposed hours of
operation of the outdoor seating area;
         (d)   A scaled drawing or site plan of architectural design standard
quality (provided, however, that the Town Planner may relax this requirement
and accept hand-drawn drawings and plans) showing of the proposed outdoor
seating area boundary and surrounding streetscape details covering seven feet
on either side of the frontage of the associated business, including but not
limited to property lines, sidewalks, curb lines, lighting, trees (including
tree size), tree grates, planters, street signs, bicycle parking, benches, bus
stops, and fire hydrants. The drawing shall show the section of any public
right of way to be used for the outdoor seating area and the section to be kept
clear for pedestrian use, and depict the proposed materials and placement of
tables, chairs, barriers, and other furnishings on the public right of way; and
         (e)   The furniture to be used in the outdoor seating area and its
proposed arrangement.
      (2)   An applicant shall also provide:
         (a)   An application fee as provided in the Town of Franklin Fee
Schedule to cover the cost of processing and investigating the application and
issuing the permit.
         (b)   Evidence of a valid insurance policy, through an insurance
carrier authorized or eligible to do business in the State of North Carolina
for any damage to the public right of way, and for any damages for which the
town (or NCDOT, if applicable) might incur liability because of property damage
or personal injury arising out of the use of the public right of way for
seating purposes. The minimum liability limit of the policy shall be
$1,000,000. The Town of Franklin (and NCDOT, if applicable) shall be listed as
an “additional insured as its interests may appear” on all certificates of
insurance;
         (c)   An indemnity agreement, approved by the Town Attorney, whereby
the permit holder and the permitted business agree to indemnify and hold
harmless the town and its officers, agents, and employees (as well as NCDOT,
its officers, agents, and employees, if applicable) from any claim arising or
resulting from the operation of the outdoor seating area;
         (d)   A copy of all permits and licenses issued by the state, county
or town that are necessary for the operation of the business, including health
permits, ABC permits and business licenses, if no permit has been issued, the
applicant shall provide a copy of the application submitted.
      (3)   No permit shall be issued until the applicant has submitted a
completed application and all items required by this section.
   (E)   Permit renewals.
      (1)   A permit issued under this section shall be valid from the date of
issuance and shall expire on June 30. Permits must be renewed annually by the
applicant. Applications for renewal must be submitted on or before May 31. If a
renewal application is not submitted by this date, a submittal shall be
considered a new permit application.
      (2)   The permit renewal process shall consist of re-submission of the
following:
         (a)   Application form;
         (b)   Certificate of insurance;
         (c)   Indemnity agreement;
         (d)   A copy of all permits and licenses issued by the state, county
or town that are necessary for the operation of the business, including health
permits, ABC permits and business licenses. If no permit has been issued, the
applicant shall provide a copy of the application submitted; and
         (e)   Permit fee.
      (3)   No scaled drawing shall be required for a permit renewal unless the
permit holder has rearranged or reconfigured the tables, chairs, or other
furnishings used for outdoor seating purposes or otherwise revised the outdoor
seating area from the previous permit year.
   (F)   Denial of application; reconsideration.
      (1)   The Town Planner shall notify the applicant in writing if it is
determined that the proposed outdoor seating area does not meet the criteria
established by this section. The notice shall identify which criteria were not
met.
      (2)   Within 30 days of denial, the applicant may submit for
reconsideration one revised plan for an outdoor seating area for the same
business. The payment of a new application fee is not required.
      (3)   A revised plan that is submitted for reconsideration after the 30
day period has expired must be accompanied by a new application, including the
application fee.
   (G)   Operation of outdoor seating areas.
      (1)   An outdoor seating area may be used only by the permitted business
identified in the permit and only for the seating of patrons in the furniture
provided by the permit holder.
      (2)   The limits of the outdoor seating area must be delineated by
medallions prior to usage of the outdoor seating area. The medallions must
continually remain in place while an approved outdoor seating permit is active.
If a medallion is removed for any reason, the permit holder shall notify the
town to have a replacement installed.
      (3)   A permit holder may place one host station, removable tables,
chairs, or other items used in conjunction with seating within an outdoor
seating area in the arrangement shown on the permit. No cash registers, tents,
minibars or similar appurtenances shall be permitted. Furniture in an outdoor
seating area shall be kept clean and in good repair.
      (4)   A permit holder may rearrange or reconfigure approved tables,
chairs, and other furnishings in the permitted outdoor seating area without
submitting a new application and without any fee only if:
         (a)   No prior rearrangement or reconfiguration had been submitted
within the permit year.
         (b)   The permit holder within seven days of the reconfiguration
provides the Town Planner with a scaled drawing or site plan as described in
division (D)(1)(d) of this section of the new placement; and
         (c)   The furnishings or their new placement do not:
            1.   Extend outside of the approved area;
            2.   Constitute a danger to the health or safety of a patron or the
public; or
            3.   Otherwise violate the terms of the permit.
         (d)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the permit holder may temporarily
rearrange the tables and chairs to accommodate larger groups of patrons
provided all of the requirements of this ordinance are met.
      (5)   Outdoor seating areas shall be open to the air, except that seating
may be located under approved umbrellas, awnings, or canopies.
      (6)   A permit holder must provide stanchions to delineate the outdoor
seating area during all special events or as otherwise required by the town, or
as otherwise required by applicable law or regulation.
      (7)   Stanchions, planters, pots or other portable, visible above ground
barrier may be utilized to delineate the outdoor seating area at the discretion
of the permit holder.
      (8)   If stanchions are utilized or otherwise required, they shall be
made for commercial use; shall be movable, durable and weather resistant; shall
be compliant with the standards set forth in the Americans with Disabilities
Act of 1990 (as amended); shall be at least 18 inches above the sidewalk and no
taller than 42 inches above the sidewalk.
      (9)   Except for the required medallions, nothing shall be permanently
affixed to a sidewalk or to other public property.
      (10)   The permit holder and the permitted business shall not operate
outside the area specified in the permit.
      (11)   Permit holders and operators shall keep all licenses and permits
required for their business operations continuously in effect.
      (12)   Permit holders and operators shall ensure that the permitted
business obeys all laws related to alcohol service and consumption. To retain
an outdoor seating area permit, permit holders and operators shall ensure that
no alcohol is served or consumed outside the permitted outdoor seating area.
      (13)   An outdoor seating area may be used by the permit holder only when
the permitted business is open to customers.
      (14)   No outdoor seating area shall operate after 12:00 a.m. on any day
of the week. Permit holders shall ensure that their outdoor seating areas are
not available for use after the hours specified in this section.
      (15)   The maximum occupancy permitted in the outdoor seating area shall
be posted either on the inside of a window that faces the public street
adjacent to the outdoor seating area or within a weather resistant frame on the
exterior of the building in a conspicuous place. The permit holder shall ensure
that the number of occupants in the outdoor seating area does not exceed the
posted limit at any time. A server or other person employed by the permit
holder who briefly enters and exits an outdoor seating area shall not be
considered an occupant for the purposes of this subsection.
      (16)   If the permit holder chooses to display signage that notifies
patrons of the physical limits of the outdoor seating area for the purpose of
clarifying the allowable area for consuming alcohol served by the permit
holder, this signage shall either be placed on the menu or posted on the table
top and shall not exceed one square foot in size.
      (17)   The permit holder shall keep the outdoor seating area and the
adjacent seven feet of public space surrounding it clean of any solid waste,
including, food debris, paper, cups, bottles, cans, and other garbage
associated with the operation of the outdoor seating area space on a daily
basis. The public right of way within and adjacent to the outdoor seating area
must be washed down with water and detergent when needed and cleaned on a daily
basis. Any stains from spills must be removed. The permit holder must properly
dispose of all waste and trash.
      (18)   The permit holder is responsible for timely removal of snow and
ice from the outdoor seating area. No ice-melt should drain into tree pits.
      (19)   The permit holder is responsible for the maintenance, upkeep,
cleanliness and security of furniture and accessories used in the outdoor
seating area.
   (H)   Additional requirements for N.C. DOT streets. In addition to the
requirements set out in this section, when an outdoor seating area is located
on a sidewalk along an N.C. Department of Transportation street or highway,
applicants and permit holders shall meet all requirements established by the
N.C. Department of Transportation.
   (I)   Assignment prohibited; effect of ceasing business operations.
      (1)   An outdoor seating area permit is not transferrable or assignable.
The permit authorizes use of the outdoor seating area by the permit holder for
the permitted business. Any change in the ownership of a business after the
issuance of an outdoor seating area permit shall cause the permit to be
immediately invalid and require the new owner to reapply for the permit. A
change in ownership shall mean acquisition of more than 10% of the stock in a
publicly traded corporation, any change in the ownership of shares in a
privately held corporation, sale of all or part of a sole proprietorship, or
any change in the membership of any form of limited liability organization.
      (2)   Outdoor seating area permit holders shall notify the town when
business operations cease. If business operations cease at the business for 30
calendar days or longer, the outdoor seating area permit shall automatically
terminate.
   (J)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Civil penalties. 
         (a)   Violations of any of the provisions of this section will result
in the following civil penalties:
            1.   First offense in any 12-month period: $100.
            2.   Subsequent offense in any 12-month period: $500.
         (b)   The Town Manager or the Manager's designee may issue a notice of
violation assessing civil penalties. The notice shall be issued in writing and
shall set forth with reasonable specificity the basis for the civil penalty.
The notice of violation shall be served by registered or certified mail, or by
personal service. When service is made by registered or certified mail, a copy
of the notice may also be sent by first-class mail. Service shall be deemed
sufficient if the first-class mail is not returned by the post office within
ten days after the mailing. Refusal to accept the notice shall not relieve the
violator of the obligation to pay the penalty.
         (c)   The notice of violation shall contain a time period by which the
violation must be corrected. From and after the date specified in the notice,
each subsequent day that the violation continues in existence shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense subject to additional civil penalties.
         (d)   If a person fails to pay any civil penalty within 30 days after
the decision becomes final, the town may recover the penalty, together with all
costs allowed by law, by filing a civil action in the General Court of Justice
in the nature of a suit to collect a debt.
      (2)   Administrative fee. Any person who violates this article shall pay
an administrative fee of $100 per violation.
      (3)   Permit suspension. If a person violates any provision contained in
this section twice in any twelvemonth period, any outdoor seating area permit
issued to or on behalf of that person shall be suspended for 30 days. If a
person violates any provision contained in this section three or more times in
any 12-month period, any outdoor seating area permit issued to or on behalf of
that person shall be suspended for 12 months.
      (4)   Other remedies. In addition to civil penalties and permit
suspension, a violation of this division may also be enforced through
injunctive or other equitable relief, or a combination of remedies
      (5)   Appeals.
         (a)   A party aggrieved may appeal any decision under this section to
the Town Manager within 15 calendar days after the contested decision. An
appeal must be made in writing and shall contain the reasons supporting the
appeal and any evidence that supports it. The person appealing may review the
evidence that is the basis of any suspension or violation during the town's
normal business hours. The Town Manager or his designee shall review the
information provided and shall issue a written decision determining whether a
violation has occurred.
         (b)   After receiving a determination from the Town Manager or his
designee, a party aggrieved may appeal to the Town Council within 21 calendar
days after the Town Manager's decision (or the decision of his designee) was
mailed. The scope of the Town Council's review shall be limited to verifying
the facts supporting a written decision or findings of fact made on a
suspension. If the Town Council finds that the facts as found are correct, the
civil penalty, administrative fee, or suspension shall not be disturbed.
(Ord. 2020-002, passed 4-13-2020)
OBSTRUCTING
§ 95.20 DISPLAY OF GOODS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, or corporation to
obstruct any sidewalk or street, or any part thereof, within the corporate
limits of the town by placing thereon any advertising device, weighing device,
goods offered for sale or any other object that will in any way obstruct the
free use to the public of the sidewalk or street or part thereof.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to persons who have secured a permit from
the Building Inspector to build or repair any building adjacent to any sidewalk
or street; provided that the person or corporation holding the permit shall at
all times keep the obstructed portion of the sidewalk or street fenced so that
the same cannot be used by the public, and at night time shall keep sufficient
warning lights displayed at the obstruction.
('76 Code, § 6-2001) (Ord. passed 7-7-42) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.21 CONSTRUCTION NEAR SIDEWALK.
   Before building or remodeling at any place where the same is in close
proximity to the sidewalk, a passageway shall be constructed so as to leave the
sidewalk unobstructed and provide safe and easy passage.
('76 Code, § 6-2002)
§ 95.22 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.
   No person, firm or corporation shall maintain any tent, booth, telephone or
temporary structure of any sort whatsoever on any of the streets, squares,
alleys or other public places in the town without the express permission in
writing of the town, which permission shall be signed by the Manager and
countersigned by the Chief of Police, and no permission shall be granted except
for a temporary and special purpose. Each day or part of day that the tent,
booth, telephone or other structure shall be maintained shall constitute a new,
separate and distinct offense within the contemplation hereof.
('76 Code, § 6-2003) (Ord. passed 9-3-24) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.23 PRIVATE TELEPHONES REGULATED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or per sons to install on any
property owned by the town a telephone for private use without the written
permission of the town.
   (B)   The purpose of this section is to assure the general public a free use
of the town's streets and sidewalks by eliminating private telephones installed
so as to congest pedestrian traffic on sidewalks or vehicle traffic on streets.
('76 Code, § 8-6006) (Ord. passed 8-7-72) Penalty, see §
95.99
EXCAVATION AND REPAIR
§ 95.35 PERMIT TO DIG IN STREETS.
   No person shall make any excavation or open ing or dig any ditch, trench,
tunnel or hole in, along, across or under any street, sidewalk or other public
place for the purpose of laying or placing therein any pipe, wires, poles or
for any other purposes, unless a written permit therefor has been issued by the
Manager or some other officer of the town vested with authority to grant the
same. Provided, that a permit shall not be required where the work is performed
under a contract with the town but in the event that it becomes necessary to
the work that a sidewalk or street must be wholly or partially obstructed, the
person shall notify the Manager, the Public Works Department and the Police
Department at least two hours before obstructing the sidewalk or street, unless
prevented by sudden emergency.
('76 Code, § 4-1021) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.36 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEES.
   All persons desiring a permit in order to make an opening in any street or
sidewalk, as set forth in §
95.35, shall make written application therefor, which application shall show
the location of the proposed opening, the purpose thereof and the approximate
number of square yards of surface to be cut. The application shall be
accompanied by the fee required by this section. The fee required for making
any opening in any street or sidewalk shall be fixed by the Board and kept on
file in the office of the Clerk.
('76 Code, § 4-1022)
§ 95.37 MUNICIPAL LIABILITY.
   Any person obtaining a permit as provided for in §§
95.35 and
95.36 herein agrees, as a condition of the issuance of the permit to indemnify
and hold harmless the town against any claims or expenses, including attorney's
fees for bodily injury or property damage for accidents or occurrences arising
out of the person's operations, excluding only the liability of the town for
its sole negligence except in connection with general supervision of work
performed by the person.
('76 Code, § 4-1023)
§ 95.38 STREET REPAIR.
   When any part of any street, sidewalk, alley or other public place of the
town shall be torn or dug up for any purpose, the person making the excavation
or opening shall have the duty of refilling the excavation or opening so as to
restore it to essentially the same condition that existed prior to the
excavation or opening and the refilling shall be done in accordance with the
standards and specifications issued by the Director of Public Works, or his
duly authorized representative. Any person, firm or corporation, neglecting,
refusing, or failing to comply with any provisions of this subchapter shall be
guilty of a violation thereof; and where the neglect, refusal or failure is
continued, after notice from the Director of Public Works or his authorized
representative, every day's continuance thereafter shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense.
('76 Code, § 4-1024)
§ 95.39 LEAVING EXCAVATIONS UNPROTECTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who obtains a
permit under the pro visions of this article to do any excavation of any kind
which may create or cause a dangerous condition in or near any street, alley,
sidewalk or public place of the town without placing and maintaining proper
guard rails and signal lights or other warnings at, in or around the same,
sufficient to warn the public of the excavation or work, and to protect all
persons using reasonable care from injuries on account of same.
('76 Code, § 4-1025) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.40 SUPERVISION AND CONTROL.
   All excavations and work in streets, sidewalks, alleys or public places of
the town shall be under the supervision and control of the Director of Public
Works, whose duty it shall be to inspect the same from time to time during the
progress thereof. Upon the completion thereof, he shall make a final inspection
and see that the street, sidewalk or public place is restored to a condition as
good in all respects as before the excavation or work was made or done, and
that all debris, materials, tools and equipment are removed therefrom. Any
person refusing or failing to comply with any provision of this section shall
be guilty of a violation thereof; and where the failure or refusal is continued
after notice from the Director of Public Works, every day's continuance shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
('76 Code, § 4-1026)
§ 95.41 DISPOSITION OF FEES.
   All fees collected under the provisions of this subchapter shall be paid
into the general fund.
('76 Code, § 4-1027)
NAMING AND ADDRESSING STREETS AND ROADS
§ 95.45 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to facilitate the provision of adequate
public safety and emergency response service, and to minimize difficulty in
locating properties and buildings for public service agencies and the general
public. It intends to achieve this purpose by providing a uniform system for
naming streets and roads within the town limits, and for assigning addresses to
all properties and buildings throughout the town. This subchapter is hereby
adopted under the authority and provisions of G.S. 160A.
(Ord. passed 3-4-96)
§ 95.46 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADDRESS PROGRAM ADMINISTRATOR. The town official charged with the
administration of this subchapter, including his authorized representative.
   BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the
shelter of persons, residential or business use. When separated by division
walls from the ground up without openings, each such enclosure may be deemed a
separate building.
   DRIVEWAY. A private way, beginning at the property line of a lot abutting
(and giving access from) a public street, recorded private road easement or
private right-of-way, and leading to a building on that lot.
   PUBLIC STREET. Any road, street, highway, thoroughfare, or other way of
passage within the town limits that has been irrevocably dedicated to the
public or in which the public has acquired rights by prescription, without
regard to whether it is open for travel.
   PRIVATE ROAD. Any one-way or two-way road for ingress and/or egress that
serves two or more properties, but not the general public.
   STREET ADDRESS. The combination of numbers and street or road name assigned
by the town to identify a particular building or lot.
(Ord. passed 3-4-96)
§ 95.47 ADMINISTRATION AND APPLICATION.
   The Address Program Administrator will be responsible for the interpretation
and administration of this subchapter, including:
   (A)   Assigning all numbers for properties and buildings.
   (B)   Compiling a database of addresses for each property and building.
   (C)   Recommending changes in existing addresses when necessary to
facilitate sequential house numbers along a street or road.
   (D)   Designating individual unit addresses within multiple housing units in
conformity with this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 3-4-96)
§ 95.48 DISPLAY OF STREET AND ROAD ADDRESS NUMBERS.
   (A)   Every owner of improved property shall purchase and display official
address numbers that are visible from the street or road on which the property
fronts.
   (B)   The following criteria must be used to properly display the address
number:
      (1)   Individual numbers must be:
         (a)   A minimum of three inches in height for all structures so as to
be seen easily from the street or road.
         (b)   Set on a background of a contrasting color.
         (c)   Plain block numerals, not words.
      (2)   On a corner lot, the address number should face the street or road
named in the address.
      (3)   If a building is more than 75 feet from any street or road, the
address number shall be displayed on a sign attached to a fence, gate, lawn
stake, mailbox, etc., adjacent to the street or road right-of-way.
   (C)   The Address Program Administrator will have the right to authorize and
approve alternate methods of displaying address numbers that meet the intent of
this subchapter, when strict adherence to these standards can not reasonably be
met.
(Ord. passed 3-4-96)
§ 95.49 NEW STREET AND ROAD NAMES.
   (A)   No new public street within the regulatory jurisdiction of the town
shall be named without approval of the Board of Aldermen.
   (B)   No new private road name shall be recognized by this subchapter or
added to town's list of street and road names without prior approval of the
Board of Aldermen.
   (C)   The name of any new street or road, public or private, shall not
duplicate or be similar to any other street or road name already named in
accordance with this subchapter or any subsequent ordinances or amendments
thereto. This division shall not apply to extensions of existing streets or
roads.
   (D)   Developers establishing new public streets or roads shall pay the town
for the actual cost of purchasing and erecting street signs that meet the
town's standards.
   (E)   The names of private roads (including mobile home park roads), which
require naming to facilitate postal delivery and emergency response, shall be
recognized by the town at the request of the citizens who own property adjacent
to the road. Such a road must serve at least three households.
   (F)   While suggestions and requests for certain names may be accepted from
the general public, the sole authority and responsibility for naming streets
and roads within the town limits rests with the Board of Aldermen.
(Ord. passed 3-4-96)
§ 95.50 RENAMING STREETS AND ROADS.
   Property owners who want to have the name of a street or road changed must
submit a petition to the Address Program Administrator for verification. The
Address Program Administrator will make recommendations to the Board of
Aldermen once the following criteria have been met:
   (A)   A $25 fee for each street or road shall accompany any petition
requesting that an existing street or road name be changed.
   (B)   The petition should include: the existing street or road name, the
proposed street or road name, and the signatures of 75% of those persons owning
property adjacent to that street or road.
   (C)   In the event the Board of Aldermen approve the request, the
petitioners shall be required to pay town the costs of purchasing and erecting
new signs. The sole authority for renaming streets and roads within the town
limits rests with the Board of Aldermen.
(Ord. passed 3-4-96)
§ 95.51 NUMBERS FOR FUTURE BUILDINGS.
   All residential and business buildings erected after the adoption of this
subchapter shall be assigned a number prior to the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy by the Building Inspector. Owners shall purchase and display such
number as provided in §
95.48.
(Ord. passed 3-4-96)
§ 95.52 ENFORCEMENT.
   Occupants of buildings that do not comply with this subchapter will be
notified and requested to meet its requirements within 60 days from the date of
notification. If, after 60 days, these requirements have not been met, a
warning notice will be issued. If, within 30 days of receiving a warning notice
(by hand delivery, registered or certified mail), the occupant does not comply
with this subchapter, he or she shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 3-4-96) Penalty, see §
95.99.
PARADES AND DEMONSTRATIONS
§ 95.55 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BLOCK. That portion of any street lying between its intersections with other
streets.
   GROUP DEMONSTRATION. A public display of sentiment for or against a person
or cause, including protesting, among two or more persons.
   PARADE. Any assemblage of two or more persons participating in or operating
any vehicle in any march, ceremony, show, exhibition or procession of any kind
in or upon the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks, or other public
grounds or places.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other
organization, whether formal or informal.
   PICKET LINE. Any two or more persons formed together for the purpose of
making known any position or promotion of the persons, or on behalf of any
organization or class of persons.
   SOCIAL EVENT/FESTIVAL. An outdoor concert, fair, community event, or similar
event that is primarily cultural, commercial and/or recreational in nature.
('76 Code, § 6-2021) (Ord. passed 12-6-76; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 95.56 PERMIT REQUIRED.
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or block any street,
sidewalk, alley, or other public place within the town for a parade, picket
line, or group demonstration unless a permit therefor has been issued by the
town in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Participation in an
illegal parade, picket line, or group demonstration is unlawful. This provision
is not intended to prohibit First Amendment principles of freedom of expression
or freedom of assembly. A permit is not required if the parade, picket line, or
group demonstration is a spontaneous response to unforeseeable and immediate
events or if the parade, picket line, or group demonstration constitutes a
small gathering that poses no threat to the safety, order, and accessibility of
streets and sidewalks.
('76 Code, § 6-2022) (Ord. passed 12-6-76; Am. Ord. passed 1-4-2021)  Penalty,
see §
95.99
§ 95.57 REQUIREMENTS AND ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
    The Chief of Police or his designee is authorized to issue permits as
required in the preceding section, and in the issuance thereof he shall:
   (A)   Require a written application for permit to be filed not less than 48
hours in advance of the parade, picket line, or group demonstration.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the Chief shall consider an application
that is filed less than 48 hours before the commencement of the proposed event
where the purpose of such event is a spontaneous response to an unforeseeable
and immediate event.
   (B)   The application shall be on a form prescribed by the Chief, shall
require the application to be signed by the applicant or applicants, shall
require that the applicant show the proposed time, place, purpose and size of
the parade, picket line or group demonstration and whether any minors below the
age of 18 years shall participate;
   (C)   Specify in the permit whetherminors below the age of 18 years will be
permitted to participate;
   (D)   Require that the application for a permit shall specify and the permit
shall designate the person or persons in charge of the activity. The person
shall be required to accompany the parade, picket line, or group demonstration
and shall carry the permit with him at that time. The permit shall not be valid
in the possession of any other person;
   (E)   The permit may set the starting time, duration, speed of travel, and
space between persons or vehicles in the parade, picket line, or group
demonstration, may prescribe the portions or areas of streets, alleys,
sidewalks, or other public places to be used; and may impose other reasonable
requirements as the Chief may prescribe for the control and free movement of
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or for the health, safety, and property rights
of the participants and the general public.
   (F)   Among other considerations, consider and find as a requisite to
issuance the following:
      (1)   The activity will not require excessive diversion of police from
other necessary duties;
      (2)   The activity will not interfere with the right of property owners
in the area to enjoy peaceful and lawful occupancy and use of their property;
      (3)   The activity can be conducted without unreasonable interference
with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the area, and will not prevent
normal police and fire protection to the public, and will not be likely to
cause injury to persons or property or to provoke disorderly conduct or to
create a public disturbance.
('76 Code, § 6-2023) (Ord. passed 12-6-76; Am. Ord. passed 1-4-2021)
§ 95.58 CERTAIN ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED.
   The following acts or activities, when performed or undertaken in
conjunction with or as a part of, any parade, picket line, or group
demonstration, are hereby prohibited and declared unlawful:
   (A)   The carrying on or about the person any firearm, or any weapon or
article, including but not limited to blackjacks, nightsticks, or flashlights
which by their use might constitute a deadly weapon;
   (B)   The taking or keeping of any dog or other vicious animal, whether
leashed or unleashed.
('76 Code, § 6-2024) (Ord. passed 12-6-76) Penalty, see §
95.99
§ 95.59 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall deny any permit for a parade, picket line,
or group demonstration for any of the following causes:
      (1)   When a permit has already been granted for the same time and place:
      (2)   Abuse of the permitting process, such as providing false
information on an application: or
      (3)   If the applicant's proposed activities would be unlawful, endanger
the health and safety of surrounding persons, significantly inhibit pedestrian
and vehicular traffic, or deprive the municipality of critical services that
could not be supplied through other means.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall revoke any permit granted for a parade,
picket line, or group demonstration for any of the following causes:
      (1)   The violation by any participant of §
95.58 of this chapter;
      (2)   The failure to comply with the terms and conditions of the permit.
('76 Code, § 6-2025) (Ord. passed 12-6-76; Am. Ord. passed 1-4-2021)
§ 95.60 INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall hamper, obstruct, impede, or interfere with any
parade, picket line, or group demonstration being conducted under authority of
a permit duly issued by the Chief of Police.
   (B)   If more than one group of paraders or demonstrators desires to parade
or demonstrate at the same time at or near the same location, law enforcement
officers may, without regard to the purpose or content of the message, assign
each group a place to parade or demonstrate to preserve the public peace.
Members of a group shall not enter an area assigned to another group. Priority
of location shall be based upon which group of paraders or demonstrators
applied for a permit first.
('76 Code, § 6-2026) (Ord. passed 12-6-76; Am. Ord. passed 1-4-2021)  Penalty,
see §
95.99
§ 95.61 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO PICKETING.
    Picket lines and picketing shall be subject to the following additional
regulations:
   (A)   Picketing may be conducted only on the sidewalks reserved for
pedestrian movement, and may not be conducted on the portion of a street used
primarily for vehicular traffic;
   (B)   Not more than ten pickets promoting the same objective shall be
permitted to use either of the two sidewalks within a single block at any one
time;
   (C)   Pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs not exceeding 2
feet in width and 2 feet in length promoting the objective for which the
picketing is done; provided, the words used are not obscene by prevailing
community standards, defamatory in nature, or used to incite violence;
   (D)   Pickets must march in single file and not abreast and must not march
closer together than 15 feet, except in passing one another. Pickets shall not
be allowed to walk more than 5 feet from the curb line and shall be in
continuous motion; and
   (E)   If pickets promoting different objectives desire to use the same
sidewalk for picketing and the use would result in the presence of more than 10
pickets thereon, the Chief of Po lice shall allot time to each group of pickets
for the use of the sidewalk on an equitable basis.
('76 Code, § 6-2027) (Ord. passed 12-6-76; Am. Ord. passed 1-4-2021)
§ 95.62 EXCEPTIONS.
   Sections §§
95.55 -
95.61 shall not apply to:
   (A)   Funeral processions;
   (B)   Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions;
   (C)    Students going to or from school classes or participating in
educational or recreational activity where the activity is under the
supervision and direction of proper school authorities.
   (D)   Social events/festivals, for which organizers shall refer to the Town
Manager for the permission process, up to and including Town Council approval
of street and/or sidewalk closures: or
   (E)   Activities permitted by the County of Macon on property owned or
controlled by the county within town limits, including but not limited to the
area designated by the county as a free speech zone. Organizers of such
activities may he required to demonstrate valid permission from the county.
('76 Code, § 6-2028) (Ord. passed 12-6-76; Am. Ord. passed 1-4-2021)
CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
§ 95.75 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Any person seeking authorization under this chapter to solicit charitable
contributions by standing in, or, or near any town-maintained street or state
roadway within the town’s corporate limits shall first file a written
application with the Police Department, on a form provided by the Chief of
Police or his or her designee. The application shall be filed not later than
seven days before the date the solicitation event is to occur. Provided that
the applicant has complied with every requirements of this chapter, the Chief
of Police or his designee shall issue a permit for the solicitation.
(Ord. passed 1-5-15)
§ 95.76 SEPARATE PERMIT FOR EACH EVENT OR DAY.
   If there are multiple events or one event occurring on more than one day,
each event shall be subject to the application and permit requirements of this
chapter for each day the event is to be held, and shall require separate
payment of the application fee specified in §
95.78 below for each event or each day thereof.
(Ord. passed 1-5-15)
§ 95.77 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   The application shall include:
   (A)   The date and time when the solicitation is to occur;
   (B)   Each location at which the solicitation is to occur; and
   (C)   The number of solicitors to be involved in the solicitation at each
location.
(Ord. passed 1-5-15)
§ 95.78 APPLICATION FEE.
   The applicant must pay a fee of $25 per day per event before any permit may
issue.
(Ord. passed 1-5-15)
§ 95.79 PROOF OF LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   The applicant shall also furnish, at the time of filling the application,
proof of liability insurance in the amount of at least two million dollars
($2,000,000) to cover damages that may arise from the solicitation. The
insurance coverage must provide coverage for claims against any solicitor and
agree to hold the Town of Franklin, its officers, employees and agents,
harmless for any claims arising from or related to the solicitation.
(Ord. passed 1-5-15)
§ 95.80 IMMUNITY AND LIABILITY.
   Pursuant to applicable law, the town does not waive, or limit, any immunity
or create any new liability for the town by enacting this system of permits.
The issuance of a permit under this chapter and the conducting of the
solicitation authorized are not governmental functions of the town.
(Ord. passed 1-5-15)
§ 95.81 REVOCATION OF PERMIT; ORDER TO CEASE SOLICITATION.
   In the event the solicitation event or the solicitors shall create a
nuisance, delay traffic, create threatening or hostile situations, any law
enforcement officer with proper jurisdiction may order the solicitation to
cease. In such event, the permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall
automatically be revoked. In no event shall a refund of any application fee or
fees be issued. Any individual failing to follow a law enforcement officer’s
lawful order to cease solicitation shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 1-5-15)
§ 95.82 OTHER SOLICITATIONS PROHIBITED.
   Except as authorized by this chapter, no person shall stand on any street,
highway, or right-of- way excluding sidewalks while soliciting, or attempting
to solicit, any employment, business, or contributions from the driver or
occupants or any vehicle. However, nothing in this chapter shall be construed
to prohibit engaging in the distribution of newspapers on the non-traveled
portion of any street or highway, except when those distribution activities
impede the normal movement of traffic on the street or highway. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to restrict or prohibit the activities of licensees,
employees, or contractors of the Department of Transportation or of the town
when engaged in construction or maintenance or in making traffic or engineering
surveys.
(Ord. passed 1-5-15)
SOCIAL DISTRICT
§ 95.90 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   (1)   Pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 160A-205.4 et seq., one or
more social districts may be created within the town and the town hereby
creates and designates the following social districts.
      (2)   Downtown Franklin Social District which is designated as shown on a
map dated January 2, 2024; the map is available in the office of the Town
Clerk, and signage and/or markings shall be posted clearly delineating the
boundaries of the social district.
   (B)   The Downtown Franklin Social District shall be created, designated,
and managed in accordance with the requirements contained in G.S. § 160A-205.4
and Chapter 18B.
   (C)   Any person who violates this subchapter, and any person who aids,
abets, encourages, assists in, or contributes to such violation, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2024-001, passed 1-2-24)
§ 95.91 DEFINITIONS.
   NON-PERMITTEE. A person holding no ABC permits issued by the North Carolina
Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission.
   PERMITTEE. A person holding any of the following ABC permits issued by the
North Carolina Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission established under G.S. §
18B-200.
      (1)   An on-premises malt beverage permit issued pursuant to G.S. § 18B-
1001(1).
      (2)   An on-premises unfortified wine permit issued pursuant to G.S. §
18B-1001(3).
      (3)   An on-premises fortified wine permit issued pursuant to G.S. § 18B-
1001(5).
      (4)   A mixed beverages permit issued pursuant to G.S. § 18B-1001(10).
      (5)   A distillery permit issued pursuant to G.S. § 18B-1100(5).
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, other organization or group, or other combination of
individuals acting as a unit.
   PREMISES. A fixed permanent establishment, including all areas inside or
outside the permitted establishment, where the permittee has control through a
lease, deed, or other legal process.
   SOCIAL DISTRICT. A defined outdoor area in which a citizen may consume
alcoholic beverages sold by a permittee. This term does not include the
permittee's licensed premises or an extended area allowed under G.S. § 18B-904
(h).
(Ord. 2024-001, passed 1-2-24)
§ 95.92 APPLICATION.
   (A)   The provisions and terms contained in this subchapter shall be
applicable between the hours of 12:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m., Monday through
Sunday. At all other times, the provisions and terms contained in this
subchapter are not in effect and all provisions of state and local laws
concerning the possession and consumption of alcohol shall be in full force and
effect.
   (B)   Any alcoholic beverage purchased for consumption in a social district
shall (i) only be consumed in that social district and (ii) be disposed of
before the person in possession of the alcoholic beverage exits that social
district unless the person is reentering the licensed premises where the
alcoholic beverage was purchased. A violation of this section is a Class 3
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2024-001, passed 1-2-24)
§ 95.93 REQUIREMENTS FOR SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   A permittee located in or contiguous to a social district may sell alcoholic
beverages for consumption within that social district in which it is located in
or contiguous to in accordance with the following requirements.
   (A)   The permittee shall only sell and serve alcoholic beverages on its
licensed premises.
   (B)   The permittee shall only sell alcoholic beverages for consumption in
the social district in which it is located in a container that meets all of the
following requirements.
      (1)   The container clearly identifies the permittee from which the
alcoholic beverage was purchased.
      (2)   The container clearly displays a logo or some other mark that is
unique to the social district in which it is sold.
      (3)   The container is not comprised of glass.
      (4)   The container displays, in no less than 12-point font, the
statement, “Drink Responsibly-Be 21.”
      (5)   The container shall not hold more than 16 fluid ounces.
   (C)   The permittee shall not allow a person to enter or reenter its
licensed premises with an alcoholic beverage not sold in conjunction with the
social district regulations.
(Ord. 2024-001, passed 1-2-24)
§ 95.94 REQUIREMENTS FOR POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   The possession and consumption of an alcoholic beverage in a social district
is subject to all of the following requirements.
   (A)   Only alcoholic beverages purchased from a permittee located in or
contiguous to the social district may be possessed and consumed in that social
district.
   (B)   Alcoholic beverages shall only be in containers meeting the
requirements set forth in §
95.93.
   (C)   Alcoholic beverages shall only be possessed and consumed during the
days and hours set forth in §
95.92.
   (D)   Nothing in this division shall be construed as authorizing the sale
and delivery of alcoholic beverage drinks in excess of the limitation set forth
in G.S. § 18B-1010.
   (E)   A person shall dispose of any alcoholic beverage in the person's
possession prior to exiting the social district in which the beverage was
purchased unless the person is reentering the licensed premises where the
alcoholic beverage was purchased.
   (F)   A participating non-permittee business is required to always display
the uniform sign during the times when the social district is active as to
whether the business allows for patrons to enter their business with alcohol.
   (G)   All permittee and non-permittee businesses that are part of a social
district and allow customers to bring alcoholic beverages onto their premises
are required to clearly post signage on any exits that do not open to the
social district indicating that alcoholic beverages may not be taken past that
point.
   (H)   During the days and hours when the social district is in effect as set
forth in §
95.92, a non-permittee business that allows customers to bring alcoholic
beverages onto its premises is required to allow law enforcement officers
access to the areas of the premises accessible by customers.
   (I)   A violation of this section is a Class 3 misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2024-001, passed 1-2-24)
§ 95.95 EXCEPTIONS.
   When a social event (as that term is used in this chapter) is held pursuant
to the issuance of an event permit (as that term is used in this chapter) the
terms of the event permit supersede the provisions of this subchapter within
the boundaries of the event including: a.) the prohibition of alcohol within
the event boundaries, even if within the social district or b.) any alcohol
purchased within the boundaries of the event may be taken outside of the event,
only into the boundary of a social district. A violation of this section is a
Class 3 misdemeanor.
(Ord. 2024-001, passed 1-2-24)
§ 95.99 PENALTY.
   Except where a different penalty is specifically provided for within any
section of this chapter, the violation of any provision of this chapter, except
where some other penalty is clearly indicated, shall constitute a Class 3
misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction by a fine not exceeding $50 or
imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, as provided in G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. passed 12-6-76; Am. Ord. passed 1-5-15; Am. Ord. 2017-002, passed 2-6-17)
CHAPTER 96: LITTLE TENNESSEE RIVER GREENWAY
Section
   
96.01   Prohibited activities
§ 96.01 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Refuse. It shall be unlawful for any person, within the area
designated as Little Tennessee River Greenway:
      (1)   To deposit in any toilet, toilet vault or plumbing fixture any
substance that could damage or interfere with the operation or maintenance of
the fixture;
      (2)   To possess or leave refuse, debris or litter in an exposed or
unsanitary condition;
      (3)   To place in or near a stream, lake or other waters, any substance
which does or may pollute a stream, lake, or other water;
      (4)   To fail to dispose of all garbage, including any paper, can,
bottle, sewage, waste water or material, rubbish, either by removal from the
site or area, or by depositing it into receptacles or at places provided for
such purposes;
      (5)   To dump any refuse, debris, trash or litter brought as such from
off the Greenway property.
   (B)   Animals. It shall be unlawful for any person:
      (1)   To bring onto the Greenway property, or possess an animal on said
property, other than a seeing eye dog unless it is crated, caged, or restrained
by a leash not longer than six feet;
      (2)   To bring in or possess on Greenway property, a saddle, pack or
draft animal.
   (C)   Vandalism. No person shall willfully:
      (1)   Damage any natural feature or other property of the Greenway;
      (2)   Remove any natural feature of the Greenway;
      (3)   Damage or remove any vegetation from the Greenway;
      (4)   While on the Greenway, use any pesticide except for personal use as
an insect repellent or as provided by special use authorization for other minor
uses;
      (5)   Dig, excavate, disturb, injure, destroy, or in any way damage any
pre-historic, historic, or archaeological resource, structure, site, artifact
or other property along the Greenway;
      (6)   Kill, injure, or otherwise disturb any bird, mammal, or reptile on
the Greenway;
   (D)   Commercial activity; firearms. It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation:
      (1)   To sell or offer for sale on Greenway property, any merchandise or
perform any kind of work activity or service for hire without a special use
authorization;
      (2)   To distribute printed material on Greenway property without special
use authorization;
      (3)   To possess a firearm on the Greenway property;
      (4)   To discharge a firearm on or within 150 yards of the Greenway;
      (5)   To place a vehicle or other object on the Greenway in such a manner
to create a hazard to the safety of pedestrian or authorized vehicular traffic;
      (6)   To operate or use any device which produces noise, such as a radio,
television, musical instrument, motor or engine in such a manner and at such a
time so as to unreasonably disturb Greenway traffic;
      (7)   To operate or use a public address system on Greenway property,
whether fixed, portable or vehicle mounted without special use authorization;
      (8)   To violate any term or condition of a special use authorization
granted by authorized Greenway officials.
   (E)   Vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person:
      (1)   To operate a motor vehicle, except for motorized wheel chairs and
golf carts, on Greenway property except in parking areas and boat launch areas
and unless for maintenance or emergency purposes. Motorized wheel chairs and
golf carts, leased on premises shall be permitted for use by the physically
handicapped;
      (2)   To jump from any bridge on the Greenway;
      (3)   To use a skateboard on Greenway property in an area that has not
been specifically designated and marked as permitting the use of skate boards.
(Ord. passed 8-5-02)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   BUSINESS LICENSES
      
111.   ADVERTISING
      
112.   RESERVED
      
113.   PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND PANHANDLERS
      
114.   TAXICABS
      
115.   HEALTH MASSAGE/BODY WORK THERAPISTS
CHAPTER 110: BUSINESS LICENSES
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Town Manager may name designee
   
110.03   Business license required
   
110.04   Application
   
110.05   Refusal or revocation of license
   
110.06   Revocation
   
110.07   Form and content of business license
   
110.08   Assignments
   
110.09   Changes in business license during year
   
110.10   Licenses shall be for 12 months
   
110.11   Business license required for every separate business
   
110.12   License required for every place of business
   
110.13   License must be displayed at the place of business
   
110.14   Fees; no refunds allowed
   
110.15   Zoning compliance
Registry; Exemptions
   
110.21   Registry of business licensed
   
110.22   Exemptions
Pawnbrokers and Currency Converters
   
110.30   Pawnbrokers license required
   
110.31   Bond
   
110.32   Refusal to issue license; revocations
   
110.33   Exemptions
   
110.34   Electronic record keeping required
Alcoholic Beverages
   
110.40   Sale on Sundays
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      AGENT. The person having the agency for the manufacturer, producer, or
distributor.
      BUSINESS. Any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or
calling of any kind, subject, by the provision of this chapter, to the
requirement of a business license.
      DEALER, As defined in G.S. § 66-406 and any amendments thereto.
      ENGAGED IN THE BUSINESS. Engaged in the business as owner or operator.
      FISCAL YEAR. The period beginning with the 1st day of July and ending
with the 30th day of June next following.
      FIXED LOCATION. Any site occupied by a secondhand dealer as the owner or
lessee of the site under a lease or rental agreement providing for occupation
of the site by the secondhand dealer for a total duration of not less than 364
days.
      PAWNBROKERS. As defined in G.S. § 66-387 and any amendments thereto.
      PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, company or corporation.
      PRECIOUS METALS DEALER. As defined in G.S. § 66-406 and any amendments
thereto.
      QUARTER. Any three consecutive months.
      SECONDARY METALS RECYCLER. As defined in G.S. § 66-420 and any amendments
thereto.
      SECONDHAND DEALER. Any person, sole proprietorship, partnership, joint
venture, corporation, company, association or any other form of organization
whose regular business is buying or exchanging, in any manner, at retail or
wholesale, or otherwise dealing for profit in, secondhand goods. Included
within this definition and chapter are those entities subject to and regulated
under G.S. §§ 66-385 through 66-399 (pawnbrokers and cash converters), G.S. §§
66-405 through 66-419 (precious metals) and G.S. §§ 66-420 through 66-439
(secondary metals).
      SELLER. Any person or business which does not meet the definition of a
secondhand dealer and sells and/or exchanges secondhand goods to a secondhand
dealer.
   (B)   Any amendments to state law or regulation shall be automatically
incorporated herein.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.02 TOWN MANAGER MAY NAME DESIGNEE.
   The Town Manager is authorized to designate a town employee to perform the
duties assigned to the Town Manager in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.03 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person or his or her agent or servant to engage
in or carry on a business in the town for which there is required a license,
without first having secured a business license as required by this chapter.
For the purpose of this subchapter the opening of a place of business or
offering to sell, followed by a single sale or the doing of any act or thing in
the furtherance of the business shall be construed to be engaging in or
carrying on the business; and each day that the person, firm or corporation
shall engage in or carry on the business as aforesaid, shall be construed to be
a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.04 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every person desiring to obtain a business license pursuant to this
chapter shall apply to the Town Manager for each license required by this
chapter prior to beginning operations. The information shall be submitted on a
form provided by the Town Manager, and shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name of the applicant and whether the applicant is an
individual, a partnership, a corporation, or some other entity;
      (2)   The address where the business is conducted and a mailing address
for the business, if different;
      (3)   All telephone numbers applicable to business;
      (4)   The start date in which the business will begin in the town, along
with the application date;
      (5)   The name and address of the person filling out the application and
his or her relationship to the business;
      (6)   The nature of the business.
   (B)   All applications will be forwarded by the tax collector to the town
and county departments that require review and/or approval of the application
prior to the license being issued.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.05 REFUSAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Town Manager shall refuse to issue a business license or shall
revoke a license for the following reasons:
      (1)   The applicant fails or refuses to provide all information required
in the application.
      (2)   Approval of zoning certificate or any other applicable inspections
is denied.
   (B)   Upon revocation of any business license, it shall be unlawful for the
person to whom such license was granted to continue to conduct such business.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.06 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Town Manager shall revoke a license if a reason exists to revoke
it as set forth in §
110.05. Before revoking a license, the Town Manager shall give the licensee
written notice of the grounds for revocation, in accordance with §
110.05. The licensee, within ten days of receipt of written notice, may require
in writing a conference with the Town Manager. The request shall specify the
reasons why the license should not be revoked. The Town Manager shall arrange
the conference within a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days.
   (B)   If the licensee fails to request a conference within ten days of
receipt of written notice, the Town Manager shall revoke the license. If the
licensee requests a conference, the Town Manager may not revoke the license
until after the conference. If the Town Manager revokes a license, the former
licensee may apply for a new license at any time thereafter. If the reason for
which the license was revoked no longer exists and if no other reason exists
for refusing to issue a license, the Town Manager shall issue the license in
accordance with §
110.04.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.07 FORM AND CONTENT OF BUSINESS LICENSE.
   A license shall show the name of the person licensed, the place where the
business is conducted (if it is to be conducted at one place), the nature of
the business licensed, and the period for which the license is issued. The Town
Manager shall keep a copy of each license issued.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.08 ASSIGNMENTS.
   A license shall not be reassigned or transferable. If a business is sold,
the new owner must report the change under §
110.09 and a new license will be issued upon application as required by this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.09 CHANGES IN BUSINESS LICENSE DURING YEAR.
   A licensee shall report changes in the information contained in the license
application to the Town Manager within ten days after the change occurs.
   (A)   If there are no reasons for revoking the license under §
110.05, the Town Manager shall reissue a license reflecting the change.
   (B)   If there is a reason for revoking the license under §
110.05, the Town Manager shall refuse to reissue a license and shall begin
proceedings to revoke the license in accordance with §
110.06.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.10 LICENSE SHALL BE FOR TWELVE MONTHS.
   Each business license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for 12
months.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.11 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EVERY SEPARATE BUSINESS.
   The obtaining of a business license pursuant to this chapter for any given
business shall not relieve the person obtaining the same from the obligation to
obtain a separate license for any other business that person may carry on, it
being the intent of this chapter that business licenses prescribed shall be
cumulative except where otherwise specifically provided.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.12 LICENSE REQUIRED FOR EVERY PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   A business license issued pursuant to this chapter is only valid for the
business conducted at that place and by the licensee named therein. Every
person doing business in more than one factory, mill, warehouse, store, stall,
stand or other place of business shall secure a separate license for each place
of business, unless the places of business are contiguous to each other,
communicate directly with an opening into each other and are operated as a
unit. If the business is moved or if the licensee sells to another then a new
license is necessary.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.13 LICENSE MUST BE DISPLAYED AT THE PLACE OF BUSINESS.
   Every license must be kept prominently displayed at the place of business of
the licensee named in the license, or, if the licensee has no fixed place of
business, the licensee must keep the same wherever the business is being
operated and where it can be inspected at any time by the proper municipal
official.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.14 FEES; NO REFUNDS ALLOWED.
   Each licensee shall, before a business license may be issued by the town,
pay an administrative fee to be set by the Town Manager, but not to exceed $10.
No business license fee shall be refunded, in part or in whole, in any case
where the licensee discontinues the business before the end of the period for
which the license was issued.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.15 ZONING COMPLIANCE.
   No business license shall be issued unless the business to be engaged in at
the location specified shall be in compliance with the Town's Unified
Development Ordinance. The Town Manager shall develop a zoning compliance
statement to be verified by the Land Use Administrator on each application for
a license pursuant to this chapter, and no license shall issue until such
verification is obtained. In the event that it is determined by the Land Use
Administrator that any licensee or applicant for a business license is
conducting or desires to conduct a business activity pursuant to a business
license which activity would be in violation of any provision of the Unified
Development Ordinance with respect to permitted and prohibited uses, the Town
Manager shall refuse to issue the license, and shall so notify the licensee or
applicant in writing.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
REGISTRY; EXEMPTIONS
§ 110.21 REGISTRY OF BUSINESSES LICENSED.
   The Town Manager shall maintain a registry of each business licensed
pursuant to this chapter, and the same shall be made available to the town's
Fire Department and Police Department, in order that emergency response
personnel may be informed as to the business uses of property within the town.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.22 EXEMPTIONS.
   Any person or business that is required, by state or federal law, to pay for
a privilege license or similar fee shall be exempt from the provisions of this
chapter. Any person or business holding a license issued by an occupational
licensing board of the state of North Carolina as to a business or trade that
such person has been licensed to practice or pursue by the state shall be
exempt from the provisions of this chapter. Any person conducting door-to-door
activities of a political or religious nature shall be exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
PAWNBROKERS AND CURRENCY CONVERTERS
§ 110.30 PAWNBROKERS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. § 66-390, any person wishing to operate a pawnshop,
or conduct any pawn or pawn transaction shall first obtain a pawnbrokers
license. The said license shall be obtained through the same procedure set out
in this chapter, except that in addition to the information required under §
110.04, the petitioner shall submit the following, as required by G.S.§ 66-390:
      (1)   A statement indicating the amount of net assets or capital proposed
to be used by the petitioner in operation of the business (which shall be
accompanied by an unaudited statement from an accountant or certified public
accountant verifying the information contained in the accompanying statement);
      (2)   An affidavit by the petitioner that he or she has not been
convicted of a felony; and
      (3)   A certificate from the town's Chief of Police, or the State Bureau
of Investigation that the petitioner has not been convicted of a felony.
   (B)   The petitioner under this section may arrange for the SBI to provide
the required certificate, which must be sent directly from the SBI by mail
addressed to the Town Manager. Otherwise, the Town Manager shall forward
applications for pawnbrokers licenses to the Police Department for
verification. In order to recoup the cost of the certification required under
this section, if performed by the Police Department, the Town Manager may
establish a fee in addition to the $10 maximum business license fee authorized
by this chapter, not to exceed $75.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.31 BOND.
   Pursuant to G.S. § 66-399, any pawnbroker licensed under this chapter shall,
at the time of receiving the license, file with the town a bond payable to the
town in the sum of $5,000, to be executed by the licensee and by two
responsible sureties or a surety company licensed to do business in the State
of North Carolina and acceptable in the sole discretion of the town, which
shall be for the faithful performance of the requirements and obligations
pertaining to the business so licensed. The town may sue for forfeiture of the
bond upon a breach thereof. Any person who obtains a judgment against a
pawnbroker and upon which judgment execution is returned unsatisfied may
maintain an action in that person's own name upon the bond, to satisfy the
judgment.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.32 REFUSAL TO ISSUE LICENSE; REVOCATIONS.
   The Town Manager shall refuse to issue a license required by §
110.30 of this chapter pursuant to §§
110.05 and
110.06, or in the case that the petitioner fails to supply any additional
information as required by §
110.30 or state law. In revoking a license, the Town Manager shall follow the
same procedure set out in this chapter, which shall constitute the hearing
required by G.S. § 66-390(d).
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.33 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The following businesses/persons shall be exempt from the provisions
of this chapter unless otherwise regulated under G.S. §§ 66-385 through 66-399
(pawnbrokers and cash converters), G.S. §§ 66-405 through 66-419 (precious
metals) and G.S. §§ 66-420 through 66-439 (secondary metals):
      (1)   A person or business whose only business transactions with
secondhand goods in the town consist exclusively of donated items and/or
purchases from 501(c)(3) organizations,
      (2)   A person or business whose only business transactions with
secondhand goods in the town consist of the sale of personal property acquired
for household or other personal use such as garage sales, yard sales, estate
sales and/or auctions held by a licensed auctioneer.
      (3)   A person or business whose only business transactions with
secondhand goods in the town consist of a display space, booth or table
maintained for displaying or selling merchandise at any trade show, convention,
festival, fair, flea market, swap meet or similar event that is not in a fixed
location.
      (4)   Fixed location antique dealers whose sole business involves the
buying, selling and trading of antiques.
      (5)   Businesses whose sole business involves the buying, selling,
trading, and selling on consignment of clothing, shoes, books and animals.
      (6)   Auction house businesses whose sole business involves the buying,
selling and trading of property by auction open to the public.
      (7)   Businesses whose sole business involves the buying, selling, and
trading of property registered by the state department of transportation,
division of motor vehicles.
   (B)   Purchase or exchange transactions with a fair market value totaling
less than $25.00 shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter unless
otherwise regulated under G.S. §§ 66-385 through 66-399 (pawnbrokers and cash
converters), G.S. §§ 66-405 through 66-419 (precious metals) and G.S. §§ 66-420
through 66-439 (secondary metals).
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
§ 110.34 ELECTRONIC RECORD KEEPING REQUIRED.
   (A)   Every secondhand dealer shall obtain the statutorily-required
information for each purchase transaction.
   (B)   All secondhand dealers shall further obtain the following information
when purchasing or exchanging secondhand goods from a seller at the secondhand
dealer's place of business:
      (1)   A clear and accurate description of the property, including model
and serial number if indicated on the property;
      (2)   The name, residence address, phone number and date of birth of the
seller;
      (3)   The date and time of the sale;
      (4)   Type of identification and the identification number accepted from
the seller;
      (5)   A description of the seller, including approximate height, weight,
sex and race; and
      (6)   Amount of consideration given for the property.
   (C)   All secondhand dealers shall, within 48 hours of the transaction,
electronically submit the information required in divisions (A) and (B) of this
section to the town Police Department. At the designation of the Police Chief,
such transmissions shall be made to the agency or company that the Police
Department contracts to provide online data pertaining to reported stolen
goods.
   (D)   In the event that a secondhand dealer does not have online access or a
technological failure prevents a secondhand dealer from reporting
electronically, the secondhand dealer shall immediately notify the Police
Department of the failure and have physical records of the information required
in divisions (A) and (B) of this section submitted each regular business day to
the Police Department. Upon resolution of the technological failure, the
secondhand dealer shall submit the required information electronically to the
Police Department from each regular business day the technological failure
existed.
   (E)   Any secondhand dealer, with the exception of secondary metal
recyclers, convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty
of a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $500. Secondary metal
recyclers convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject
to the provisions set forth in G.S. § 66-429.
(Ord. passed 12-1-14)
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 110.40 SALE ON SUNDAYS.
   Pursuant to Session Law 2017-87, the sale of malt beverages, fortified and
unfortified wine, and mixed beverages in premises permitted pursuant to G.S. §
18B-1001 located within the corporate limits of the town shall be permitted
beginning at 10:00 a.m. on Sunday.
(Ord. 2017-013, passed 10-2-17)
CHAPTER 111: ADVERTISING
Section
   
111.01   Posting of bills on public property prohibited; exceptions
   
111.02   Posting of bills on private property prohibited; exceptions
   
111.03   Election materials
   
111.04   Fairs, carnivals and horse shows
§ 111.01 POSTING OF BILLS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to post, nail,
stick, or otherwise affix bills, posters, advertisements, notices or any other
printed or graphic matter upon public property in the Town. This subchapter
shall not apply to notices, signs, or advertisements required to be posted by
law, signs or plates on residential premises giving the name or address of the
occupant, mail boxes or newspaper tubes, municipal, county, State and Federal
traffic signs, historical markers, monuments or signs erected by public
authority, temporary displays as a part of customary holiday decorations, and
signs denoting the location of underground utilities.
('76 Code, § 9-5001) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.02 POSTING OF BILLS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to nail, stick, or
otherwise affix bills, posters, advertisements, notices or other printed or
graphic matter upon private property within the Town without the consent of the
owner.
('76 Code, § 9-5002) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.03 ELECTION MATERIALS.
   Notwithstanding the above provisions, it shall be unlawful to post or affix
printed or graphic materials upon public property in the town for up to 60 days
preceding a National, State, or local election or referendum to be held in the
town when the materials relate to the candidate or candidates seeking election
or the political issue being voted upon. Provided, however, the Chief of Police
shall require the giving of a bond by those posting the election-related
materials, the amount of the bond to be commensurate with the cost of removing
the election materials so posted. If the election-related materials are not
removed within 15 days following the scheduled election, the bond shall be
retained by the town to defray the costs of removing the election- related
posters and materials.
('76 Code, § 9-5003) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04 FAIRS, CARNIVALS AND HORSE SHOWS.
   Notwithstanding the above provisions, it shall be lawful to affix temporary
banners or signs advertising the place and date of fairs, carnivals, horse
shows and similar events to be observed within the town for a period not to
exceed 30 days and after the giving of a bond which the Chief of Police shall
set, the amount of the bond to be commensurate with the cost of removing the
banners or signs. If the signs or banners are not removed within the 30-day
period, the bond shall be retained by the town to defray the costs of removing
the banners or signs.
('76 Code, § 9-5004) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 112: RESERVED
CHAPTER 113: PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS, AND PANHANDLERS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Registration required
   
113.03   Badge
   
113.04   Exceptions
   
113.05   Business and industrial sections
   
113.06   Selling from vehicles
   
113.07   Panhandlers
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. Any person who transports goods from place to place and sells or
offers for sale the goods, or who, without travelling from place to place,
sells or offers for sale any goods from any vehicle or device; provided, that
any person who separates the acts of sale and delivery for the purpose of
evading the provisions of this article shall be deemed a peddler.
   SOLICITOR. Any person who travels from place to place taking or offering to
take orders for the sale of goods for future delivery or for personal services
to be performed in the future, whether or not samples are displayed or money is
collected in advance, and any person who uses or occupies any building or
premises for the sole purpose of taking or offering to take orders for the sale
of goods for future delivery or for personal services to be performed in the
future, whether or not samples are displayed or money is collected in advance.
   TRANSIENT VENDOR. Any person who en gages in a temporary business of selling
and de livering goods and who, for this purpose, uses or occupies any building
or premises; provided, that no person shall be relieved from complying with the
provisions of this subchapter merely by conducting a transient business in
association with any permanently established merchants.
('76 Code, § 6-1071)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate solicitations, itinerant merchants, and begging, see
G.S. §§ 160A-178, 179
§ 113.02 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   Each and every person doing business in the town as a peddler, solicitor or
transient vendor shall file with the Town Clerk, on a form to be provided for
the purpose, a statement setting forth the following information:
   (A)   Name and address of individual filing statement;
   (B)   Name and address of principal or employer if individual is an agent or
employee;
   (C)   Credentials showing relationship of agent or employee;
   (D)   Description of individual filing statement including height, weight,
sex, age, color and distinguishing characteristics, if any;
   (E)   The goods to be sold or offered for sale, or the type of services to
be rendered;
   (F)   The period of time during which the busi ness will be carried on in
the town;
   (G)   Description of automobile or other vehicle to be used in the business,
including the make, model, body style, color and license number.
('76 Code, § 6-1072)
§ 113.03 BADGE.
   The Town Clerk shall issue to each person filing the statement required by §
113.02, a badge substantially as follows:
19______ Town of __________________, N.C. No. ____
         SOLICITOR'S BADGE
(Name)  has registered with the Town Clerk as required by Ordinance.
(Date)
                            
Town Clerk
   During the time the person is engaged in soliciting, the badge shall be worn
on the front of his outer garment in a manner as to be conspicuous.
('76 Code, § 6-1073)
§ 113.04 EXCEPTIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the sale or solicitation
of farm or dairy products by the producer or to organizations or
representatives of organizations organized and operated exclusively for
educational, benevolent, religious, fraternal, charitable or civic purposes and
not operating for profit and where the solicitation or sales are made without
remuneration to the solicitor.
('76 Code, § 6-1074)
§ 113.05 BUSINESS AND INDUSTRIAL SECTIONS.
   Peddling and soliciting upon any street or within any area shall be
permitted provided the business license tax has been paid to the town by the
peddler or solicitor, and provided the peddler or solicitor has with him at all
times a permit issued by the Clerk of the town.
('76 Code, § 6-1075) (Am. Ord. 2021-001, passed 4-5-21)
§ 113.06 SELLING FROM VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to peddle, sell, or
offer to sell, from trucks, wagons, or any other vehicle, or in any manner or
place, except in a regularly estab lished place of business, any fruits,
vegetables, products, livestock, meats, or merchandise on any of the streets in
the town. This section shall not apply to Macon County farmers who grow and
offer to sell their own vegetables and fruit, livestock, or meats but it shall
be unlawful for them to park on Main Street from the Town Hall to the
intersection with Harrison Avenue, or on Phillips Street from its intersection
with Main Street to its intersection with Palmer Street, or on Iotla Street
from its intersection with Main Street to its intersection with Church Street,
or on the public square for more than one hour.
('76 Code, § 6-1076) (Am. Ord. 2021-001, passed 4-5-21) Penalty, see §  
10.99
§ 113.07 PANHANDLERS.
   (A)   Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this
section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this division (A), except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
      AGGRESSIVE PANHANDLING, SOLICITATION, OR PEDDLING. Includes:
         (a)   Accosting a person by approaching or speaking to the individual
or individuals in such a manner as would cause a reasonable person to fear
imminent bodily harm or the commission of a criminal act upon their person, or
upon property in their immediate possession;
         (b)   Touching someone without consent;
         (c)   Using obscene or abusive language toward someone while
attempting to panhandle or solicit from them;
         (d)   Forcing oneself upon the company of another by continuing to
solicit in close proximity to an individual who has made a negative response by
verbal or physical signs or by attempting to leave the presence of the person
soliciting, or by other negative indication;
         (e)   Blocking the path of the individual being solicited; otherwise
engaging in conduct that could reasonably be construed as intending to force a
person to accede to a solicitation;
         (f)   Other conduct that a reasonable person being solicited would
regard as intended to compel or force the person to accede to the solicitation.
      AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE. A device linked to a financial institution's
account records, which is able to carry out transactions, including but not
limited to, account transfers, deposits, cash withdrawals, balance inquiries,
and mortgage, loan, and credit card payments.
      AUTOMATIC TELLER MACHINE FACILITY. The area comprised of one or more
automatic teller machines and any adjacent space which is made available to
banking customers after regular banking hours.
      FINANCIAL INSTITUTION. Any bank, industrial bank, credit union, savings
and loan, check cashing business, or other financial business.
      PANHANDLING. Means, without limitation, use of the spoken, written, or
printed words, signs, bodily gestures, or other acts as are conducted in the
furtherance of the purpose of obtaining alms or contributions of money, food,
or clothing for the use of oneself or others.
      PUBLIC PLACE. A place where a governmental entity has title and/or to
which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, including, but
not limited to, any street, highway, parking lot, plaza, restaurant, theater,
transportation facility, vendor location, school, place of amusement, park, or
playground.
   (B)   Prohibited conduct while soliciting, peddling, or panhandling. It
shall be unlawful for any person to solicit, peddle, or panhandle, as defined
in division (A) of this section:
      (1)   By engaging in any acts of aggressive soliciting, peddling, or
panhandling as defined in division (A) of this section;
      (2)   Within 50 feet of the entrance to any financial institution, any
automatic teller machine or any automatic teller facility;
      (3)   At any permitted outdoor dining area or outdoor merchandise area,
provided such areas are in active use at the time;
      (4)   At any transit stop or taxi stand, or in a public transit vehicle;
      (5)   While the person being solicited is standing in line waiting to be
admitted to a commercial establishment;
      (6)   On private property, unless the person has written permission from
the owner of the property to beg or solicit alms on the property;
      (7)   After dark, which shall mean one-half hour after sunset until one-
half hour before sunrise;
      (8)   While under the influence of alcohol or after having illegally used
any controlled substance as defined in the North Carolina Controlled Substance
Act;
      (9)   Within 20 feet of any crosswalk;
      (10)   In or on town streets to include the right-of-way, median or
shoulder thereof;
      (11)   By standing, sitting or loitering in any street or highway,
including shoulders or medians, but excluding sidewalks, and/or to stop or
attempt to stop any vehicle for the purpose of obtaining employment, business
or contribution from the driver or any occupants of the motor vehicle in
accordance with G.S. § 20-175. This provision shall not apply to licensees,
employees or contractors of the department of transportation or town employees
engaged in construction, maintenance or in making traffic engineering surveys;
      (12)   In a school zone during the time of arrival of students at the
beginning of the school day and/or during the time of the departure of students
at the end of the school day;
      (13)   Within 20 feet of the entrance or exit of any parking deck,
garage, or surface parking lot;
      (14)   Within 50 feet of any city-owned or operated building or facility.
(Ord. 2021-001, passed 4-5-21)
CHAPTER 114: TAXICABS
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Unlawful to operate without certificate
   
114.03   Application required
   
114.04   Board issues certificates
   
114.05   Duration of certificate
   
114.06   Determination of convenience and necessity
   
114.07   Publication
   
114.08   Burden of proof
   
114.09   Failure to begin operations
   
114.10   Transfer
   
114.11   Revocation of certificate
   
114.12   Substitution of vehicles
   
114.13   Certificate required for each vehicle
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERSON. It shall mean and include both singular and plural, and shall also
mean and include persons, individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and
associations.
   TAXICAB. It shall be defined as any motor vehicle seating nine or fewer
passengers, operated upon any street or highway on call or on demand, accepting
or soliciting passengers indiscriminately for hire between points along streets
and highways as may be directed by the passenger or passengers so being
transported, and shall not include motor vehicles or motor vehicle carriers as
defined in subsections 17 and 18 of Section 62-3 of the General Statutes of
North Carolina.
('76 Code, § 6-1001)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate taxicabs, see G.S. § 160A-304
§ 114.02 UNLAWFUL TO OPERATE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab upon or over the
streets of the town without first having applied for and secured from the Board
a certificate of convenience and necessity as hereinafter set forth.
('76 Code, § 6-1002) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 114.03 APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   Every person desiring to operate a taxicab upon and over the streets of the
town shall file on forms supplied by the Clerk an application for certificate
of convenience and necessity.
('76 Code, § 6-1003)
§ 114.04 BOARD ISSUES CERTIFICATES.
   The Board shall have power and it will be its duty to order certain
certificates or to issue certificates for partial exercise of the rights
granted only the certificate under the terms and conditions as in its judgment
the public convenience and necessity may required.
('76 Code, § 6-1004)
§ 114.05 DURATION OF CERTIFICATE.
   A certificate shall constitute a franchise from the town for the operation
of taxicabs within the town subject to the provisions of this subchapter for
one year, unless a shorter period of time is specified in the certificate.
Applications for renewal shall be filed annually and hearing conducted as
herein provided.
('76 Code, § 6-1005)
§ 114.06 DETERMINATION OF CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY.
   (A)   In determining whether the public convenience and necessity require
the franchising of the taxicab or taxicabs, the Board shall, among other
things, take into consideration the following factors:
      (1)   Whether or not the public convenience and necessity require the
proposed or additional taxicab service within the town.
      (2)   The financial responsibility of the applicant and the likelihood of
the proposed service being permanent, responsible and satisfactory.
      (3)   The number and condition of equipment.
      (4)   The schedule of proposed rates, if re quired by the Board to be
charged.
      (5)   The number of taxicabs now operated and the demand for increased
service, if any, and whether or not the safe use of the streets by the public,
both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved and whether or not adequate
provision has been made for off-street parking of the taxicabs.
      (6)   The experience of applicant in the taxicab business.
      (7)   The other relative facts as may be deemed necessary and advisable.
   (B)   Before making any decision with respect to the issuance of a
certificate of convenience and necessity. The Board or a committee thereof,
shall make a full and complete investigation of all facts, if it so desires,
subpoena witnesses and utilize the services of the Chief of Police or any other
officer or employee of the Town.
('76 Code, § 6-1006)
§ 114.07 PUBLICATION.
   The Clerk shall cause to be published, at least once in a newspaper with
general circulation, a notice setting forth the name of the applicant and
requesting any information as to why the applicant should or should not be
granted a certificate of convenience and necessity. The cost of the publication
shall be paid by the applicant.
('76 Code, § 6-1007)
§ 114.08 BURDEN OF PROOF.
   The burden of proof shall be upon the appli cant to establish the existence
of public convenience and necessity for the operation of the taxicab or
taxicabs specified in his application, and all other facts required for the
granting of a certificate.
('76 Code, § 6-1008)
§ 114.09 FAILURE TO BEGIN OPERATIONS.
   If a certificate is granted to an applicant, and the applicant shall fail,
in accordance with the provisions of the certificate, to begin operations
within 60 days after the date of the certificate, then the certificate shall
become null and void, and no refund of any amount paid by the applicant will be
made by the town.
('76 Code, § 6-1009)
§ 114.10 TRANSFER.
   A certificate is not transferable without the consent and approval of the
Board. Applications for a permit to transfer shall be filed in the same manner
as an application for a certificate of convenience and necessity. The
proceedings upon the application for transfer shall be the same as those
prescribed for the issuance of a certificate, except that the question of
public convenience and necessity need not be proved.
('76 Code, § 6-1010)
§ 114.11 REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE.
   (A)   The Board may at any time after a public hearing revoke any
certificate issued by authority of this article for any one, or more, of the
following causes:
      (1)   Failure to operate the taxicab specified in the certificate in the
manner as to serve the public adequately and efficiently.
      (2)   Failure to maintain motor equipment in good repair.
      (3)   Failure to carry liability insurance or bond as required by law.
      (4)   Failure to pay to the town taxes or license fees imposed upon the
taxicabs.
      (5)   Repeated and persistent violation by the taxicab drivers of traffic
and safety ordinances, or state laws relating to alcoholic beverages or
prostitution.
      (6)   Failure to report accidents.
      (7)   Willful failure to comply with any provision of this article or
ordinances or state laws relating to the operation of taxicabs, whether the
ordinances and laws be now in force or hereafter enacted into ordinances and
into laws.
   (B)   No certificate shall be revoked until the owner has had at least five
days' notice by personal service or registered mail of the charges against him,
and of the time and place of the hearing. If, after the hearing, it is found
that the owner is guilty of one or more of the offenses listed herein, the
Board shall have the power to revoke the certificate, or to condition a
revocation upon compliance of its order within any time fixed by it.
('76 Code, § 6-1011)
§ 114.12 SUBSTITUTION OF VEHICLES.
   The person to whom a certificate has been issued may, by proper endorsement
thereon by the Clerk substitute another vehicle, or other vehicles, for the
vehicle or vehicles for which certificate was granted. In the instance, the
liability insurance or bonds shall also be transferred to the substitute
vehicle or vehicles.
('76 Code, § 6-1012)
§ 114.13 CERTIFICATE REQUIRED FOR EACH VEHICLE.
   To operate more than one taxicab, a person must obtain a certificate of
convenience and necessity for each vehicle to be so operated.
('76 Code, § 6-1013)
CHAPTER 115: HEALTH MASSAGE/BODY WORK THERAPISTS
Section
   
115.01   Purpose
   
115.02   Definitions
   
115.03   Licensing of health massage/body therapists
   
115.04   Only licensed health massage/body work therapists permitted to
practice
 
   
115.99   Penalty
§ 115.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   In the interest of public health, safety and welfare, and to protect
the public from unqualified practitioners and unethical businesses, the
following privilege license provisions and regulations are hereby adopted.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, physical
therapists or podiatrists duly licensed to practice in this state, and
registered or licensed practical nurses governed by the North Carolina Nursing
Practices Act;
      (2)   Athletic directors or trainers who are affiliated with an approved
educational institutional or professional sports team, and whose work is
limited to athletic team members;
      (3)   Licensed cosmetologists, barbers or beauty culturists who do not
offer massage treatments other than those customarily given in such
establishments, solely for the purpose of beautification.
(Ord. passed 7-8-96)
§ 115.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   HEALTH MASSAGE/BODY WORK THERAPIST. Any person, male or female, engaged in
the practice of health massage/body work therapy who: has graduated from an
institute or school of massage therapy licensed under a state licensing
requirement, is certified by the American Massage Therapy Association or the
National Certification Board for Therapeutic Massage and Body Work, or meets
the criteria of §
115.03 herein below.
   HEALTH MASSAGE/BODY WORK THERAPY. Systems of activity applied to the
superficial or deep tissues (muscles, tendons, ligaments, connective tissue,
skin) of the body by means of applying pressure with the hands, feet, arms, or
elbows for therapeutic and/or relaxing purposes. Soft tissue health massage/
body work practices are designed to promote general relaxation, improve
flexibility and pliability of the soft tissues, or relieve stress and muscle
hypertension; and to enhance a general sense of well-being in the client. The
term THERAPY does not include the diagnosis or treatment of illness or disease;
medical procedures; or the use of modalities for which a license to practice
medicine, chiropractic, physical therapy, acupuncture or podiatry is required
by law.
   HEALTH MASSAGE/BODY WORK THERAPY ESTABLISHMENT. Any business or
establishment wherein health massage/body work therapy is performed solely by
health massage/body work therapists.
(Ord. passed 7-8-96)
§ 115.03 LICENSING OF HEALTH MASSAGE/BODY WORK THERAPISTS.
   (A)   No person shall perform health massage/body work therapy as herein
defined unless such a person shall have first applied for and received a
privilege license from the Town Tax Collector. Such privilege license shall be
issued only to those persons meeting the definition of health massage/body work
therapist provided in §
115.02 above.
   (B)   Each application for the license required by this section shall be
upon a form approved by and filed with the Tax Collector. Such application
shall include the following information:
      (1)   The name and business address of the applicant; and
      (2)   A diploma or certificate of graduation from an institute or school
of health massage/body work therapy whose curriculum is licensed under a state
licensing requirement, a valid document of certification from the American
Massage Therapy Association for Therapeutic Massage and Body Work, or the
information required in division (D) below.
   (C)   Each applicant for a license issued pursuant to this section shall pay
the privilege license tax provided in
Chapter 110 of this code, a schedule of which is on file in the Town Office.
   (D)   Any person who has been engaged in the business of health massage/body
work therapy for at least three years prior to application shall be deemed a
health massage/body work therapist under this article provided that:
      (1)   The applicant submit verification and documentation of at least 500
hours of experience in the practice of health massage/body work therapy to the
authority issuing the license;
      (2)   Three letters of reference are provided from state-licensed health
care professionals or health massage/body work therapists licensed under this
chapter, attesting to the applicant's sound moral character, professional
qualifications and competence;
      (3)   The applicant pays any application and license taxes required under
this code; and
      (4)   The appropriate application required under division (B) above is
completed.
(Ord. passed 7-8-96) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.04 ONLY LICENSED HEALTH MASSAGE/BODY WORK THERAPISTS PERMITTED TO
PRACTICE.
   (A)   No person or business shall permit anyone to perform health massage/
body work therapy upon the premises operated by that person or business, unless
the individual performing health massage/body work therapy has been issued a
license as required by this chapter.
   (B)   Every health massage/body work therapist shall post the license
required by this chapter in his or her work area at all times.
(Ord. passed 7-8-96) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   A violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable by a
fine not to exceed $50 or a prison sentence not more than 30 days.
(Ord. passed 7-8-96)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST TOWN REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST TOWN REGULATIONS
Section
   
130.01   Public consumption of alcoholic beverages
   
130.02   Injuring shade trees
   
130.03   Injuring telephone poles
   
130.04   Discharging firearms
   
130.05   Carrying concealed weapons on certain municipal property
   
130.06   Tobacco use prohibited
   
130.07   Camping on public property prohibited
   
130.08   Public parks and recreational facilities; sex offenders prohibited
   
130.09   Unauthorized taking of utility service
 
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 PUBLIC CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   No person shall consume malt beverages or unfortified wine, as defined by
G.S. § 18B- 101, or possess open containers thereof, on property owned,
occupied, or controlled by the town, including but not limited to public
streets, boulevards, alleys, rights-of-way, sidewalks and parks outside of the
designated social district as defined and regulated in Chapter 95 of this code.
This section shall not apply to any property leased by the town to any third
party for the express purpose of operating a brewpub, microbrewery, restaurant
or similar enterprise, provided that on-premises consumption of such beverages
is otherwise permitted by law. This section also shall not appl to the service
of beverages in a properly permitted outdoor seating area pursuant to § 95.10
of this code, provided that such service and possession are otherwise permitted
by law.
(‘76 Code, § 8-1001) (Ord. passed 5-6-68; Am. Ord. passed 2-2-70; Am. Ord.
passed 10-3-83; Am. Ord. passed 4-7-14; Am. Ord. passed 12-7-15; Am. Ord. 2020-
001, passed 4-13-2020; Am. Ord. 2024-001, passed 1-2-24) Penalty, see § 
130.99
§ 130.02 INJURING SHADE TREES.
   No person shall willfully or negligently injure or cause to be injured any
shade tree on public property of the town.
(‘76 Code, § 8-1002) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.03 INJURING TELEPHONE POLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to drive any nail,
tack or other metal of any kind or nature into any telephone, telegraph, or
electric light pole, or in any way deface any telephone, telegraph, or electric
light pole within the corporate limits of the town.
(‘76 Code, § 8-1003) (Ord. passed 2-7-27) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any gun, pistol, or other
weapon within the corporate limits except a peace officer in the performance of
his or her duty. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot an air gun or
sling-shot within 100 yards of any street. This section shall not apply to
discharge of firearms within the interior of an indoor shooting range, as
defined and permitted under
Chapter 152 of this code.
(‘76 Code, § 8-6003) (Am. Ord. passed 11-21-15) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS ON CERTAIN MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Posting of signs required. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized
and instructed to post conspicuous signage at appropriate locations on or
within each park and each building or portion of a building owned, leased as
lessee, operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the town, as well as the
appurtenant premises to such buildings, indicating that carrying a concealed
handgun is prohibited therein.
   (B)   Location of signs. Signs on buildings shall be visibly posted on the
exterior of each entrance by which the general public can access the building.
The Chief of Police shall exercise discretion in determining the number and
appropriate location of signs to be placed on or within appurtenant premises
and parks.
   (C)   Effective date. This section shall be effective on and after December
31, 1995.
(Ord. passed 1-2-96) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.06 TOBACCO USE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Tobacco use prohibited in municipal buildings. It shall be unlawful
for any person to use tobacco, of any kind or description, in any building or
facility or portion of a building or facility now or hereafter owned, leased,
operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the town.
   (B)   Tobacco use prohibited in municipal vehicles. It shall be unlawful for
any person to use tobacco, of any kind or description, in any vehicle now owned
or leased, or hereafter owned or leased by the town.
   (C)   Notice required. Clear and conspicuous signs shall be posted in every
municipal building or facility, in a position clearly visible on entry to the
building. “No Smoking” or other signs stating this policy shall be used and
shall have letters of not less than one inch in height, or the international
“No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning
cigarette enclosed in a circle with a bar across it).
(Ord. passed 9–8-09)
§ 130.07 CAMPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      CAMP or CAMPING. The use of public owned property for living
accommodation purposes such as sleeping, making preparations to sleep, storing
personal belongings, or placing any tent or a temporary shelter on the property
for living accommodation purposes. The creation of a campfire or bonfire is
also included as part of this definition, unless there is a designated location
or permit policy.
      PUBLIC PROPERTY. Property owned or controlled by a federal, state, or
local governmental entity.
      TEMPORARY SHELTER. Any tent, tarp, structure, or cover that provides
shelter from the elements.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. Pursuant to G.S. §§ 160A-274 and 160D-202, this section
shall apply within the town’s corporate limits and throughout its
extraterritorial planning jurisdiction (ETJ).
   (C)   Camping prohibited. Camping on public property is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep, camp, or
otherwise engage in any activity prohibited by this section on any public
property located within the city limits of the town or the ETJ. The town may
remove any temporary shelter, bedding, or personal belongings that are stored
on the property.
(Ord. 2023-003, passed 5-1-23)
§ 130.08 PUBLIC PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES; SEX OFFENDERS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      PUBLIC PARK. Any publicly owned or maintained land, which is designated
by the town as a park or recreational facility.
      REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER. An individual who is registered by any state or
federal agency as a sex offender and whose name is published on any state or
federal registered sex offender listing, including but not limited to the sex
offender registry established pursuant to G.S. Ch. 14, Art. 27A.
   (B)   Prohibited. That the following prohibition shall apply: It shall
constitute a general offense against this section for any person registered
with the State of North Carolina or any other state or federal agency as a sex
offender to knowingly enter into or on any public park which is owned, operated
or maintained by the town.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person found in violation of this section shall be
subject to a fine of not less than $500 and 30 days in jail for each offense.
Each entrance into a public park, regardless of the time period involved, shall
constitute a separate offense of this section.
(Ord. 2022-003, passed 11-7-22)
§ 130.09 UNAUTHORIZED TAKING OF UTILITY SERVICE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, in any matter whatever, to change,
extend, or alter any service or other pipe, wire, or attachment of any kind,
connection with or through which natural or artificial gas or electricity is
furnished from the gas mains, pipes, wires, or outlets of any other person,
without first procuring from the other person written permission to so connect
to the service. The penalty for violation of this section is the one set forth
in §
10.99 of this code; provided, however, that if the amount of utility service
unlawfully obtained can be ascertained, then, and in that event the person
found liable for violation of this section, shall repay such amount to the
utility customer, in addition to the penalty set forth in §
10.99 of this code.
(Ord. 2024-003, passed 5-6-24) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable on conviction by
a fine not exceeding $50 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.
(Ord. passed 10-3-83)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   FIRE LIMITS
      
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
152.   UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
      
153.   RESERVED
      
154.   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
      
155.   SIGN REGULATIONS
      
156.   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
157.   MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS
CHAPTER 150: FIRE LIMITS
Section
   
150.01   Limits established
   
150.02   Construction to conform with state regulations
   
150.03   Enforcement by Building Inspector
§ 150.01 LIMITS ESTABLISHED.
   The primary fire limits of the town are hereby established as follows:
   Beginning at point intersecting Harrison Avenue and Church Street. Thence
N71-08E with centerline Church Street to intersection with Iotla Street and
continuing whole distance 2,032 feet to point centerline River View Street.
Thence SE direction crossing Main Street to point centerline Palmer Street.
Thence SW direction meandering with centerline Palmer Street to point
intersecting Palmer Street and Porter Street. Thence NW direction with
centerline Porter Street to intersection with West Main Street. Thence NE
direction with centerline West Main Street to point intersecting West Main
Street and Harrison Avenue. Thence NW direction with centerline Harrison Avenue
to point of Beginning; the limits include the principal business portion of the
town.
(‘76 Code, § 3-2021)
§ 150.02 CONSTRUCTION TO CONFORM WITH STATE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Within the primary fire limits as described in §
150.01, all construction, repairs or alterations of any building or structure
shall conform with all regulations for fire zones as set forth in the North
Carolina State Building Code, most current edition, and to the provisions of
G.S. § 160A-436.
   (B)   A copy of the North Carolina State Build ing Code shall be kept on
file in the office of the Clerk.
   (C)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-436, it shall be unlawful without written
permission from the Board for any person or corporation to erect, alter or
repair any wooden building within the fire limits. For each day in which a
person or corporation shall erect, alter or repair the building it shall
constitute a new and separate violation of this section.
   (D)   Any person who shall assist in constructing or repairing any building
prohibited in this section shall be subject to a penalty for each day or part
thereof during which he shall so assist.
(‘76 Code, § 3-2021)
§ 150.03 ENFORCEMENT BY BUILDING INSPECTOR.
   It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to enforce the requirements
of this section.
(‘76 Code, § 3-2021) (Ord. passed 12-2-74) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory references:
   Establishment of, and restrictions within, primary fire limits, G.S. §§
160A-435, 436
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Statutory authorization
   
151.02   Findings of fact
   
151.03   Statement of purpose
   
151.04   Objectives
   
151.05   Definitions
   
151.06   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
151.07   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas
   
151.08   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
151.09   Compliance
   
151.10   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.11   Interpretation
   
151.12   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
151.13   Recognition/evaluation of flood or flood-related erosion hazards in
official land use/building actions
Administration
   
151.20   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
151.21   Floodplain development application, permit and certification
requirements
   
151.22   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
151.23   Corrective procedures
   
151.24   Variance procedures
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
151.35   General standards
   
151.36   Specific standards
   
151.37   Standards for floodplains without established base flood elevations
   
151.38   Standards for riverine floodplains with base flood elevations but
without established floodways or non-encroachment areas
   
151.39   Floodways and non-encroachment areas
Legal Status Provisions
   
151.50   Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood damage
prevention ordinance
   
151.51   Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in Part 6, Article
21 of Chapter 143; Parts 3, 5, and 8 of Article 19 of Chapter 160A; and Article
8 of Chapter 160A of the North Carolina General Statutes, delegated to local
governmental units the responsibility to adopt regulations designed to promote
the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   Therefore, the Town Council of the Town of Franklin, North Carolina,
does ordain as set forth in this chapter.
('76 Code, § 9-6001) (Ord. passed 12-6-71; Am. Ord. passed 5-2-16)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the Town of Franklin
are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the
occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16)
§ 151.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
('76 Code, § 9-6002) (Ord. passed 12-6-71; Am. Ord. passed 5-2-16)
§ 151.04 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Protect human life, safety, and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e., water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and bridges)
that are located in flood prone areas;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas; and
   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a special
flood hazard area.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16)
§ 151.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same
parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage
sheds are common urban ACCESSORY STRUCTURES. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like
qualify as ACCESSORY STRUCTURES on farms, and may or may not be located on the
same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). A determination of the water surface elevations
of the base flood as published in the Flood Insurance Study. When the BFE has
not been provided in a special flood hazard area, it may be obtained from
engineering studies available from a federal, state, or other source using
FEMA-approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with the
freeboard, establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY. A building, portion of a building, or exterior
area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically
reactive products.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY. Any activity defined as development which will
necessitate a floodplain development permit.
   DISPOSAL. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on
any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid
waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into
any waters, including groundwaters.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated
floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers,
pilings, or columns.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was
completed before December 6, 1971, the initial effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by the community.
   EXISTING RV PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A recreational vehicle park or subdivision
for which the construction of facilities for servicing the RV parking sites
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or pouring of concrete pads) was
completed before the initial effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which the special flood
hazard areas and the floodways are delineated. This official map is a
supplement to and shall be used in conjunction with the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM).
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the special
flood hazard areas have been defined as Zone A.
   FLOOD INSURANCE. The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special flood hazard
areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). An examination, evaluation, and determination
of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate),
flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. The FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY report includes
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs),
if published.
   FLOOD PRONE AREA. See FLOODPLAIN.
   FLOOD ZONE. A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or
Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the
area.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances, and other applications of police power. This term describes
federal, state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or unproved real property, water and sanitation facilities,
structures, and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot as shown
on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
   FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT ANALYSIS. An engineering analysis of the impact a
proposed encroachment into a floodway or non-encroachment area is expected to
have on the floodway boundaries, base flood elevations, and floodway surcharge
elevations. The evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified North Carolina
licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and models.
   FREEBOARD. The height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to account for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed. The base flood elevation (BFE) plus the
freeboard establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, limited to a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. As defined in G.S. § 130A, Article 9, a
facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling,
recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the
structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.
      (1)   Any structure that is:
         (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the US Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
         (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
         (c)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks
in communities with a “Certified Local Government (CLG) Program”; or
         (d)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a
historic district designated by a community with a “Certified Local Government
(CLG) Program”.
      (2)   Certified Local Government (CLG) Programs are approved by the US
Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina Department of
Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having
met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as
amended in 1980.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that
amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance
Study. Letters of Map Change include:
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). An amendment based on technical
data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special
flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map
and establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure
is not located in a special flood hazard area.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on technical data
that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard
area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features.
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F). A determination that
a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the base flood
elevation and is, therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard
area. In order to qualify for this determination, the fill must have been
permitted and placed in accordance with the community’s floodplain management
regulations.
      (4)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal review and
comment as to whether a proposed flood protection project or other project
complies with the minimum NFIP requirements for such projects with respect to
delineation of special flood hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the
effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study; upon submission
and approval of certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may
be issued by FEMA to revise the effective FIRM.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG). The elevation of the ground, sidewalk or patio
slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion of the
building.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than
a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor, provided that such
an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a recreational vehicle.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, not including the land value and that of
any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. MARKET VALUE may be
established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of this chapter, the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as
corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a reference for
establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which base flood
elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel to
determine datum used.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations
and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA. T he channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot
as designated in the Flood Insurance Study report.
   POST-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred on or after the effective date of the initial Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
   PRE-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred before the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance
Rate Map.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure is above ground.
   PUBLIC SAFETY and/or NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A vehicle, which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REFERENCE LEVEL. The top of the lowest floor for structures within special
flood hazard areas designated as Zone AE, A, A99 or AO.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The base flood elevation plus the
freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations (BFEs)
have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus two feet of
freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has been established,
this elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this
chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
   SALVAGE YARD. Any non-residential property used for the storage, collection,
and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not limited to
vehicles, appliances and related machinery.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any facility involved in the disposal of
solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35).
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36), any place
at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or
any other method.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as determined in §
151.07.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START
OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas,
liquid, or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any
one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. See definition of SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT. SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means flood-related damage sustained by a
structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place
during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any correction of existing violations of state or community health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant
to §
151.21.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community’s floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in §§
151.20 through
151.24 and
151.35 through
151.39 is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION (WSE). The height, in relation to mean sea level, of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine
areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
('76 Code, § 9-6003) (Ord. passed 12-6-71; Am. Ord. passed 5-2-16)
§ 151.06 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction, including extra-territorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the Town of
Franklin.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16)
§ 151.07 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the Cooperating
Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North Carolina and FEMA in
its FIS dated May 4, 2009 for Macon County and associated DFIRM panels,
including any digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study,
which are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. Future
revisions to the FIS and DFIRM panels that do not change flood hazard data
within the jurisdictional authority of the Town of Franklin are also adopted by
reference and declared a part of this chapter. Subsequent revisions to the FIRM
should be adopted within six months.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16)
§ 151.08 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the
provisions of §
151.07.
('76 Code, § 9-6008) (Ord. passed 12-6-71; Am. Ord. passed 5-2-16) Penalty, see
§
151.99
§ 151.09 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.10 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
('76 Code, § 9-6010) (Am. Ord. passed 12-6-71; Am. Ord. passed 5-2-16)
§ 151.11 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16)
§ 151.12 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land
outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will
be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability
on the part of the Town of Franklin or by any officer or employee thereof for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16)
§ 151.13 RECOGNITION/EVALUATION OF FLOOD OR FLOOD-RELATED EROSION HAZARDS IN
OFFICIAL LAND USE/BUILDING ACTIONS.
   (A)   The Town Council assures the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA)
that upon approval of a flood control ordinance, it will enact as necessary and
maintain in force in those areas having flood or flood-related erosion hazards
adequate land use and control measures with effective enforcement provisions
consistent with the criteria set forth in Parts 59, 60 and 65 of the National
Flood Insurance Program Regulations (44 CFR); and
   (B)   Upon approval of a flood control ordinance, the Town Council will vest
the Town Land Use Administrator with the responsibility, and the means to:
      (1)   Assist the FIA Administrator, as requested, in delineation of the
limits of the area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards.
      (2)   Provide such information as the FIA Administrator may request
concerning present uses and occupancy of the floodplain or flood-related
erosion areas.
      (3)   Cooperate with federal, state and local agencies and private firms
which undertake to study, survey, map, and identify floodplain or flood-
related erosion areas, and cooperate with neighboring communities with respect
to management of adjoining floodplain and/or flood- related erosion areas in
order to prevent aggravation of existing hazards.
      (4)   Upon occurrence, notify the FIA Administrator in writing whenever
the boundaries of the community have been modified by annexation or the
community has otherwise assumed or no longer has authority to adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In order that all
Flood Hazard Boundary maps (FHBMs) and Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)
accurately represent the community’s boundaries, include within such
notification a copy of a map of the community suitable for reproduction,
clearly delineating the new corporate limits or new area for which the
community has assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory
authority.
   (C)   Upon approval of a flood control ordinance, the Town Council will
appoint the Town Land Use Administrator to maintain for public inspection and
to furnish upon request, for the determination of applicable flood insurance
risk premium rates within all areas having special flood hazards identified on
a FHBM or FIRMs, any certificates of floodproofing, and information on the
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the level of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and
include whether or not such structures contain a basement, and if the structure
has been floodproofed.
   (D)   The Town Council agrees to exercise its discretion to take such other
official action as may be reasonably necessary to carry out the objective of
the program.
(Res. passed 3-7-16)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.20 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Land Use Administrator, hereinafter referred to as the “Floodplain
Administrator”, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions
of this chapter, subject to reassignment of these duties in the discretion of
the Town Manager.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16)
§ 151.21 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application requirements. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The applicant shall pay a
fee at the time the application is made, in an amount to be determined and
changed from time to time in the discretion of the Town Manager, but in any
event not to exceed $50. The following items shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain development permit:
      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and
other development;
         (b)   The boundary of the Special Flood Hazard Area as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
151.07, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard
area;
         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
151.07;
         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as
determined in §
151.07;
         (e)   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in §§
151.07,
151.22 or
151.37;
         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
         (g)   The certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor
or professional engineer.
      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
special flood hazard area including but not limited to:
         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed
reference level (including basement) of all structures;
         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-
residential structure in Zone AE, or A will be floodproofed; and
         (c)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
      (3)   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34
(7/12)) with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and
maintenance plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise,
and maintenance of floodproofmg measures.
      (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter are
met. These details include but are not limited to:
         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation
on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
         (b)   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with §
151.36(D)(3)when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AO, AE,
and A1-30.
      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      (7)   Certification that all other local, state and federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of §
151.36(F) and (G) of this chapter are met.
      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on
plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation.
   (B)   Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
      (1)   A description of the development to be permitted under the
floodplain development permit.
      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in this section.
      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
reference level and all attendant utilities.
      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
protection of all public utilities.
      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse, as
applicable.
      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AO, AE or A1-30.
      (8)   Limitations of below BFE enclosure uses (if applicable; e.g.,
permitted uses may be limited to parking, building access and limited storage
only, etc.).
   (C)   Certification requirements.
      (1)   Elevation certificates.
         (a)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33 (7/12)) is required
prior to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder prior to the
beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to
make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development
permit.
         (b)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33 (7/12)) is required
after the reference level is established. Within seven calendar days of
establishment of the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the
permit holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. Any work done
within the seven-day calendar period and prior to submission of the
certification shall be at the permit holder’s risk. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and
prior to further work being permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the
certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause to issue a
stop-work order for the project.
         (c)   A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33 (7/
12)) is required after construction is completed and prior to certificate of
compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy.
      (2)   Floodproofing certificate. If non-residential floodproofing is used
to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing
certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34 (7/12)), with supporting data, an operational
plan, and an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual
start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the fioodproofed
design elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in
relation to mean sea level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or
under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and
certified by same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate
data, the operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan.
Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the applicant prior
to permit approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make
required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit.
Failure to construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to
withhold the issuance of a certificate of compliance/occupancy.
      (3)   If a manufactured home is placed within Zone A, AO, AE, or A1-30
and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade,
an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the
provisions of §
151.36(C)(2).
      (4)   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of
the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a professional engineer’s
certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying
capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream
and downstream; and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior
to issuance of a floodplain development permit.
      (5)   Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located
within Zone A, AO, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing
certification requirements specified in items (1) and (2) of this subsection:
         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of §
151.36(E)(1);
         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of §
151.36(G); and
         (c)   Accessory structures less than 150 square feet meeting
requirements of §
151.36(H).
   (D)   Determinations for existing buildings and structures. For applications
for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including
alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy,
additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of
substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and
structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building
Official, shall:
      (1)   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed
work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure
shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are
made;
      (2)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or
structure;
      (3)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
      (4)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood resistant construction requirements of the North Carolina
Building Code and this chapter is required.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.22 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:
   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
   (B)   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been received,
including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of
Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the
National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained.
   (E)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment areas unless
the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of §
151.39 are met.
   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of §
151.21.
   (G)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which all
new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed,
in accordance with the provisions of §
151.21(C).
   (H)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all public
utilities in accordance with the provisions of §
151.21(C).
   (I)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of §§
151.21(C) and §
151.36(B).
   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the special flood hazard areas, floodways, or non-encroachment areas (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter.
   (K)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.07, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with
floodway or non-encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or
other source, including data developed pursuant to §
151.37(B)(2), in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   (L)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway or
non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with the provisions
of §
151.07, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-
encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source in
order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   (M)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or
the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood hazard area is above
the base flood elevation (BFE), advise the property owner of the option to
apply for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain a copy of the
LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain development permit file.
   (N)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of
this chapter and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as
amended.
   (O)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to
a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall
make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the
work is being done according to the provisions of this chapter and the terms of
the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has a right,
upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the purposes of
inspection or other enforcement action.
   (P)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation
of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor.
   (Q)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain
Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked.
   (R)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each
member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
   (S)   Follow through with corrective procedures of §
151.23.
   (T)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests.
   (U)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to, the
FIS report, FIRM and other official flood maps and studies adopted in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.21 of this chapter, including any revisions thereto including Letters of
Map Change, issued by FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of mapping needs.
   (V)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including Letters of
Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-Fs) and Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs).
(Ord. passed 5-2-16)
§ 151.23 CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified and
registered mail to the owner’s last known address or by personal service,
stating:
      (1)   That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
      (2)   That a hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at
a designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      (3)   That following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue
an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
   (C)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of this chapter, he or she shall issue
an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation
within a specified time period, not less than 60 calendar days, nor more than
180 calendar days. Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is
imminent danger to life or other property, he or she may order that corrective
action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible.
   (D)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the Zoning Board of Adjustment, as established by the
Town Council for the Town of Franklin (hereinafter referred to as the “Appeal
Board”) by giving notice of appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator
and the Clerk within ten days following issuance of the final order. In the
absence of an appeal, the order of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final.
The Appeal Board shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm,
modify and affirm, or revoke the order.
   (E)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the
discretion of the court.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.24 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Appeal Board shall hear and decide requests for variances from the
requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal
such decision to the court, as provided in G.S. Chapter 7A.
   (C)   Variances may be issued for:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the
definition as stated in §
151.05, provided provisions of subsection (I)(2), (3) and (5) of this section
have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public
safety; or
      (3)   Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements
of this section.
   (D)   In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under §
151.05 as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (E)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.
   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
chapter.
   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction
below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a
variance to construct a structure below the BFE will result in increased
premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage.
Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance.
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
the State of North Carolina upon request.
   (I)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or
non-encroachment area if the variance would result in any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit
approval.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (J)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas provided that all of
the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community.
      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood
hazard area.
      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to
at least the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local
laws.
      (5)   The Town of Franklin has notified the Secretary of the North
Carolina Department of Public Safety of its intention to grant a variance at
least 30 calendar days prior to granting the variance.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16) Penalty, see §
151.99
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 151.35 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas the following provisions are required:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
   (D)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding to the regulatory flood protection elevation. These
include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/
kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable
boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (H)   In the event of any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or
improvements to a structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this
chapter, such alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements shall meet
the requirements of “new construction” as contained in this chapter.
   (I)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this
chapter and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-encroachment
area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the
regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway, non-encroachment area,
or stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or
replacement meets all of the other requirements of this chapter.
   (J)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in §
151.24(J). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory
flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of §
151.21(C).
   (K)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (N)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
   (O)   When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area,
the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
   (P)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood
elevation (BFE) shall apply.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.36 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has
been provided, as set forth in §§
151.21 or
151.37, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
151.35, are required:
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the
reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.05.
   (B)   Non-residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.05. Structures located in A, AE, AO, and A1-30 Zones may be floodproofed to
the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that
all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify that the floodproofing standards of this subsection are
satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator
as set forth in §
151.21(C), along with the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance
plan.
   (C)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that
the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.05.
      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured
Homes adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. § 143-143.15.
Additionally, when the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36
inches or less above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by
reinforced piers or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is
above 36 inches in height, an engineering certification is required.
      (3)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of §
151.36(D).
      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This
plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the
Macon County Emergency Management Department and approved prior to the issuance
of a floodplain development permit.
   (D)   Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed area, of new construction and
substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor:
      (1)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only
be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage. Access to
the enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of
vehicles (garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard
exterior door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The
interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned
into separate rooms, except to enclose storage areas;
      (2)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at least
to the regulatory flood protection elevation; and
      (3)   Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30, flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (b)   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit;
         (d)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the adjacent grade;
         (e)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
         (f)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
   (E)   Additions/improvements.
      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more non-
conforming than the existing structure.
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (2)   Additions to post-FIRM structures that are a substantial
improvement with no modifications to the existing structure other than a
standard door in the common wall shall require only the addition to comply with
the standards for new construction.
      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
only must comply with the standards for new construction.
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (4)   Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a three-year
period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the improvement or repair is started must comply with
the standards for new construction. For each building or structure, the three-
year period begins on the date of the first improvement or repair of that
building or structure subsequent to the effective date of this chapter. If the
structure has sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered
substantial improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The
requirement does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required to correct
existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building
official and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living conditions.
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
historic structure.
   (F)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:
      (1)   Temporary placement.
         (a)   B on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no
permanently attached additions).
      (2)   Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles that do not meet the
limitations of temporary placement shall meet all the requirements for new
construction.
   (G)   Recreational vehicle parks or subdivisions.
      (1)   Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for a
recreational vehicle park:
         (a)   Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for a
recreational vehicle park:
            1.   RV park developers, owners, and operators shall prepare and
maintain current a comprehensive emergency evacuation plan defining how, when
and where all vehicles are to be removed to a safe location during approaching
storm, flood, or hazard events. This plan shall be filed with and approved by
the Floodplain Administrator and the Macon County Emergency Management
Department prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit.
            2.   All RV park emergency evacuation plans must be updated
annually and submitted to the Macon County Emergency Management Department for
approval.
            3.   The emergency evacuation plan for each RV park having property
in the special flood hazard area shall be implemented and supported by a
written set of park regulations. The park regulations shall be submitted for
review and approval along with the emergency evacuation plan prior to the
issuance of a floodplain development permit.
            4.   Approval of the emergency evacuation plan and the park
regulations do not relieve the RV park owner or land owner of any
responsibility or liability for providing the maximum practical extent of
protection against downstream loss of life or property when RVs are resident on
the site. Neither does approval of the emergency evacuation plan and the park
regulations create or transfer any liability to the County of Macon, the Town
of Franklin, or any of their respective employees or agents.
      (2)   The park regulations shall include at a minimum the following
requirements:
         (a)   The emergency evacuation plan for each RV park having property
in the special flood hazard area shall be implemented and supported by a
written set of park regulations. The park regulations shall be submitted for
review and approval along with the emergency evacuation plan prior to the
issuance of a floodplain development permit.
         (b)   The owner of the RV must sign a release of liability available
from the RV park owner giving the RV park owner or operator the right to
evacuate the owner’s RV(s) to a safe location or to anchor/tether the RV(s) in
case of a flood warning and the owner is away from the site. The release form
shall notify the RV owner that under flooding conditions, the RV may be damaged
or destroyed.
      (3)   Known hazards disclosure. The RV park owner is responsible for
posting a sign at the utility connection station on each RV parking site
advising the RV owner that the site is located within a FEMA-designated special
flood hazard area and is subject to damage or loss to property and life during
a flood event. Further, the sign on each site shall advise the RV owner of the
potential water depth at the site during a base flood event (base flood
elevation minus the local grade elevation where the RV is parked). If the RV
park owner elects to state a single water depth to standardize the signs, the
maximum water depth on the entire RV park shall be listed.
      (4)   Inspections.
         (a)   The Town of Franklin, and the County of Macon shall have the
right to access all RV parks and all RV parking sites at any time for the
purpose of a compliance inspection. A compliance inspection will determine if
the requirements of the emergency evacuation plan and the park regulations are
current and are being enforced by the RV park owner or operator.
         (b)   Non-conforming items or a finding of non-compliance shall result
in a written notice of violation (NOV). The RV park owner shall have a maximum
of 30 calendar days to correct the deficiencies and to bring the RV park back
into full compliance.
         (c)   Failure to correct an NOV in the proscribed time limit shall
result in a fine not to exceed $5,000 per day for every calendar day that the
RV park is found to be out of compliance with the approved plans and
regulations.
         (d)   Nothing herein shall prevent the Town of Franklin from seeking
other enforcement remedies as provided in §
151.99.
      (5)   Existing RV parks and subdivisions for which any part of the
property is located in the special flood hazard area. The owner of an existing
RV park or subdivision shall prepare an emergency evacuation plan and file it
with the Floodplain Administrator and Macon County Emergency Management
Coordinator for review and approval no later than 12 months after the effective
date of this chapter. The known hazards disclosure requirements of subsection
(G)(4) above shall be met no later than 12 after the effective date of this
chapter. After receiving approval of the emergency evacuation plan, the owner
(or manager/operator) of the facility shall have seven years to bring the
existing RV park or subdivision into compliance with all the requirements of
this chapter. Failure to file an emergency evacuation plan for approval shall
be a violation and subject to the penalties defined in §
151.99.
   (H)   Temporary non-residential structures. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood warning
notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the
Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
      (1)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to one
year;
      (2)   The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible
for the removal of the temporary structure;
      (3)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);
      (4)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity
responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
      (E)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside
the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
   (I)   Accessory structures.
      (1)   When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.) are to be
placed within a special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met:
         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);
         (b)   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
         (c)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
         (d)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
         (e)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
the provisions of §
151.35(A);
         (f)   All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of §
151.35(D); and
         (g)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection
elevation in conformance with the provisions of §
151.36(D)(3).
      (2)   An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square feet
or that is a minimal investment of $3,000 or less and satisfies the criteria
outlined above is not required to meet the elevation or floodproofing standards
of §
151.36(B). Elevation or floodproofing certifications are required for all other
accessory structures in accordance with §
151.21(C).
   (J)   Tanks. When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a
special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met:
      (1)   Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood,
including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty;
      (2)   Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard
areas shall be attached to and elevated to or above the design flood elevation
on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting
structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood
hazard area;
      (3)   Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not
meet the elevation requirements of §
151.36(B) shall be permitted in flood hazard areas provided the tanks are
anchored or otherwise designed and constructed to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during
conditions of the design flood, including the effects of buoyancy assuming the
tank is empty and the effects of flood-borne debris.
      (4)   Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and
vents shall be:
         (a)   At or above the design flood elevation or fitted with covers
designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the contents of the
tanks during conditions of the design flood; and
         (b)   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of
the design flood.
   (K)   Other development. Prior to the issuance of a floodplain development
permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must submit to the Floodplain
Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure(s) in the event of a
hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood warning notification. The
following information shall be submitted in writing to the Floodplain
Administrator for review and written approval:
      (1)    Fences in regulated floodways and NEAs that have the potential to
block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences,
shall meet the limitations of §
151.39 of this chapter.
      (2)   Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways and
NEAs. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of
fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of §
151.39 of this chapter.
      (3)   Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways and NEAs.
Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water
crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side
of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways
shall meet the limitations of §
151.39 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.37 STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS.
   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Approximate Zone A and
established in §
151.07, where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the
following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
151.35, shall apply:
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements or new development shall be permitted within a distance of 20 feet
each side from top of bank or five times the width of the stream, whichever is
greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall
not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
   (B)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection elevation
shall be determined based on the following criteria:
      (1)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other
sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas
shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and shall be
elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in §§
151.35 and
151.36.
      (2)   When floodway or non-encroachment data is available from a federal,
state, or other source, all new construction and substantial improvements
within floodway and non-encroachment areas shall also comply with the
requirements of §§
151.36 and
151.39.
      (3)   All subdivision, manufactured home park and other development
proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if development is
greater than five acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured home sites. Such
base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in accordance
with §
151.07 and utilized in implementing this chapter.
      (4)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a
federal, state, or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be
elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation, as defined in §
151.05. All other applicable provisions of §
151.36 shall also apply.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.38 STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS BUT
WITHOUT ESTABLISHED FLOODWAYS OR NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   Along rivers and streams where base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided
by FEMA or is available from another source but neither floodway nor non-
encroachment areas are identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM
or in the FIS report, the following requirements shall apply to all development
within such areas:
   (A)   Standards of §§
151.35 and
151.36; and
   (B)   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated, no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting
technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16) Penalty, see §
151.99
§ 151.39 FLOODWAYS AND NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located within
the special flood hazard areas established in §
151.07. The floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas
due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris
and potential projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards
outlined in §§
151.35 and
151.36, shall apply to all development within such areas:
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless:
      (1)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not result
in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood,
based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain Administrator
prior to issuance of floodplain development permit, or
      (2)   A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been approved by
FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must also be obtained within six months
of completion of the proposed encroachment.
   (B)   If subsection (A) above is satisfied, all development shall comply
with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Manufactured homes may be permitted provided the following provisions
are met:
      (1)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of §
151.36(C); and
      (2)   The encroachment standards of subsection (A) above.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16) Penalty, see §
151.99
   LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
§ 151.50 EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION ORDINANCE.
   (A)   This chapter in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the
provisions of the Floodways Ordinance enacted on December 6, 1971, as amended,
and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and continue to
enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that all rights
and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced.
The enactment of the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted on May 2, 2016
shall not affect any action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending. All
provisions of the Floodways Ordinance of the Town of Franklin enacted on
December 6, 1971, as amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed
unless such provisions are more stringent than the requirements set forth in
the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted on May 2, 2016, in which case the
more stringent provision shall control.
   (B)   The date of the initial Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance for Macon
County is August 7, 2000.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16)
§ 151.51 EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof
for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before May 5, 2016; provided,
however, that when construction is not begun under such outstanding permit
within a period of six months subsequent to the date of issuance of the
outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter, as amended by Ordinance passed May 2, 2016.
(Ord. passed 5-2-16)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $50
or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day such violation
continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained
shall prevent the Town of Franklin from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
('76 Code, § 9-6009) (Ord. passed 12-6-71; Am. Ord. passed 5-2-16)
CHAPTER 152: UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Short title
   
152.002   Authority
   
152.003   Jurisdiction
   
152.004   Relationship to existing zoning and subdivision chapter
   
152.005   Relationship to comprehensive plan
   
152.006   No use of land or buildings except in conformity with chapter
provisions
   
152.007   No boundary line adjustments except in conformity with chapter
provisions
   
152.008   Fees
   
152.009   Zoning maps and districts
   
152.010   Definitions
Zoning District Dimensional and Use Requirements
   
152.020   R-1 Residential
   
152.021   R-2 Residential
   
152.022   C-1 Central Commercial
   
152.023   C-2 Secondary Commercial
   
152.024   C-3 Highway Commercial
   
152.025   I-1 Industrial
   
152.026   NMU Neighborhood Mixed Use
   
152.027   MICR Medical Institutional Cultural Residential
   
152.028   EC Entry Corridor Overlay
   
152.029   UV Urban Village
   
152.030   TN Traditional Neighborhood Overlay
   
152.031   PRD Planned Residential Development
   
152.032   PCD Planned Commercial Development
   
152.033   PMH Planned Manufactured Housing Development
   
152.034   Conditional zoning definitions
Development Review
   
152.050   Purpose and structure
   
152.051   Land development and permit required
   
152.052   Development plan review
   
152.053   Special use review
   
152.054   Project phasing
   
152.055   Modification of development authorizations
   
152.056   Expiration and revocation of land development permits
   
152.057   Planned developments
   
152.058   “As built” or record drawings
   
152.059   Project infrastructure
   
152.060   Adequate facilities review
   
152.061   Aggregation
   
152.062   Appeals of development decisions
Board of Adjustment
   
152.070   Establishment of Board of Adjustment and qualifications of members
   
152.071   Powers of the Board of Adjustment
   
152.072   Officers
   
152.073   Meetings
   
152.074   Quorum and voting
   
152.075   Appeals of administrative decisions
   
152.076   Variances
   
152.077   Processing of applications before the Board of Adjustment
   
152.078   Judicial review
   
152.079   Planning Board
General Development Provisions
   
152.090   Application of regulations
   
152.091   Interpretation of district regulations
   
152.092   Visibility at intersections
   
152.093   Off-street parking
   
152.094   Off-street loading and unloading
   
152.095   Accessory structures
   
152.096   Calculation of lot areas
   
152.097   Storage containers
   
152.098   Streets and sidewalks
   
152.099   Nuisances
   
152.100   Burden of proof
   
152.101   Rights-of-way for roads and streets
   
152.102   Open space standards
   
152.103   Common space standards
   
152.104   Separability
   
152.105   Transportation impact analysis
Outdoor Display of Merchandise
   
152.110   Outdoor displays permitted
   
152.111   Regulation of outdoor displays
Special Requirements for Certain Uses
   
152.120   Purpose
   
152.121   Applicability
   
152.122   Procedures for applying standards
   
152.123   Standards
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.130   Land Use Administrator
   
152.131   Land development permit required
   
152.132   Application for land development permit
   
152.133   Construction and use to be as provided in applications, plans,
permits and certificates of zoning compliance
   
152.134   Remedies
   
152.135   Procedures upon discovery of violations
   
152.136   Penalties for violations
Nonconformities
   
152.150   Purpose
   
152.151   Nonconforming uses
   
152.152   Nonconforming structures
   
152.153   Nonconforming vacant lots
   
152.154   Repairs and maintenance
Amendments
   
152.160   Initiation of amendments
   
152.161   Application
   
152.162   Fee
   
152.163   Processing of applications
   
152.164   Property owner consent under certain circumstances
Buffering, Screening and Landscaping
   
152.170   Purpose and intent
   
152.171   Landscaping, buffering and screening required
   
152.172   Alternative compliance
   
152.173   Existing vegetation
   
152.174   General standards
   
152.175   Bufferyards and buffers
   
152.176   Screening
   
152.177   Letter of compliance
   
152.178   Landscaping for vehicular use areas
   
152.179   Buffer requirements when a street separates incompatible uses
Natural Resources and Environmental Protection
   
152.190   Statutory authority and legislative findings of fact
   
152.191   Statement of purpose
   
152.192   Objectives
   
152.193   Steep slope area requirements (Reserved)
   
152.194   Sedimentation and erosion prevention
   
152.195   Stormwater runoff provisions
   
152.196   Surface water protection requirements
   
152.197   Flood plain protection standards (Reserved)
   
152.198   Varying requirements when there is an increase in functionality
   
152.199   Remedies for violations of the natural resources and environmental
protection article
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Franklin Unified
Development Chapter.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.002 AUTHORITY.
    This chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in the town
charter as well as the provisions of G.S. Ch.160D, Ch.143, Art. 21, Part 6, and
Ch.113A, Art. 4.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.003 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall be effective throughout the town’s planning jurisdiction.
The town’s planning jurisdiction comprises the area within the corporate
boundaries of the town as well as the town’s area of extraterritorial
jurisdiction as such may exist at any time.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.004 RELATIONSHIP TO EXISTING ZONING AND SUBDIVISION ORDINANCES.
   To the extent that the provisions of this chapter are the same in substance
as the previously adopted provisions that they replace in the town’s zoning
ordinance or subdivision ordinance, they shall be considered as continuations
thereof and not as new enactments unless otherwise specifically provided. In
particular, a situation that did not constitute a lawful, nonconforming
situation under the previously adopted zoning ordinance does not achieve lawful
nonconforming status under this chapter merely by the repeal of the zoning
ordinance.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.005 RELATIONSHIP TO COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   It is the intention of the Council that this chapter implement the planning
policies adopted by the Council for the town and its extraterritorial planning
area, as reflected in the comprehensive land use plan and other planning
documents.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.006 NO USE OF LAND OR BUILDINGS EXCEPT IN CONFORMITY WITH CHAPTER
PROVISIONS.
   Subject to §§
152.150 through
152.154, below, concerning nonconformities, no person may use, occupy, or sell
any land or buildings or authorize or permit the use, or sale of land or
buildings under his or her control except in accordance with all of the
applicable provisions of this chapter. For purposes of this section, the “use”
or “occupation” of a building or land relates to anything and everything that
is done to, on, or in that building or land.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.007 NO BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENTS EXCEPT IN CONFORMITY WITH CHAPTER
PROVISIONS.
   No boundary of any lot may be adjusted, whether by subdivision, combination
or recombination of previously platted lots, boundary line agreement, or any
other legal method, except in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
To assure that a proposed boundary line adjustment conforms to the provisions
of this chapter, including, but not limited to, lot sizes, lot frontages, and
building setbacks, the proposed adjustment shall be submitted to the Land Use
Administrator for review and approval prior to execution. The plan, plat, or
survey depicting the proposed boundary line adjustment shall contain the
following certificate:
   Zoning Certificate of Approval
   The proposed boundary line adjustment depicted herein is in conformance with
the requirements of the Land Use Ordinance of the Town of Franklin and is
hereby approved.
   Date              Land Use Administrator                    
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.008 FEES.
    Reasonable fees sufficient to cover the costs of administration,
inspection, publication of notice and similar matters may be charged to
applicants for zoning permits, sign permits, conditional use permits, special
use permits, subdivision plat approval, zoning amendments, variances and other
administrative relief. The amount of the fees charged shall be as set forth in
the town’s budget or as established by resolution of the Council filed in the
office of the Town Clerk. Fees established in accordance with this section
shall be paid upon submission of a signed application or notice of appeal.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.009 ZONING MAP AND DISTRICTS.
    The boundaries of the zoning districts are shown upon the map adopted by
the Town Aldermen designated as the Zoning Map. The Zoning Map and all
notations, references and other information shown thereon are hereby declared
to be a part of this chapter and shall have the same force and effect as if the
Zoning Map and all notations, references and other information shown thereon
were fully set forth and described herein. This map has been rendered
digitally, and this digitally-rendered map shall constitute the Official Zoning
Map of the Town of Franklin. It shall be the duty of the Land Use Administrator
to maintain the digitally-rendered map and to faithfully modify it in
accordance with map amendments which may be adopted by the Town Council from
time to time. In maintaining the digitally-rendered zoning map, the Land Use
Administrator is authorized to make minor adjustments to the map where to do so
would cause zoning boundaries to match property lines, streets, streams, or
other zoning boundaries, or where circumstances otherwise make it clear that
such adjustment fulfills the intent of previous zoning map amendments.
   (A)   Map interpretation.  The following rules shall apply in the
interpretation of district boundaries on the zoning map:
      (1)   Boundaries shown appearing to follow the centerlines of streets,
highways, streams, or alleys shall follow such centerlines.
      (2)   Boundaries shown appearing to follow lot lines, rights-of-way, or
easements shall follow the actual surveyed lot lines, rights-of-way or
easements.
      (3)   Boundaries shown appearing to follow the corporate limits shall
follow such corporate limits.
      (4)   Boundaries shown appearing to follow the extraterritorial
jurisdiction boundaries of the town shall follow such boundaries.
      (5)   Boundaries shown appearing to follow railroad lines shall be midway
between the main tracks or the centerline of a single track.
      (6)   Boundaries shown parallel to or as extensions of features indicated
in this section shall be construed as such. Distances not specifically
indicated on the zoning map shall be determined by the scale of the map.
      (7)   Boundaries shown at the intersection of streets shall be at the
intersection of the street centerlines.
      (8)   Where the actual locations of existing physical or natural features
very from those shown on the zoning map, or in the event of other circumstances
not covered by this section, the Land Use Administrator shall have the
authority to interpret district boundaries.
   (B)   Zoning of streets, private streets, and alleys. All streets, private
streets, public ways and alleys, if not otherwise specifically designated,
shall be zoned the same as the adjacent land is zoned to the centerline. In
addition, they may be used for customary and incidental transportation
purposes.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.010 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Intent. For the purpose of interpreting this chapter, certain words,
concepts, and ideas are defined herein. Except as defined herein, all other
words used in this chapter shall have their everyday meaning as determined by
their dictionary definition.
   (B)   Interpretation of commonly used terms and words.
      (1)   Words in the present tense include the future tense.
      (2)   Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words
used in the plural include the singular unless the natural construction of the
wording indicates otherwise.
      (3)   The word “person” includes a firm, association, organization,
corporation, trust and company as well as an individual.
      (4)   The phrase “used for” includes the meaning “designed for”.
      (5)   The word “structure” includes the word “building”.
      (6)   The word “lot” includes the words “plot”, “parcel”, or “tract”.
      (7)   The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
      (8)   The words “map” or “zoning map” refer to the “Official Zoning Map,
Town of Franklin”.
      (9)   The phrase “Planning Director” or “Administrator” refers to the
Land Use Administrator of the town or designee thereof, who is the individual
charged with the administration of this chapter.
      (10)    The phrase “Town Council” refers to the Town Council of the town.
      (11)   The phrase “Planning Board” refers to the Planning Board of the
town.
      (12)   The phrase “Board of Adjustment” refers to the Board of Adjustment
of the town.
      (13)   The phrase “Planning Department” refers to the Planning Department
of the town.
      (14)   The words “Ordinance”, “Code”, “UDO” and “Unified Development
Ordinance” are synonymous and refer to the “Town of Franklin Unified
Development Ordinance.”
   (C)   Definitions of basic terms. Unless otherwise specifically provided, or
unless clearly required by the context, the words and phrases defined in this
section shall have the meaning indicated when used in this chapter.
   ABUT.  To reach; to touch. To touch at one end or side of something; to be
contiguous; join at a border or boundary; terminate on; end at; border on;
reach or touch with an end.
   ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE.  A structure or a portion of a principal
structure or use, which is subordinate to a principal structure or use, on the
same lot, and is used for purposes customarily incidental to the principal
structure. Garages, carports, and storage sheds are common urban accessory
structures. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like qualify as accessory structures
on farms and may or may not be located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling
or shop building.
   ADDITION (to an existing building). An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.
   ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION. Decisions made in the implementation,
administration, or enforcement of development regulations that involve the
determination of facts and the application of objective standards set forth in
this chapter or local government development regulations. These are sometimes
referred to as ministerial decisions or administrative determinations.
   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING. A proceeding to gather facts needed to make an
administrative decision.
   ADULT DAY CARE.  Adult day care offers support, services, and supervision to
older, frail, or disabled adults who have difficulty taking care of themselves
at home, but wish to maintain their independence. Services may include an
individual plan of care, skilled nursing care and health education,
rehabilitation services, personal care and supervision, social services,
recreational therapy, meals, and transportation.
   ADULT DAY CARE CENTER. A facility where adult day care is provided for more
than six adults in an institutional setting.
   ADULT DAY CARE HOME. An individual’s home wherein such individual provides
adult day care for no more than six adults.
   AGRICULTURE. The use of land for agricultural purposes, including farming,
dairying, pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture and
animal husbandry, and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or
storing the produce; provided, however, that the operation of any such
accessory uses shall be secondary to that of normal agricultural activities.
The term shall not include agricultural industries such as commercial poultry
or swine production, cattle or swine feed lots, fur bearing animal farms,
commercial greenhouses, commercial fish or poultry hatcheries, and other
similar activities.
   ALLEY.  A public way which affords only a secondary means of access to
abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
   ANIMAL BOARDING FACILITY.  A facility whose primary purpose is the boarding
of household pets. This term includes animal kennels, which are commercial
establishments where the grooming, boarding, training, and selling of animals
may be conducted, and animal shelters, which are typically governmental or
nonprofit organizations devoted to the welfare, protection and humane treatment
of animals. The term shall not be construed to include facilities where the
boarding of animals is an incidental use, such as animal hospitals or clinics
and pet stores.
   ANIMAL HOSPITALS AND CLINICS. Establishments that include services by
licensed practitioners of veterinary medicine, dentistry, or surgery for
animals, boarding services for pets, and grooming. This term does not include
outdoor “kennels”.
   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. An establishment offering housing services for
those, such as the elderly, who cannot care for themselves. This term includes
uses such as congregate living services assisted living services, continuing
care retirement centers, hospice, and skilled nursing services.
   ASSISTED LIVING UNIT.  A unit occupied by an individual or individuals who
are unable to live independently. The unit is part of a facility that provides
indoor, conveniently located, shared food preparation service and major dining
areas, and common recreation, social, and service facilities for the exclusive
use of all residents.
   BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITIES. Establishments primarily engaged in providing
short-term lodging in facilities known as bed-and-breakfast inns. These
establishments provide short-term lodging in private homes or small buildings
converted for this purpose. BED AND BREAKFAST establishments are characterized
by a highly personalized service and meet the following requirements:
      (1)   They do not serve food or drink to the general public for pay;
      (2)   They serve only the breakfast meal, and that meal is served only to
overnight guests of the business;
      (3)   They include the price of breakfast in the room rate; and
      (4)   They serve as the permanent residence of the owner or the manager
of the business.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A residential use consisting of at least one dwelling unit
together with one or more rooms that are rented out or are designed or intended
to be rented but which rooms, individually or collectively, do not constitute
separate dwelling units. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the renting out of one
or two rooms within a single-family residence may be regarded as an accessory
use.
   BONA FIDE FARM PURPOSES. Agricultural activities as set forth in G.S. §
160D-903.
   BREWPUB. An establishment where beer and malt beverages are made on the
premises in conjunction with a restaurant or bar and where 40% or more of the
beet produced on site is sold on site. Where allowed by law, brewpubs may sell
beer “to go” and/or distribute to offsite accounts. A brewpub shall not exceed
1,000 barrels (as barrel is approximately 31 gallons) of beer production per
year.
   BUILDING. A structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the
shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels, and including
tents, lunch wagons, dining cars, trailers, mobile homes, manufactured homes,
fences, and similar structures whether stationary or movable. The term BUILDING
shall be construed as if followed by the words “or parts thereof.” Each portion
of a building separated by division walls from the ground up without openings
shall be considered a separate building.
   BUILDING, PRINCIPAL. The primary building on a lot or a building that houses
a principal use.
   BUILDING HEIGHT.  The vertical distance measured from the grade to the
highest point of the coping of a flat roof; to the deck line of a mansard roof;
or the mean height level between the eaves and ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel
roof.
   BUSINESS SERVICES.  Establishments primarily engaged in rendering services
to businesses. Examples of services provided include, without limitation, the
following: document preparation, telephone answering, telemarketing, mailing
(except direct mail advertising), court reporting, and stenography. These
establishments may operate copy centers, which provide photocopying,
duplicating, blueprinting, or other copying services besides printing. They may
also provide a range of support activities, including mailing services,
document copying, facsimiles, word processing, onsite PC rental, and office
product sales.
   CEMETERY.  A parcel of land used for interment of the dead in the ground or
in mausoleums.
   CHARTER. As defined in G.S. 160A-1(2).
   CHILD CARE CENTER.  An individual, agency, or organization providing
supervision or care on a regular basis for children who are not related by
blood or marriage to, and who are not the legal wards or foster children of,
the supervising adults. CHILD DAY CARE CENTERS are designed and approved to
accommodate seven or more children at a time and are not an accessory to
residential use.
   CHILD CARE HOME.  Supervision or care provided on a regular basis, as an
accessory use within a principal residential dwelling unit, by a resident of
the dwelling for not more than six children who are not related by blood or
marriage to, and who are not the legal wards or foster children of, the
supervising adult.
   CITY. As defined in G.S. 160A-1(2).
   COMMON SPACE.  Common space is intended to shape the design and character of
a project through a connecting system of pedestrian areas that create a
relationship among the various components of the built environment. It shall be
designed to create areas where workers, residents and shoppers, as the case may
be, are directly or indirectly invited to gather, browse, sit, interact, or
congregate. It shall be arranged as community space with open areas,
landscaping, seating facilities, and lighting fixtures which provide for safety
and visual effects.
   COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION. A homeowners association, condominium association, or
similar organization, organized to own, maintain and operate common facilities
and to enhance and protect their common interests.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The comprehensive plan, land-use plan, small area plans,
neighborhood plans, transportation plan, capital improvement plan, and any
other plans regarding land use and development that have been officially
adopted by the governing board.
   CONDITIONAL ZONING. A legislative zoning map amendment with site-specific
conditions incorporated into the zoning map amendment.
   CONSTRUCTION TRADES FACILITY. An establishment primarily engaged in
construction, including new work, additions, alterations, reconstruction, and
repairs. Offices for construction trades which are separate from and do not
include construction plants or storage should be classified as offices for
purposes of this chapter.
   CONVENIENCE STORE.  A one story, retail store containing less than 2,000
square feet of gross floor area that is designed and stocked to sell primarily
food, beverages, and other household supplies to customers who purchase only a
relatively few items (in contrast to a “supermarket”). It is designed to
attract and depends upon a large volume of “stop and go” traffic.
   COUNTY. Any one of the counties listed in G.S. § 153A-10.
   CIVIC CENTERS AND CULTURAL ARTS FACILITIES. Facilities designed to promote
cultural advancement and serve the community. Examples include the following:
live theater; dance, or music establishments; art galleries, studios and
museums; non-profit civic or fraternal organizations; museums; exhibition or
similar facilities; libraries; and community centers, such as the YMCA and
YWCA.
   DECISION-MAKING BOARD. A governing board, planning board, board of
adjustment, historic district board, or other board assigned to make quasi-
judicial decisions under this chapter.
   DEDICATION.  The reservation for public use of an area of land, usually a
strip of land, a street right-of-way or utilities easement, within which there
is to be or may be located streets, sidewalks, utility systems and drainage
structures, or a lot intended to be used for a public purpose such as a park,
playground, or other public facility.
   DENSITY.  The number of dwelling units per acre of land developed or used
for residential purposes.
   DETERMINATION. A written, final, and binding order, requirement, or
determination regarding an administrative decision.
   DEVELOPER.  A person, including a governmental agency or redevelopment
authority, who undertakes any development and who is the landowner of the
property to be developed or who has been authorized by the landowner to
undertake development on that property.
   DEVELOPMENT.  
      (1)   Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the term means any
of the following:
         (a)   The construction, erection, alteration, enlargement, renovation,
substantial repair, movement to another site, or demolition of any structure.
         (b)   The excavation, grading, filling, clearing, or alteration of
land.
         (c)   The subdivision of land as defined in G.S. § 160D-802.
         (d)   The initiation or substantial change in the use of land or the
intensity of use of land.
      (2)   This definition does not alter the scope of regulatory authority
granted by this chapter.
   DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL. An administrative or quasi-judicial approval made
pursuant to this chapter that is written and that is required prior to
commencing development or undertaking a specific activity, project, or
development proposal. Development approvals include, but are not limited to,
zoning permits, site plan approvals, special use permits, variances, and
certificates of appropriateness. The term also includes all other regulatory
approvals required by regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, including
plat approvals, permits issued, development agreements entered into, and
building permits issued.
   DEVELOPMENT REGULATION. A unified development ordinance, zoning regulation,
subdivision regulation, erosion and sedimentation control regulation,
floodplain or flood damage prevention regulation, mountain ridge protection
regulation, stormwater control regulation, wireless telecommunication facility
regulation, historic preservation or landmark regulation, housing code, State
Building Code enforcement, or any other regulation adopted pursuant to this
chapter, or a local act or charter that regulates land use or development.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, manufactured home, or mobile home, or
part thereof, used and occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used,
and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually
enjoyed therewith. For the purposes of the “Natural Resources and Environmental
Protection” subchapter, the term does not include any manufactured home, mobile
home, or recreational vehicle, if used solely for a seasonal vacation purpose.
   DWELLING, ACCESSORY. A dwelling unit designed for occupancy by one or two
persons, not exceeding 33% of the size of the main dwelling up to 800 square
feet of gross floor space and located on an owner occupied lot with an existing
single-family dwelling. No more than one such dwelling shall be situated on any
lot. The unit shall be located in accordance with §
152.095.
   DWELLING, APARTMENT. A structure of at least three dwelling units.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building arranged to be occupied by three or more
families living independently of each other.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED. A one-family dwelling attached to two or
more one-family dwellings by common vertical walls. No dwelling unit may be
located above another unit.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED. A dwelling which is designed for and
occupied by not more than one family and surrounded by open space or yards and
which is not attached to any other dwelling by any means.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY.  A building arranged to be occupied by two families
living independently of each other, the structure having two dwelling units.
   EVERGREEN. A plant which has green foliage throughout the year.
   EVIDENTIARY HEARING. A hearing to gather competent, material, and
substantial evidence in order to make findings for a quasi-judicial decision
required by a development regulation adopted under this chapter.
   FAMILY.  One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided
that, unless all members are related by blood or marriage, no such family shall
contain over six persons, but further provided that domestic servants employed
on the premises may be housed in the principal building, not to exceed two
domestic servants.
   FINANCIAL SERVICES INSTITUTIONS.  Establishments that engage in financial
transactions that create, liquidate, or change ownership of financial services.
Banks, credit unions, and savings institutions may perform central banking
functions, accept deposits, and lend funds from these deposits. In addition to
banks and credit unions, financial services institutions may include: credit
agencies, trust companies, holding companies, lending and thrift institutions,
securities/commodity contract brokers and dealers, security and commodity
exchanges, vehicle finance (equity) leasing agencies, and investment companies.
   FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT. A commercial establishment in which food is
processed or otherwise prepared for human consumption but not consumed on the
premises.
   FUNERAL HOMES AND SERVICES. Establishments for preparing the dead for burial
or interment and for conducting funerals (i.e. providing facilities for wakes,
arranging transportation for the dead, and selling caskets and related
merchandise).
   GOVERNING BOARD. The City Council or Board of County Commissioners. The term
is interchangeable with the terms “Board of Aldermen” and “Boards of
Commissioners” and shall mean any governing board without regard to the
terminology employed in charters, local acts, other portions of the General
Statutes, or local customary usage.
   GROUP CARE FACILITIES. A facility that provides resident services to more
than six individuals, at least one of whom is unrelated to the others. These
individuals are handicapped, aged, or disabled, or are undergoing
rehabilitation, and are being provided services in the group care facility to
meet their needs. This category includes uses licensed or supervised by any
federal, state, or county health/welfare agency, such as group dwellings (all
ages), halfway houses, nursing homes, resident schools, resident facilities,
and foster or boarding homes.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA. The total area of a building measured by taking the
outside dimensions of the building at each floor level intended for occupancy
or storage.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling
unit by a residing family member that is incidental to the primary use of the
dwelling as a residence. Home occupations are small and quiet businesses which
generally cannot be discerned from the frontage, are seldom visited by clients,
require little parking, little or no signage, have only one or two employees
and provide services such as professional services, music instruction, and hair
styling.
   HOSPITAL.  A health care facility the purpose of which is to provide for
care, treatment and testing for physical, emotional, and/or mental injury,
illness, or disability, and overnight boarding of patients, either on a for-
profit or not-for-profit basis. This term does not include group homes.
   HOTELS AND MOTELS. Establishments providing lodging and short-term
accommodations for travelers. They may offer a wide range of services including
overnight sleeping space, food services, convention hosting services, and/or
laundry services. Entertainment and recreation activities may also be included.
Extended-stay hotels are included in this category.
   LANDOWNER OR OWNER. The holder of the title in fee simple. Absent evidence
to the contrary, a local government may rely on the county tax records to
determine who is a landowner. The landowner may authorize a person holding a
valid option, lease, or contract to purchase to act as his or her agent or
representative for the purpose of making applications for development
approvals.
   LAND USE ADMINISTRATOR. The official responsible for the overall
administration and enforcement of this chapter. The Land Use Administrator may
delegate duties under these regulations; however the Land Use Administrator
shall remain responsible for their overall administration and enforcement.
   LAUNDRY, DRY CLEANING PLANT.  A service establishment engaged primarily in
high volume laundry and garment services, including, without limitation, carpet
and upholstery cleaners, diaper services, dry-cleaning and garment pressing,
commercial laundries and linen supply. These facilities may include customer
pick-up but do not include coin-operated laundries or dry cleaning pick-up
stores without dry cleaning equipment.
   LEGISLATIVE DECISION. The adoption, amendment, or repeal of a regulation
under this chapter or an applicable local act. The term also includes the
decision to approve, amend, or rescind a development agreement consistent with
the provisions of the “Amendments” subchapter.
   LEGISLATIVE HEARING. A hearing to solicit public comment on a proposed
legislative decision.
   LIVE-WORK UNIT.  An attached residential building type with small commercial
enterprises on the ground floor and a residential unit above or behind with a
common tenant in both spaces. Dual occupancy is not permitted.
   LOCAL ACT. As defined in G.S. § 160A-1(2).
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT. A city or county.
   LOT.  A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal
instrument such as a recorded deed or a recorded map and which is recognized as
a separate legal entity for purposes of transfer of title.
   LOT OF RECORD.  A lot which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has
been recorded in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Macon County, or a lot
described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
   LOT, CORNER. A parcel abutting two or more streets at their intersection.
These parcels will have a front yard abutting each street in addition to one
side yard and one rear yard.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/91a1fc597576d9f1d7ef65d503a9f7db2528373f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1410.jpg]
 
   LOT, INTERIOR. A parcel that is not a corner lot, reverse corner lot, or
through lot.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/91a1fc597576d9f1d7ef65d503a9f7db2528373f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1412.jpg]
 
   LOT, REVERSE CORNER. A corner lot whose side street line is substantially a
continuation of the front line of the lot upon which it rears. These parcels
will have a front yard abutting each street, with side yards running along the
remaining lot lines.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/91a1fc597576d9f1d7ef65d503a9f7db2528373f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1414.jpg]
 
   LOT, THROUGH.  A parcel having frontage on two parallel or approximately
parallel streets. These parcels will have two side yards and may have a front
yard facing either street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/91a1fc597576d9f1d7ef65d503a9f7db2528373f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1416.jpg]
 
   MANUFACTURED HOME OR MOBILE HOME.  A struct ure as define d in G.S. § 143-
1 45(7).
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK .  The location of two or more manufactured homes or
manufactured  home spaces on a single parcel of land, or a grouping of two or
more manufactured homes on at least two contiguous parcels when such parcels
are under common ownership and/or management as a park for the rental of
manufactured homes or manufactured home spaces.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK.  The location of two or more manufactured homes or
manufactured home spaces on a single parcel of land, or a grouping of two or
more manufactured homes on at least two contiguous parcels when such parcels
are under common ownership and/or management as a park for the rental of
manufactured homes or manufactured home spaces.
   MANUFACTURING, HEAVY.  A nonresidential use that requires an NPDES permit
for an industrial or stormwater discharge or involves the use or storage of any
hazardous materials or substances or that is used for the purpose of
manufacturing, assembling, finishing, cleaning or developing any product or
commodity. Typically the largest facilities in a community which have complex
operations, some of which may be continuous (24 hours a day/seven days per
week).
   MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. A non-residential use that requires an NPDES permit
for an industrial or stormwater discharge or involves the use or storage of any
hazardous materials or substances or that is used for the purpose of
manufacturing, assembling, finishing, cleaning or developing any product or
commodity. Facilities are typically designed to look and generate impacts like
a typical office building, but rely on special power, water, or waste disposal
systems for operation. Noise, odor, dust, and glare of each operation are
completely confined within an enclosed building, insofar as practical.
   MICROBREWERY. An establishment where beer and malt beverages are made on the
premises and then sold or distributed, and which produces less than 15,000
barrels (a barrel is approximately 31 gallons) of beer per year. Microbreweries
sell to the public by one or more of the following methods: the traditional
three-tier system (brewer to wholesaler to retailer to consumer); the two-tier
system (brewer acting as wholesaler to retailer to consumer); and directly to
the consumer.
   MINI-WAREHOUSES. A building containing separate enclosed storage spaces the
sizes of which may vary, which are leased or rented on an individual basis.
   MINOR BOUNDARY LINE ADJUSTMENTS. The placement, deletion or movement of any
boundary line in one of the following ways.
      (1)   The combination or recombination of portions of previously
subdivided and recorded lots where the resulting total number of lots is not
increased or not greater than four and the resultant lots are equal to or
exceed the standards of the municipality as shown in its subdivision
regulations.
      (2)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the
widening or opening of streets for public transportation system corridors.
      (3)   The division of a residentially zoned tract in single ownership
into not more than three lots, where no street right-of-way dedication is
involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of
the municipality, as shown in its subdivision regulations.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDING. Commercial food service sales by a mobile food vendor
on a parcel of land outside of right-of-way areas.
   MOBILE FOOD VENDOR. An individual person or corporation who owns and
operates a vehicle (truck or trailer with a maximum of two axles) that includes
a mobile kitchen or similar facility that supports the sale and/or preparation
of food and non- alcoholic beverages which is licensed and approved to walk-up
customers. Use of the term MOBILE KITCHEN in this chapter will be understood to
include mobile kitchens and similar facilities.
   MODULAR HOMES.  A factory-built dwelling unit, other than a manufactured
home, that is labeled as a North Carolina Modular Home and built and set up in
accordance with the North Carolina Residential Code, current edition. Such
structures include varieties commonly delivered onsite in modules, as well as
“on-frame” structures delivered completely pre-assembled.
   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL. A building or area in which trucks, including
tractor or trailer units, are parked, stored, or serviced, including the
transfer, loading or unloading of goods. A terminal may include facilities for
the temporary storage of loads prior to transshipment.
   MOTOR VEHICLES.  All machines designed or intended to travel over land or
water by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.
   NONCONFORMITIES. A lot, structure, use of land, or condition, which existed
lawfully and was created in good faith prior to the adoption, revision, or
amendment to this chapter, and which conformed to applicable regulations in
affect prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment to this chapter in terms
of size, area, dimension, location, intensity of use, or other condition, but
which now fails to conform to the requirements of this chapter by reason of
such adoption, revision, or amendment. NONCONFORMITIES include, but are not
limited to, the following:
      (1)   Non-conforming lots: lots of improper size, shape, or structural
density; or lots lacking frontage upon a public street.
      (2)   Non-conforming structures: structures located within a right-of-
way, or that exceed height or setback limitations, or that are located within
setback areas, floodways, or stream-side protection areas.
      (3)   Non-conforming uses of land: industrial activity within
residentially zoned areas, hazardous chemical storage in flood-prone areas,
open storage in a improperly zoned area.
      (4)   Non-conforming conditions: insufficient parking, landscaping, or
buffering for an otherwise conforming use or structure; cleared vegetation in a
stream-side protection area; inadequate storm water control measures.
   OPEN SPACE.  Area to provide for a predominately pervious land surface
providing spaces for landscaping and other visual enhancements, pedestrian
circulation and wildlife habitat. The following are not designated open space;
vehicular use areas such as drives, parking lots and service areas; and
buildings. Pedestrian amenities, both pervious and impervious are permitted in
open spaces.
   OUTDOOR DISPLAY, RETAIL. The placement of merchandise outside the walls of
any enclosed building, which merchandise is advertised for sale, and/or
displayed with the intent to entice potential customers onto the premises. The
term shall apply only to merchandise which is placed outside temporarily for
the purpose of sale or enticement and placed within an enclosed structure while
the business is closed. The term shall not apply to types of merchandise which
by their nature cannot feasibly be placed within an enclosed structure outside
of operational hours, such as automobiles, recreational vehicles, boats, farm
equipment, or prefabricated outbuildings or other outdoor structures.
   PARKING SPACE. A portion of the vehicular use area set aside for the parking
of one vehicle.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public
or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private
institution, utility, cooperative, interstate body, the State of North Carolina
and its agencies and political subdivisions, or other legal entity.
   PERSONAL SERVICES. Establishments primarily engaged in providing services
generally to individuals, such as dry-cleaning and laundry pick-up facilities,
portrait photographic studios, beauty and barber shops, seamstress shops, shoe
repair shops, and clothing rental shops.
   PLACES OF WORSHIP. Any facility such as a church, temple, monastery,
synagogues, or mosque used by a non-profit organization for worship and, if
applicable customary related uses such as education (pre-schools, religious
education, etc.), recreation (gymnasiums, activity rooms, ball fields, etc.),
housing (rectory, parsonage, elderly or disabled housing, etc.) and accessory
uses such as cemeteries, mausoleums, soup kitchens, and bookstores.
   PLANNING BOARD. Any board or commission established pursuant to G.S. § 160D-
301.
   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT.  A residential or commercial development which promotes
the efficient and well-planned use of land through unified development while
providing the town with open space, compatible uses, optimum service of
community facilities and adequate vehicular access and circulation.
   PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION JURISDICTION. The geographic area
defined in the “Zoning District Dimensional and Use Requirements” subchapter of
this chapter within which a city or county may undertake planning and apply the
development regulations authorized by this chapter.
   PRIVATE CLUB.  Any person, firm, corporation or association, key club,
bottle club, locker club, pool club or any other kind of club or association
having, possessing or requiring membership and excluding the general public
from its premises or place of meeting, or congregating, or operating, or
exercising control over any other place where persons are permitted to drink
alcoholic beverages, consume food, observe entertainment, live or otherwise,
play at video, mechanical or electronic games and/or dance, other than in a
private home.
   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES. Services provided that make available the knowledge
and skills of their employees to sell expertise and perform professional,
scientific, and technical services to others. Such services include, without
limitation, the following: legal services; accounting, tax, bookkeeping, and
payroll services; architectural, engineering, and related services; graphic,
industrial, and interior design services; consulting services; research and
development services; advertising, media, and photography services; real estate
services; investment banking, securities, brokerages and insurance-related
services; and medical services such as physician’s and dentist’s offices.
   PROPERTY. All real property subject to land-use regulation by a local
government. The term includes any improvements or structures customarily
regarded as a part of real property.
   PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITY.  Any structure or facility transmitting a service
provided by a government or public utility, including, without limitation, fire
stations, emergency medical service centers, telephone and repeater stations,
pumping substations, and water towers, but not including telecommunication
towers, antennas, and other telecommunication devices.
   QUASI-JUDICIAL DECISION. A decision involving the finding of facts regarding
a specific application of a development regulation and that requires the
exercise of discretion when applying the standards of the regulation. The term
includes, but is not limited to, decisions involving variances, special use
permits, certificates of appropriateness, and appeals of administrative
determinations. Decisions on the approval of subdivision plats and site plans
are quasi-judicial in nature if the regulation authorizes a decision-making
board to approve or deny the application based not only upon whether the
application complies with the specific requirements set forth in the
regulation, but also on whether the application complies with one or more
generally stated standards requiring a discretionary decision on the findings
to be made by the decision-making board.
   RECREATION FACILITIES, INDOOR.  Uses or structures for active recreation
including, without limitation, gymnasiums, natatoriums, athletic equipment,
indoor running tracks, climbing facilities, court facilities and their
customary accessory uses. This definition is inclusive of both non-profit and
for-profit operations.
   RECREATION FACILITIES, OUTDOOR. Parks and other open space used for active
or passive recreation such as ball fields, playgrounds, greenway trails, tennis
courts, riding stables, campgrounds, and golf courses, and their customary
accessory uses including, but not limited to, maintenance sheds, clubhouses,
pools, restrooms, and picnic shelters. This definition is inclusive of both
non-profit and for-profit operations.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (R.V.). A vehicular, portable structure built on a
chassis, designed to be used as a temporary residence for travel, recreational
and vacation uses, permanently identified as a recreational vehicle by the
manufacturers of the unit which either has its own motive power or is mounted
on or drawn by another vehicle. The term shall include, but not limited to
travel trailer, camper, truck camper or motor home. Recreational vehicles shall
not be used as permanent residences.
   RECREATION VEHICLE PARK. A parcel, tract, plat or lot, consisting of a
minimum of one acre which is designed and improved to accommodate two or more
RVs and is permitted as a R.V. Park.
   RESTAURANT.  A retail business selling ready-to-eat food and/or beverages
for on or off-premise consumption. Customers may be served from an ordering
counter (i.e. cafeteria or limited service restaurant), at their tables (full-
service restaurant), and at exclusively pedestrian-oriented facilities that
serve from a walk-up ordering counter (snack and/or nonalcoholic bars).
   RETAIL SALES. A use category allowing premises to be available for the
commercial sale of merchandise and prepared foods. Such use category does not
include manufacturing.
   SCHOOL, ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY. A public or private institution for
education or learning which does not include lodging. This term includes any
school licensed by the state and that meets the state requirements for
elementary and secondary education and also includes any accessory athletic,
recreational or other facilities.
   SCHOOL, VOCATIONAL/TECHNICAL. A public or private institution for education
or learning of a vocational or technical nature which does not include lodging.
This term includes any accessory athletic, recreational or other facilities.
These schools offer vocational and technical training in a variety of technical
subjects and trades. Training may lead to job-specific certification.
   SERVICE STATION.  An establishment that primarily retails automotive fuels.
These establishments may also provide services such as automotive repair,
automotive oils, and/or replacement parts and accessories. Gas stations include
structures that are specialized for selling gasoline with storage tanks, often
underground or hidden. Bays for car washes may also be included.
   SETBACK. The distance from the property line or street right-of-way,
whichever is closer, to the closest edge of a structure. Where the street
right-of-way is not defined, that distance shall start at the edge of the
maintained area.
   SHELTER FACILITY.  A temporary residence operated by a nonprofit
organization meeting the needs of citizens temporarily in crisis such as:
family violence, natural disaster, fire, economic distress, neighborhood
violence, homelessness, and unwed pregnant teens.
   SHOOTING RANGE, INDOOR. A public or private facility intended for the
discharge of firearms, and constructed to a standard that is at least as
stringent as all standards set forth in the National Rifle Association Range
Source Book and any applicable federal or state regulations and guidelines,
whichever is more stringent.
   SHRUB.  A woody plant, usually multi-stemmed or well-branched from the base,
the branches being retained to the ground. When used for buffer plantings,
shrubs must also reach a mature height between four and 15 feet.
   SITE PLAN. A scaled drawing and supporting text showing the relationship
between lot lines and the existing or proposed uses, buildings, or structures
on the lot. The site plan may include site-specific details such as building
areas, building height and floor area, setbacks from lot lines and street
rights-of-way, intensities, densities, utility lines and locations, parking,
access points, roads, and stormwater control facilities that are depicted to
show compliance with all legally required development regulations that are
applicable to the project and the site plan review. A site plan approval based
solely upon application of objective standards is an administrative decision
and a site plan approval based in whole or in part upon the application of
standards involving judgment and discretion is a quasi-judicial decision. A
site plan may also be approved as part of a conditional zoning decision.
   SPECIAL USE PERMIT. A permit issued to authorize development or land uses in
a particular zoning district upon presentation of competent, material, and
substantial evidence establishing compliance with one or more general standards
requiring that judgment and discretion be exercised as well as compliance with
specific standards. The term includes permits previously referred to as
conditional use permits or special exceptions.
   STORAGE YARD.  The open storage of various materials outside of a structure
as a principal use.
   STREET. A public street or a street with respect to which an offer of
dedication has been made.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. A major street in the town’s street system that serves as
an avenue for the circulation of traffic onto, out, or around the town and
carries high volumes of traffic.
   STREET, COLLECTOR. A street whose principal function is to carry traffic
between minor, local, and sub-collector streets and arterial streets, but that
may also provide direct access to abutting properties. It serves or is designed
to serve, directly or indirectly, more than one hundred dwelling units and is
designed to be used or is used to carry more than eight hundred trips per day.
   STREET, CUL-DE-SAC. A street that terminates in a vehicular turn-around.
   STREET, LOCAL. A street whose sole function is to provide access to abutting
properties. It serves or is designed to serve at least ten, but not more than
25 dwelling units and is expected to or does handle between 75 and 200 trips
per day.
   STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS.  A street that is parallel to and adjacent to an
arterial street and that is designed to provide access to abutting properties
so that these properties are somewhat sheltered from the effects of the through
traffic on the arterial street and so that the flow of traffic on the arterial
street is not impeded by direct driveway access from a large number of abutting
properties.
   STREET, MINOR. A street whose sole function is to provide access to abutting
properties. It serves or is designed to serve not more than nine dwelling units
and is expected to or does handle up to 75 trips per day.
   STREET, SUBCOLLECTOR.  A street whose principal function is to provide
access to abutting properties, but is also designed to be used or is used to
connect minor and local streets with collector or arterial streets. Including
residences indirectly served through connecting streets, it serves or is
designed to serve at least 26 but not more than 100 dwelling units and is
expected to or does handle between 200 and 800 trips per day.
   STRUCTURE.  Any walled and roofed building or other physical object, whether
temporary or permanent, that is designed for human habitation or to uphold,
house, contain, or bear other objects or materials, including but not limited
to buildings, manufactured homes, swimming pools, telecommunications towers,
and LPG storage tanks.
   STUDIO-ART, DANCE, MARTIAL ARTS, MUSIC, ETC. Small facilities which provide
individual and/or group instruction and training in the arts, including the
martial arts. This term also includes the processing of photographs produced
only by users of the studio facilities, yoga and similar instruction, and
aerobics and gymnastics studios with no other fitness facilities or equipment.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of land for the purpose of sale or development as
specified in G.S. § 160D-802.
   SUBDIVISION, MAJOR. Any subdivision not meeting the definition of a minor
subdivision as listed below.
   SUBDIVISION, MINOR. The subdivision of five acres or less into five or fewer
lots and involving no new public or private streets or roads, right-of-way
dedication, easements or utility extensions. Also includes the combination and
recombination of existing lots.
   SUBDIVISION REGULATION. A subdivision regulation authorized by G.S. 160D,
Art. 8.
   SURFACE WATER. Any body of water, perennial or intermittent stream
(including any “blue line stream” as indicated on a United States Geological
Survey Topographical Map), river, brook, wetland as identified by means of the
Cowardin wetland classification system or other appropriate classification
system as employed by agencies of the Untied States or the State of North
Carolina), swamp, pond, lake, branch, creek, reservoir, waterway, or other body
or accumulation of water, whether surface or temporarily underground by means
of a man-made conveyance, public or private, permanent or intermittent, or
natural or artificial, that is contained in, flows through, or borders upon any
portion of the Town of Franklin and its extra-territorial jurisdiction.
   TASTING ROOM. A facility in which wine products, malt beverages or
spirituous liquors that are grown or processed on the owner’s property may be
tasted and sold (where permitted by applicable law and regulation). The
definition shall also include the following associated uses as permitted: gift/
retail sales, assembly areas, meeting rooms, dining and catering facilities,
and a restaurant facility, if expressly requested and permitted. The facility
must be operated in association with an existing vineyard (bona fide farm),
brewery or distillery operation, but need not be located upon the same property
as the vineyard, brewery or distillery operation. The facility must obtain all
applicable permits, including any required by the Town of Franklin, the Macon
County Health Department or any other department of health and North Carolina
Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission before beginning operations and must
thereafter maintain the same.
   TEMPORARY STRUCTURE.  A structure intended to serve a specific event and to
be removed upon the completion of that event. This term includes, but is not
limited to, bleachers, perimeter fencing, vendor tents/canopies, judging
stands, trailers, portable toilets, sound/video equipment, stages, platforms,
and other impermanent devices, which do not involve grading or land form
alteration for installation, and which are not permanently affixed to the
ground.
   TEMPORARY USE.  An activity or use of land which, having met certain
requirements and conditions, may be permitted for a period of limited duration,
and which may utilize “temporary structures” for the duration of the event.
   THEATER. A specialized theater for showing movies or motion pictures on a
projection screen. This category also includes cineplexes and megaplexes,
complex structures with multiple movie theaters, each theater capable of an
independent performance.
   TINY HOUSE. A single-family detached home that is 200 square feet to 600
square feet in size (not including loft space) and complies with the North
Carolina State Building Code. A tiny house on wheels for permanent occupancy
(longer than 30 days) is considered a recreational vehicle.
   TOWER.  Any tower or structure, including those erected for the purpose of
transmitting or receiving signals (i.e., telephonic, radio, television or
microwave), and including the construction of new free-standing facilities or
facilities that extend more than 20 feet above the normal height of the
building or structure on which they are placed. The following shall not be
included in this definition:
      (1)   Amateur radio facilities with antennas mounted on supporting
structures less than 100 feet in height;
      (2)   Residential antennas for receiving television or AM/FM radio
broadcasts;
      (3)   Residential satellite dishes; and
      (4)   Commercial or industrial satellite dishes that are less than 20
feet in height.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.
   VESTED RIGHT. The right to undertake and complete the development and use of
property under the terms and conditions of an approval secured as specified in
G.S. § 160D-108 or under common law.
   WAREHOUSE. Facilities for the storage of furniture, household goods, or
other commercial goods of any nature. This term includes cold storage but does
not include the following: warehouse, storage, or mini-storage facilities
offered for rent or lease to the general public; warehouse facilities primarily
used for wholesaling and distribution; or terminal facilities for handling
freight.
   WHOLESALE SALES.  Establishments engaged in selling merchandise to
retailers; to contractors, industrial, commercial, institutional, farm or
professional business users; to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or
brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or
companies. Examples of these establishments include, without limitation, the
following:
      (1)   Agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants;
      (2)   Assemblers, buyers and associations engaged in the cooperative
marketing of farm products;
      (3)   Merchant wholesalers; and
      (4)   Stores primarily selling electrical plumbing, heating, and air
conditioning supplies and equipment.
   YARD. A space on the same lot with a principal building, open, unoccupied,
and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except where
encroachments and accessory buildings and structures are expressly permitted.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard situated between the front building line and the front
lot line extending the full width of the lot.
   YARD, REAR.  A yard situated between the rear building line and the rear lot
line extending the full width of the lot.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard situated between a side building line and side lot line
and extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard. In
determining the situation of accessory structures, the side yard shall be
assumed to extend through the rear yard to the rear lot line.
   ZONING DISTRICT. The term applied to various geographical areas of the Town
of Franklin for the purpose of interpreting the provisions of this chapter. The
districts are designated with the use of symbols on the official zoning map.
Regulations controlling land use in the various districts within the Town of
Franklin are set forth in §§
152.020 -
152.033. The terms “district” and “zoning district” are synonymous and are used
interchangeably throughout this chapter.
   ZONING MAP AMENDMENT OR REZONING. An amendment to a zoning regulation for
the purpose of changing the zoning district that is applied to a specified
property or properties. The term also includes:
      (1)   The initial application of zoning when land is added to the
territorial jurisdiction of a local government that has previously adopted
zoning regulations; and
      (2)   The application of an overlay zoning district or a conditional
zoning district. The term does not include:
         (a)   The initial adoption of a zoning map by a local government;
         (2)   The repeal of a zoning map and readoption of a new zoning map
for the entire planning and development regulation jurisdiction; or
      (3)   Updating the zoning map to incorporate amendments to the names of
zoning districts made by zoning text amendments where there are no changes in
the boundaries of the zoning district or land uses permitted in the district.
   ZONING REGULATION. A zoning regulation authorized by the “Special
Requirements for Certain Uses” subchapter (2019-111, s. 2.4. G.S. 160D-7).
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08; Am. Ord. passed 5-5-14; Am.
Ord. passed 6-2- 14; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-15; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-15; Am. Ord.
passed 2-1-16; Am. Ord. 2017-013, passed 11-6-17; Am. Ord. passed - - )
ZONING DISTRICT DIMENSIONAL AND USE REQUIREMENTS
§ 152.020 R-1 RESIDENTIAL.
   The R-1 Residential Zoning District Classification is established to provide
areas for medium-density, single-family residential uses, where adequate water
and sewer facilities are available to serve the development. Low-density
single-family residential uses are allowed where water and/or sewer facilities
are not available; consequently, the minimum lot sizes shall be increased and
the density shall be reduced to accommodate the larger lot sizes that may be
required by the Macon County Department of Public Health.
   (A)   Dimensional requirements.
      Minimum lot size, single-family (sq. ft.):   10,000
      Minimum lot size, two-family (sq. ft.):    15,000
      Minimum setbacks (feet):         front: 25
                        side: 10
                        rear: 15
      Maximum building height (feet):         35
      Maximum gross floor area (sq. ft.):    no restrictions
      Minimum open space (% of site):       40 (not applicable to single-family
and two-family residences.)
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted by right in the R-
1 Residential Zoning District Classification provided they meet all
requirements of this section and all other requirements established in this
ordinance. A use followed by the notation (SR) is permitted subject to special
requirements contained in §§
152.120 -
152.123, below.
      (1)   Accessory uses and/or structures
      (2)   Accessory dwelling units (SR)
      (3)   Adult day care homes
      (4)   Agriculture
      (5)   Bed and breakfast facilities (SR)
      (6)   Cemeteries
      (7)   Child care homes
      (8)   Child day care centers (SR)
      (9)   Home occupations (SR)
      (10)   Minor planned residential developments, subject to the
requirements of §§
152.050 -
152.062, herein (SUP).
      (11)   Modular homes
      (12)   Places of worship
      (13)   Public parks, including greenways
      (14)   Public utility facilities (SR)
      (15)   Residences, single-family
      (16)   Residences, two-family
      (17)   Schools, elementary and secondary (SR)
   (C)   Special uses. The following use shall be permitted in the R-
1 Residential District Classification only upon issuance of a special use
permit pursuant to §§
152.050 -
152.062, below.
         Adaptive reuses (SR)
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.021 R-2 RESIDENTIAL.
   The R-2 Residential Zoning District Classification is established to provide
areas for medium- to high-medium density, for single- and multi-family
residential uses, with a maximum density of eight dwelling units per acre,
where adequate water and sewer facilities are available to serve the
development. Housing types allowed include single-family, two-family, multi-
family and individual manufactured homes, and manufactured home parks. Where
water and/or sewer facilities are not available; consequently, the minimum lot
sizes shall be increased and the density shall be reduced to accommodate the
larger lot sizes that may be required by the Macon County Department of Public
Health.
   (A)   Dimensional requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot size, single-family (sq. ft.): 8,000
      (2)   Minimum lot size, two-family (sq. ft.): 12,000
      (3)   Minimum setbacks (feet):       front: 25
                        side: 10
                        rear: 15
      (4)   Maximum building height (feet): 35
      (5)   Maximum gross floor area (sq. ft.): no restrictions
      (6)   Minimum open space (% of site): 40 (Not applicable to single-family
and two-family residences.)
   (B)   Permitted uses. 
      (1)   The following uses are permitted by right in the R-2 Residential
Zoning District Classification provided they meet all requirements of this
section and all other requirements established in this ordinance. A use
followed by the notation (SR) is permitted subject to special requirements
contained in §§
152.120 -
152.123, below.
      (2)   All permitted uses listed in the R-1 Residential Zoning District
Classification, subject to special requirements if noted.
         (a)   Manufactured homes, individual, limited to one home per lot.
         (b)   PMH Planned Manufactured Housing Development (SUP).
   (C)   Special uses. The following use shall be permitted in the R-2 Multi-
Family Residential District Classification only upon issuance of a special use
permit pursuant to §§
152.050 -
152.062, below.
         Adaptive reuses (SR)
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.022 C-1 CENTRAL COMMERCIAL.
   The C-1 Central Commercial District is established to recognize the existing
historic role andheritage of Franklin’s downtown area, and to promote its
preservation, redevelopment and expansion. Further, this district provides
concentrated retail, service, office, civic uses, places of worship,
residences, and other compatible uses of land.
   (A)   Dimensional requirements.
      Maximum setback (feet):   front    0
                  side:   0
                  rear:   0
      Minimum lot/parcel size (sq. ft.): no restrictions
      Minimum setbacks (feet):   front:    0
      Maximum building height (feet):    65
      Maximum gross floor area (sq. ft.): 15,000-99,999 square-foot structures
require conditional zoning approval. 100,000 plus square-foot structures
require a special use permit.
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted by right in the C-
1 Central Commercial Zoning District Classification provided they meet all
requirements of this section and all other requirements established in this
ordinance. A use followed by the notation (SR) is permitted subject to special
requirements contained in §§
152.120 -
152.123, below.
      (1)   All permitted uses listed in the R-1 Residential Zoning District
Classification, subject to special requirements if noted.
      (2)   Adult day care centers registered with the North Carolina
Department of Health and Human Services.
      (3)   Apartments three to 19 units.
      (4)   Bed and breakfast facilities.
      (5)   Brewpubs.
      (6)   Cemeteries.
      (7)   Civic centers and cultural art facilities.
      (8)   Civic clubs and fraternal organizations.
      (9)   Dance and fitness facilities.
      (10)   Dry cleaning and laundry establishments.
      (11)   Funeral homes and crematoria.
      (12)   Home occupations.
      (13)   Hotels and motels.
      (14)   Laundries, coin-operated.
      (15)   Live/work or mixed use buildings in which any of the business uses
described in this subsection occur on the first floor and residential uses
occur behind or on upper floors.
      (16)   Mobile food vending (SR).
      (17)   Multi-family dwellings and apartments 20 plus units (CZ).
      (18)   Music and art studios and galleries.
      (19)   Newspaper offices and printing establishments.
      (20)   Offices, professional, governmental and financial, including
banks.
      (21)   Parking lots and garages.
      (22)   Parking lots and structures.
      (23)   Places of worship.
      (24)   Private clubs (SR).
      (25)   Public and semi-public uses such as libraries, museums and
galleries.
      (26)   Public utility facilities.
      (27)   Recreational facilities, indoor.
      (28)   Repair services.
      (29)   Restaurants.
      (30)   Retail sales.
      (31)   Schools, business, technical and vocational.
      (32)   Service stations.
      (33)   Services, personal, business and repair.
      (34)   Tasting rooms.
      (35)   Theaters.
      (36)   Transit facilities.
      (37)   Wholesale sales.
   (C)   Prohibited uses. No non-residential development or redevelopment
exceeding 15,000 but less than 100,000 square feet in gross floor area shall be
permitted in the C-1 Central Commercial Zoning District Classification unless a
conditional zoning approval has been granted by the Town Council; no non-
residential development or redevelopment exceeding 100,000 square feet in gross
floor area shall be permitted unless a special use permit has been approved by
the Board of Adjustment.
   (D)   Streetscape design. The relationship between a building and areas for
pedestrian or vehicular circulation shall be carefully planned in order to
avoid negative impacts of one upon the other. All buildings and uses developed
in this zoning district classification shall meet the following minimum
standards; provided, however, buildings undergoing renovation and
rehabilitation, in which the footprint of existing structures is not being
increased or altered, may be exempted from regulations regarding street walls
and urban open spaces if site conditions make compliance therewith impractical.
      (1)   Street walls. 
         (a)   The first floors of all buildings, including structured parking,
shall be designed to encourage and complement pedestrian-scale interest and
activity. To the extent practicable, in consideration of the nature of the uses
proposed, this is to be accomplished in part by the use of transparent windows
and doors arranged so that the uses are visible from and/or accessible to the
street on the first floor street frontage. In addition a combination of design
elements shall be used on the building facade and/or in relationship to the
building at street level to animate and enliven the streetscape. These design
elements may include, but are not limited to, the following: ornamentation,
molding, changes in material or color, architectural lighting, works of art,
fountains and pools, street furniture, landscaping and garden areas, and
display areas.
         (b)   Any design elements which extend into the public right-of-way on
city or state maintained streets require an encroachment agreement with the
Town of Franklin or the North Carolina Department of Transportation (NCDOT), as
appropriate. Where expanses of blank wall are necessary, they may not exceed 20
feet in length. A blank wall is a facade which does not add to the character of
the streetscape and does not contain transparent windows or doors or sufficient
ornamentation, decoration or articulation as listed in the above paragraph. The
first floor and street level shall be designed with attention to adjacent
public or private open spaces and existing streetscape improvements. The
provision of multiple entrances from the public sidewalk or open spaces is
encouraged.
         (c)   All new structures must not be built further than 20 feet from
street right-of-way to help encourage pedestrian activity. All new structures
must be at least two or more stories high to help to insure new structures
blend with the historic look of the C-1 Downtown District.
      (2)   Structured parking facilities. In addition to the above
requirements, in the event that any openings for ventilation, service, or
emergency access are located at the first floor level in the building facade,
then they shall be an integral part of the overall building design. These
openings as well as pedestrian and vehicular entrances shall be designed to
minimize visibility of parked cars. The remainder of the street level frontage
shall be either commercial space or an architecturally articulated facade
designed to minimize the visibility of parked cars. All levels of a structured
parking facility shall be designed and screened in such a way as to minimize
visibility of parked cars. In no instance will rails or cabling alone be
sufficient to meet this screening requirement. The design requirements of this
section apply to all building facades which are visible from any public right-
of-way.
      (3)   Screening. All structures and facilities for trash, loading,
outdoor equipment, and storage, including the storage of inventory, shall be
screened so as not to be visible from the street and pedestrian circulation
areas. Solid walls shall be faced with brick, stone or other decorative finish
with the decorative side adjacent to the public right-of-way. Fences shall be
opaque and either painted or stained with the decorative side adjacent to the
public right-of-way. In no instance will a chain link or barbed wire fence be
acceptable. Trees used to fulfill this requirement shall be located on private
property in planters, a planting strip, berm or tree lawn, any of which shall
be at least eight feet wide and at least two feet deep. The trees shall be of a
small maturing evergreen variety and be at least ten feet tall at the time of
planting. All shrubs shall be between 24 inches and 36 inches tall at time of
planting. All plant material shall conform with the American Standard for
Nursery Stock published by the American Association of Nurserymen. Trees
employed to meet the screening requirement may not be counted toward the street
tree planting or urban open space tree requirements. Any lot which becomes
vacant through the removal of a structure for any reason shall be screened from
all abutting public street rights-of-way in accordance with the provisions of
this section or cleared of rubbish and debris and seeded with grass. However,
if the lot is to be used for parking either as a transitional or permanent use,
it shall meet all the minimum requirements for that use as established by this
chapter. Maintenance of screening required under these provisions shall conform
to the requirements of §§
152.170 -
152.179, including the requirement to promptly replace dead vegetation with
healthy, living plantings.
      (4)   Street trees. In addition to all other requirements of this
section, at least one tree width three to three and one-half inches caliper,
minimum, measured 6 inches above ground, shall be planted for each 25 feet for
small maturing trees and for each 35 feet for large maturing trees of the
entire building lot which abuts any public street right-of-way with a minimum
of one tree required for any distance up to 35 feet. Trees shall not be planted
closer than two feet, nor more than ten feet, from the back of thecurb. For the
purposes of this section, all specifications for measurement and quality of
trees shall be in accordance with the American Standard for Nursery Stock
published by the American Association of Nurserymen. All trees planted to meet
this requirement shall be well-matched specimen grade and shall be limbed up
six feet. Trees used to fulfill this requirement may be located on public or
private property. Maintenance of street trees required under these provisions
shall conform to the requirements of §§
152.170 -
152.179 , including the requirement to promptly replace dead vegetation with
healthy, living plantings.
      (5)   Reflective surfaces.  No development subject to these provisions
may have exterior walls with a reflectivity value in excess of 36%, as measured
under the applicable provisions of ASTM-C-1036. No reflective surfaces may be
used on street level exterior facades.
      (6)   Urban open spaces.  On parcels of ten acres or more, open spaces
for public congregation and recreational opportunities are required for non-
residential developments and shall be equipped or designed to allow pedestrian
seating and to be easily observed from the street or pedestrian circulation
areas. All urban open spaces shall comply with the minimum required design
standards of this subchapter.
         (a)   Urban open space size.  Buildings shall be provided with public
open space behind the required setback and on private property on the basis of
five square feet of urban open space per 100 square feet of gross floor area. A
maximum of 30% of this required urban open space may be provided on an enclosed
ground floor level provided the enclosed space meets all other requirements of
these provisions.
         (b)   Accessibility to the street. Urban open space shall be designed
so that it is accessible to and visible from the street.
         (c)   Trees. Within the open space area(s), one tree shall be planted
for each 500 square feet. Trees shall have a minimum caliper of three to three
and one-half inches measured six inches above ground at the time of planting.
         (d)   Amenities. The following amenities are permitted within an urban
open space area: ornamental fountains, stairways, seating, waterfalls,
sculptures, arbors, trellises, plant beds, drinking fountains, clock pedestals,
public telephones, awnings, canopies, and similar structures.
         (e)   Maintenance. The building owner, lessee, management entity or
authorized agent are jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of
the urban open space area including litter control and care and the replacement
of trees and shrubs, as required herein.
         (f)   Utilities. All utilities service lines and connections shall be
underground.
         (g)   Exceptions for single-family and two-family residences. Single-
family and two-family residential dwellings shall not be required to comply
with the streetscape design regulations contained herein.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08; Am. Ord. passed 6-2-14; Am.
Ord. passed 10-5-15; Am. Ord. passed 2-1-16; Am. Ord. passed - -; Am. Ord.
2024-003, passed 6-3-24)
§ 152.023 C-2 SECONDARY COMMERCIAL.
   The C-2 Secondary Commercial Zoning District Classification is established
to provide for general commercial activities, for those uses requiring easy
vehicular access, circulation and parking, and larger lot areas than found in
the C-1 Commercial District described above. This district promotes a broad
range of commercial operations and services necessary for the operation of the
town and surrounding areas. Light manufacturing is allowed, but heavy
manufacturing is not.
   (A)   Dimensional requirements.
      Minimum lot/parcel size (sq. ft.): 8,000
      Minimum lot size, two-family (sq. ft.): 12,000
      Minimum setbacks (feet):   front:    10
                  side:   10
                  rear:   10
      Maximum building height (feet):    65
      Maximum gross floor area (sq. ft.): 15,000-99,999 square-foot structures
require conditional zoning approval. 100,000 plus square- foot structures
require a special use permit.
      Minimum open space (% of site): 10 (Not applicable to single-family and
two-family residences.)
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted by right in the C-
2 Secondary Commercial Zoning District Classification provided they meet all
requirements of this section and all other requirements established in this
subchapter. A use followed by the notation (SR) is permitted subject to special
requirements contained in §§
152.120 -
152.123, below.
      (1)   All permitted uses listed in the C-1 Central Commercial Zoning
District Classification, subject to special requirements if noted.
      (2)   Animal boarding facilities (SR).
      (3)   Animal hospitals and clinics.
      (4)   Assisted living facilities(SR).
      (5)   Automobile car washes.
      (6)   Automobile sales and service.
      (7)   Bus stations.
      (8)   Communication services.
      (9)   Construction trade facilities.
      (10)   Farm and construction equipment sales and service.
      (11)   Golf courses.
      (12)   Golf driving ranges (SR).
      (13)   Greenhouse and plant nurseries.
      (14)   Indoor shooting ranges (SUP).
      (15)   Laundries, coin-operated.
      (16)   Lawn and garden centers.
      (17)   Manufacturing facilities, light.
      (18)   Medical clinics less than 10,000 square fee.
      (19)   Microbreweries.
      (20)   Mini-warehouses (SR).
      (21)   Multi-family dwellings and apartments of 20 or more units (CZ).
      (22)   PCD Planned Commercial Development (CZ).
      (23)   PRD Planned Residential Development (CZ).
      (24)   Recreational facilities, outdoor.
      (25)   Residences, multi-family dwelling and apartments fewer than ten
units.
      (26)   RV Parks.
      (27)   Shelter facilities (SR).
      (28)   Tobacco sales, vape shops.
      (29)   U.S. Post Office and parcel delivery services.
      (30)   Vehicle repair.
      (31)   Wholesale sales, distribution and warehousing.
   (C)   Prohibited uses. No non-residential development or redevelopment
exceeding 15,000 but less than 100,000 square feet in gross floor area shall be
permitted in the C-2 Secondary Commercial Zoning District Classification unless
conditional zoning appoval has been granted by the Town Council. No non-
residential development or redevelopment exceeding 100,000 square feet in gross
floor area shall be permitted unless a special use permit has been approved by
the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08; Am. Ord. passed 3-3-14; Am.
Ord. passed 6-2- 14; Am. Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2024-003, passed 6-3-24)
§ 152.024 C-3 HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL.
   The C-3 Highway Commercial Zoning District Classification is established to
provide areas accommodating all uses stated in the C-2 Secondary Commercial
District above plus the following: uses requiring ready access to a
thoroughfare, uses requiring larger parcels for larger buildings, sales lots,
storage, and parking. Residential and service uses are explicitly allowed.
   (A)   Dimensional requirements.
      Minimum lot/parcel size (sq. ft.): 15,000
      Minimum lot size, two-family (sq. ft.): 22,500
      Minimum setbacks (feet):   front:    10
                  side:   10
                  rear:   10
      Maximum building height (feet):    65
      Maximum gross floor area (sq. ft.): 15,000-99,999 square-foot structures
require conditional zoning approval. 100,000 plus square- foot structures
require a special use permit.
      Minimum open space (% of site): 10 (not applicable to single-family and
two-family residences.)
   (B)   Permitted uses.  The following uses are permitted by right in the C-
3 Highway Commercial Zoning District Classification provided they meet all
requirements of this section and all other requirements established in this
chapter. A use followed by the notation (SR) is permitted subject to special
requirements contained in §§
152.120 -
152.123, below.
      (1)   All permitted uses listed in the C-2 Secondary Commercial Zoning
District Classification, subject to special requirements if noted.
      (2)   Electronic machines and devices for sweepstakes.
      (3)   Sales of manufactured homes and recreational vehicles.
      (4)   Sawmills, Lumber yards, Mulch Grinding SR.
      (5)   Vehicle sales with lot areas in excess of one acre.
   (C)   Prohibited uses.  No non-residential development or redevelopment
exceeding 30,000 square feet in gross floor area shall be permitted in the C-
3 Highway Commercial Zoning District Classification. Unless a special use
permit has been approved by the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 5-6-13; Am. Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord.
2024-003, passed 6-3-24)
§ 152.025 I-1 INDUSTRIAL.
   The I-1 Industrial District is established to provide for areas that
recognize both existing and future manufacturing operations. This
classification allows all uses as described above for C-3 Highway Commercial,
plus medium to heavy manufacturing operations. These districts and uses must be
located so as to have direct access to or within close proximity to a
thoroughfare.
   (A)   Dimensional requirements.
      Minimum lot/parcel size: one acre
      Minimum setbacks (feet):   front:    30
                  side:   20
                  rear:   20
      Maximum building height (feet):    65
      Maximum gross floor area (sq. ft.): 15,000-99,999 square-foot structures
require conditional zoning approval. 100,000 plus square- foot structures
require a special use permit.
      Minimum open space (% of site):     10 (not applicable to single-family
and two-family residences.)
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted by right in the I-
1 Industrial Zoning District Classification provided they meet all requirements
of this section and all other requirements established in this chapter. A use
followed by the notation (SR) is permitted subject to special requirements
contained in §§
152.120 -
152.123, below.
      (1)   All permitted uses listed in the C-3 Highway Commercial Zoning
District Classification, subject to special requirements if noted.
      (2)   Adult establishments, subject to requirements contained in
Chapter 156, Town Code.
      (3)   Asphalt manufacturing.
      (4)   Concrete manufacturing.
      (5)   Governmental facilities.
      (6)   Landfills.
      (7)   Manufacturing facilities, heavy.
      (8)   Public utility operations.
      (9)   Recycling and garbage disposal centers.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08; Am. Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord.
2024-003, passed 6-3-24)
§ 152.026 NMU NEIGHBORHOOD MIXED USE.
   The Neighborhood Mixed Use Zoning District Classification is primarily
intended to providesuitable locations for limited, neighborhood- oriented,
commercial, business and service activities in close proximity to major
residential neighborhoods. The district is designed to allow for a mix of
residential, commercial, business and service uses in limited areas along major
traffic arteries and at key intersections leading to residential neighborhoods
in order to provide services to the residents of that particular neighborhood.
The types of uses allowed and the standards established for development in this
district should be compatible with the residential character of the area, and
the uses should not cause traffic congestion, cause obnoxious noise, dust,
odors, fire hazards or lighting objectionable to surrounding residences, nor
visually detract from the overall appearance of the neighborhood.
   (A)   Dimensional requirements.
      Minimum lot/parcel size (sq. ft.): 8,000
      Minimum lot size, two-family (sq. ft.): 12,000
      Minimum setbacks (feet):   front:    10
                  side:   10
                  rear:   10
      Maximum building height (feet):        25
      Maximum footprint (sq. ft.): 15,000-99,999 square-foot structures require
conditional zoning approval. 100,000 plus square- foot structures require a
special use permit.
      Minimum open space (% of site): 20 (not applicable to single-family and
two-family residences.)
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted by right in the NMU
Neighborhood Mixed Use Zoning District Classification provided they meet all
requirements of this section and all other requirements established in this
chapter. A use followed by the notation (SR) is permitted subject to special
requirements contained in §§
152.120 -
152.123, below.
      (1)   All permitted uses listed in the R-1 Residential Zoning District
Classification, subject to special requirements if noted.
      (2)   Grocery and convenience stores without petroleum dispensing,
subject to the requirement that such stores shall not operate prior to 7:00
a.m. nor later than 9:00 p.m.
      (3)   Music and art studios and galleries.
      (4)   Newspaper offices and printing establishments.
      (5)   Offices, financial, governmental, medical, and professional.
      (6)   Restaurants, limited (SR).
      (7)   Retail sales.
      (8)   Services, personal.
      (9)   Tasting room.
   (C)   Prohibited uses.  No non-residential development or redevelopment
exceeding 15,000 but less than 100,000 square feet in gross floor area shall be
permitted in the NMU Neighborhood Mixed Use Zoning District Classification.
Unless a special use permit has been approved by the Board of Adjustment.
   (D)   Design and appearance standards. All development regulated by this
chapter within the Neighborhood Mixed Use District shall conform to the
following design and appearance standards.
      (1)   Outdoor lighting.  Outdoor lighting fixtures shall be designed and
located so as to prevent light from shining directly on vehicular traffic or
adjoining property.
      (2)   Landscaping. A minimum of 20% of the lot area, excluding paved or
unpaved parking areas, shall be reserved and developed only for landscaping.
The landscaping may include existing vegetation. The property owner shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the landscaping and the replacement of all
dead plant material. Street trees shall be incorporated in the landscaping for
property abutting public rights-of-way. The trees shall be deciduous and be
maintained, and all dead materials shall be replaced by the next growing
season.
      (3)   Design.  All new construction and renovation within an NMU
Neighborhood Mixed Use District is encouraged to conform to the following
standards:
         (a)   Where possible, the project should use indigenous materials of
the region, including stone and wood;
         (b)   Buildings, structures and grounds shall be designed using
materials, finishes and proportions in a manner which will produce a
coordinated appearance with adjacent properties.
      (4)   Off-street parking. Adequate off-street parking in accordance with
§
152.095, herein, shall be provided.
      (5)   Signage. Signs shall be in compliance with the Residential District
sign regulations contained in the Town of Franklin Sign Regulations.
      (6)   Storage. Any establishment operating in this district shall
maintain and/or store all equipment or goods related to the business within
principal buildings.
      (7)   Drive-through service. No development shall provide drive-in or
drive-through service.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08; Am. Ord. 2019-001, passed 2-4-
19; Am. Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2024-003, passed 6-3-24)
§ 152.027 MICR MEDICAL INSTITUTIONAL CULTURAL RESIDENTIAL.
   The MICR Medical Institutional Cultural Residential District is to establish
and provide for a mix of medical, institutional, cultural and residential uses,
while maintaining compatibility with surrounding uses of land.
   (A)   Dimensional requirements.
      Minimum lot/parcel size (sq. ft.):   8,000
      Minimum lot size, two-family (sq. ft.): 12,000
      Minimum setbacks (feet):   front:    10
                  side:   10
                  rear:   10
      Maximum building height (feet):    65
      Maximum gross floor area (sq. ft.): 15,000-99,999 square-foot structures
require conditional zoning approval. 100,000 plus square- foot structures
require a special use permit.
      Minimum open space (% of site): 10 (not applicable to single-family and
two-family residences.)
   (B)   Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted by right in the MICR
Medical Institutional Cultural Residential Zoning District Classification
provided they meet all requirements of this section and all other requirements
established in this chapter. A use followed by the notation (SR) is permitted
subject to special requirements contained in §§
152.120 -
152.123, below.
      (1)   All permitted uses listed in the R-1 Residential Zoning District
Classification, subject to special requirements if noted.
      (2)   Assisted living facilities (SR).
      (3)   Civic centers and cultural art facilities.
      (4)   Community colleges.
      (5)   Funeral homes and crematoria Hospitals and clinics.
      (6)   Mobile food vending (SR).
      (7)   Music and art studios and galleries.
      (8)   Offices, professional, governmental and financial.
      (9)   Parking lots and garages.
      (10)   Restaurants (SR).
      (11)   Retail sales, medically-oriented.
      (12)   Schools business, technical and vocational.
      (13)   Services, personal.
   (C)   Prohibited uses. No non-residential development or redevelopment
exceeding 15,000 but less than 100,000 square feet in gross floor area shall be
permitted in the MICR Medical Institutional Cultural Residential Zoning
District Classification unless conditional zoning approval has been granted by
the Town Council. No non- residential development or redevelopment exceeding
100,000 square feet in gross floor space shall be permitted unless a special
use permit has been approved by the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-15; Am.
Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2024-003, passed 6-3-24)
§ 152.028 EC ENTRY CORRIDOR OVERLAY.
   This zoning district classification is established to provide development
standards for particular roadway corridor areas which are in addition to those
provided by the other zoning districts established by this chapter. The purpose
for establishing this entry corridor overlay district is first, to recognize
the importance that different roadway corridors play in defining the town’s
character as entryways and, second, to protect and preserve both the aesthetics
of these important roadways and their traffic-handling capabilities, thereby
contributing to the general welfare of the Town of Franklin.
   (A)   Dimensional requirements.  Same as for the underlying district(s).
   (B)   Permitted uses.  Same as for the underlying district(s).
   (C)   Special uses.  Same as for the underlying district(s).
   (D)   Prohibited uses. Same as for the underlying district(s).
   (E)   Development standards. Dimensional requirements and all other
development standards shall be the same as for underlying zoning district(s)
except as modified herein.
      (1)   Setbacks. Setbacks shall be the same as for the underlying zoning
district; provided, however, one or more principal structures may be authorized
within the setback under the following circumstances:
         (a)   Such principal structure(s) is not situated within 10 feet of
the projected right-of-way line of an entry corridor roadway;
         (b)   Parking for the site is placed to the side or rear of such
structure(s) so that it is screened from view from the entry corridor by means
of such structure(s) and landscaping, as necessary.
         (c)   When siting principal structures within the setback, the
developer is encouraged to design the site, including any proposed structures,
in such a way as to protect and preserve the aesthetics of the entry corridor,
thereby furthering the purpose of this section.
      (2)   Thoroughfare protection. No improvements other than driveways,
sidewalks, parking and landscaping shall be permitted within the limits of
projected rights-of-way as specified in the Official Thoroughfare Plan.
      (3)   Driveways.  Driveways serving a development parcel shall be
permitted in accordance with the standards of the NCDOT; provided, however, a
development parcel shall be limited to no more than two driveways on any road
and no more than three driveways total. Additional driveways may be permitted
when they are necessary to improve traffic movement, increase sight distances
or for other safety reasons. Developers are encouraged to share parking areas
and driveways with adjoining developments. No landscaping or structures of any
kind shall be required or allowed to be placed near the intersections of
driveways and streets that would impede safe vision of traffic.
      (4)   Outdoor storage. Outdoor storage shall be screened from view so
that it is not visible from a roadway or adjacent properties. Provided,
however, this section shall not apply to the outdoor display of goods for sale.
      (5)   Lighting. Lighting for the site shall be designed and installed so
that it is directed away from the roadway and any adjacent properties and does
not interfere with the safe use of public rights-of-way.
      (6)   Signs.  Signs shall be governed by the regulations contained in the
sign regulations of the town except as modified below:
         (a)   Outdoor advertising signs.  Outdoor advertising signs, commonly
known as billboards, are prohibited.
         (b)   Freestanding signs. Each development parcel may include no more
than one freestanding sign, which shall not exceed 70 square feet in size and
18 feet in height, measured from street grade, for each thoroughfare on which
the site has driveway access. For purposes of this subsection, a development
parcel shall include all out parcels associated with shopping centers and other
multiple-business development sites.
         (c)   Business identification signs. Each business on a development
parcel shall be entitled to install one or more business identification signs
on the premises where the business is located so long as the total amount of
such signage does not exceed one square foot for each linear foot of the front
facade for that business, or 250 square feet, whichever is less. Such signs may
be placed on the front wall of the business or on awnings, canopies or marquees
attached to or closely associated with such facade. Any additional facade which
has a door designed and used for public access may contain a business
identification sign so long as the total amount of such signage does not exceed
one square foot for each three linear feet of such facade frontage for that
business, or 250 square feet, whichever is less. Also, in shopping centers, one
suspended sign may be incorporated per business, which sign shall not exceed
three square feet per face per sign.
      (7)   Parking.  In consideration of the goals of this section and the
increased landscaping requirements contained herein, the off-street parking
requirements contained in §
152.093(E) may be reduced, at the discretion of the developer, by up to 20%.
      (8)   Street trees.  
         (a)   Street trees shall be required at the rate of one large-maturing
tree (35 feet in height) for every 50 linear feet of property abutting a
street, or one small-maturing tree (25 feet in height) for every 40 linear feet
of property abutting a street if overhead utility lines are present. Trees do
not need to be spaced evenly. They may be clustered with a minimum spacing of
15 feet and a maximum spacing of 75 feet. Street trees shall be placed in a
planting strip on private property and not within the street right-of-way.
         (b)   No street tree can be planted farther than 35 feet from the edge
of the right-of-way to count as a street tree. The width of the planting strip
may vary, but the minimum width cannot be less than seven feet and the average
width shall be at least ten feet. The planting area must be covered with living
material, including ground cover and/or shrubs, except for mulched areas
directly around trees and shrubs, so that no soil is exposed. When a sidewalk
is proposed to be constructed on a development site and right-of-way
configuration requires that it be constructed on the developer’s property, the
width of the planting strip may be reduced to an average of seven feet. During
the development review process, the approving authority for the town may permit
minor deviations in the placement of trees in order to avoid conflict with
utility structures and utility lines.
         (c)   Existing vegetation on a development parcel may count toward
meeting the requirements of this section when such is in good condition and
helps to further the purpose of the district.
      (9)   Exceptions.
         (a)   Single-family and two-family residential dwellings shall be
required to comply with the provisions of (E)(1) through (E)(4), above, but
they shall not be required to comply with the remaining regulations of the EC
Entry Corridor Overlay Zoning Classification.
         (b)   Small lots, defined as lots with less than 100 feet of frontage
on an entry corridor roadway or with less than 100 feet of depth, may have site
constraints which make strict compliance with the regulations contained in this
section a hardship. In such cases, the approving authority for the town may
approve deviations from such regulations so long as the plans of development
are consistent with the goals and objectives stated herein.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.029 UV URBAN VILLAGE.
   The UV Urban Village Zoning District Classification is intended to create
mixed use development that is economically vital, pedestrian-oriented and
contributes to the place-making character of the built environment. This
classification offers the unique opportunity to provide quality and long-
lasting retail, office and residential uses in an organized layout that
encourages the full range of access by patrons and users, and offers innovative
high-quality design of structures, public amenities and pedestrian facilities.
The development and design standards set forth in this section are intended to
accomplish the following purposes:
   (A)   Provide safe and convenient access to shopping and other essential
services to pedestrians, bicyclists, transit riders, motorists, and persons
with disabilities.
   (B)   Provide effective traffic flow through access management and improved
internal and external connectivity.
   (C)   Create a built environment that serves to enhance gateway corridors,
preserve historic heritage, promote economic development and an improved tax
base for the city, and celebrate Franklin’s distinction from other towns and
cities.
   (D)   Promote sustainable use of limited land and investment resources
through the following means:
      (1)   Encouraging higher building densities;
      (2)   Allowing efficient shared parking areas, making cost effective use
of existing infrastructure;
      (3)   Showcasing innovative high-quality development;
      (4)   Providing adaptive reuse of under-performing retail properties;
      (5)   Ensuring multi-modal transportation access;
      (6)   Ensuring internal and external connectedness;
      (7)   Developing a durable framework of infrastructure and built
structures that can accommodate future renovations; and
      (8)   Re-establishing the public realm, civic pride, and sense of
community ownership in new developments.
   (E)   Procedure. The reclassification of property to UV Urban Village shall
constitute an amendment of the zoning map which may be initiated only by the
owner(s) of a legal interest in the affected property, any person(s) having an
interest in the property by reason of a contract with the owner(s), or an agent
authorized in writing to act on behalf of the owner(s).
      (1)   Pre-application conference. Every person proposing to apply for
creation of a UV Urban Village District is required to meet with the Planning
Director prior to the submittal of such application. This conference is
intended to provide the applicant with an opportunity to discuss requirements,
standards and procedures and to identify and solve potential problems for the
proposed application. The applicant shall bring a sketch plan for the project
showing, at a minimum, the location, the existing and proposed transportation
network, phasing, general development plans and a written synopsis of the
development proposal. The pre-application conference shall take place at least
one week prior to submitting of an application to create an Urban Village
District.
      (2)   Application.  Creation of an urban village district shall be
initiated by means of an application for rezoning to a UV Urban Village
District.
      (3)   Master plan.  
         (a)   Applicants for creation of an urban village district project are
required to submit a master plan for the entire development that indicates the
following:
            1.   The general street network;
            2.   The proposed land use configuration within that network;
            3.   Phasing boundaries if phasing is proposed;
            4.   The ultimate proposed development intensity (including the
number of residential units and gross square footage of all nonresidential
uses) for the entire development and for each phase;
            5.   A conceptual landscape plan;
            6.   Proposed setback, height, signage, architectural and other
design standards for the overall project and for proposed uses;
            7.   Building elevations or perspective drawings to demonstrate
proposed building character; and
            8.   A conceptual stormwater plan for the development.
         (b)   For initiation of this zoning classification, properties may
fall under more than one ownership so long as there exist covenants or other
legally binding agreements that address cross-access, cross-parking and other
similar issues affecting joint operation of the projects.
         (c)   Traffic impact analysis. A traffic impact analysis is required
for all urban village projects and shall be submitted with the application to
create the urban village.
         (d)   Subsequent review. After the establishment of the urban village
district, individual development projects within the district shall be subject
to development plan review in accordance with §§
152.050 -
152.062. In addition to the development plan requirements contained in §§
152.050 -
152.062, applicants shall comply with the design submittal requirements
contained herein.
         (e)   Modifications. Revisions to approved urban village district
master plans may be approved by Town Council or by the Town Manager, or his or
her designee, depending on the type of revisions being requested. The Town
Council shall review any revisions to a master plan that increase the overall
development intensity, change the proposed mix of uses by increasing or
reducing any use category by 10% or more, or increases maximum building heights
from that shown on the approved master plan. Additionally, the Town Council
shall review any revision to a master plan that results in a decrease in the
amount of perimeter open space or perimeter parking lot buffering, or in a 25%
or greater reduction in the number of proposed blocks from that shown on the
approved master plan. For the purpose of determining overall development
intensity, one residential unit shall be regarded as the equivalent of 500
square feet of office floor area; one residential unit shall be regarded as the
equivalent of 200 square feet of commercial floor area; and 1,000 square feet
of office space shall be regarded as the equivalent of 350 square feet of
commercial. For other uses, the Planning Director shall determine the
equivalency factor.
   (F)   Permitted uses. Unlike other planned development districts, the
application for a special use permit for an urban village district is not
required to specify intended uses other than the amount of retail or office
space and the number of residential dwelling units. The applicant may, however,
choose to limit such uses, to impose restrictions on those which are allowed,
and to have such limitations and restrictions incorporated into the special use
permit issued for the development. Unless limited as noted above, the following
uses are permitted by right in the UV Urban Village Zoning District
Classification, provided they meet all requirements of this section and all
other relevant requirements of this chapter.
      (1)   Accessory dwelling units (SR).
      (2)   Accessory uses and structures.
      (3)   Adult day care centers registered with the NC Department of Human
Resources.
      (4)   Adult day care homes.
      (5)   Animal hospitals and clinics as long as they contain no outdoor
kennels.
      (6)   Banks and other financial institutions.
      (7)   Bed and breakfast facilities.
      (8)   Brewpubs.
      (9)   Business services.
      (10)   Child care centers (SR).
      (11)   Child care homes.
      (12)   Civic clubs and fraternal organizations (SR).
      (13)    Cultural arts buildings.
      (14)   Dance, health and fitness facilities.
      (15)   Dry cleaning and laundry establishments containing less than 6,000
sq. ft. of floor area.
      (16)    Funeral homes.
      (17)   Governmental buildings.
      (18)   Home occupations (SR).
      (19)   Hotels and motels.
      (20)   Laundries, coin-operated.
      (21)   Lawn and garden centers.
      (22)   Live/work or mixed use buildings in which any of the business uses
described in this subsection occur on the first floor and residential uses
occur on upper floors.
      (23)   Minor planned residential developments, subject to the
requirements of §§
152.050 -
152.062.
      (24)   Mobile food vending (SR).
      (25)   Multi-family dwellings and apartments three to nine units.
      (26)   Multi-family dwellings and apartments ten-plus units.
      (27)   Music and art studios.
      (28)   Neighborhood community centers.
      (29)   Newspaper offices and printing establishments.
      (30)   Offices, business, professional and public.
      (31)   Parking lots and parking garages.
      (32)   Parks.
      (33)   Personal services.
      (34)   Places of worship.
      (35)   Public utility facilities (SR).
      (36)   Recreational facilities, indoors.
      (37)   Repair services, miscellaneous.
      (38)   Residential dwellings, single family.
      (39)   Residential dwellings, multi-family.
      (40)   Residential dwellings, two-family.
      (41)   Restaurants.
      (42)   Retail stores (not including automobile, manufactured home, farm
equipment, gasoline, and boat and heavy equipment sales).
      (43)   Schools, business, technical and vocational.
      (44)   Schools, elementary and secondary.
      (45)   Signs.
      (46)   Tasting rooms.
      (47)   Theaters, indoors or outdoors but not including drive-in theaters.
   (G)   Development standards. Some development standards for the UV Urban
Village District are specified in this chapter. Where no standard is specified,
it is incumbent upon the applicant to propose development standards which, if
the Town Council concurs, will be incorporated into the project. The following
standards shall apply to development within the UV Urban Village Zoning
District Classification.
      (1)   Density. Residential density for an urban village district shall be
established by the Town Council in consideration of surrounding land uses and
the existence of adequate public facilities. The maximum density which may be
approved shall not be otherwise limited except by other standards such as
building height, parking, landscaping and buffering, open space, and traffic
impact.
      (2)   Structure size. The maximum size of any structure shall be
established by the Town Council in the special use permit for the project.
      (3)   Area.  The minimum area required to establish an urban village
district is three acres.
      (4)   Lot size. There is no minimum lot size required for an urban
village district; although, the applicant may specify minimum standards in its
development document.
      (5)   Lot width.  There is no minimum lot width required.
      (6)   Setbacks. There are no minimum setback requirements within the
Urban Village Zoning District Classification; provided, however, setbacks shall
be established around the perimeter of the district sufficient to protect
adjoining properties from the impacts of proposed development within the
district.
      (7)   Height. There are no maximum height restrictions. The applicant
shall propose minimum and maximum height restrictions for all building types
and locations.
      (8)   Design considerations.  Design is critical to the creation of an
Urban Village District and to achieving the goals of this classification. The
design considerations set forth in this section are intended in some instances
to guide project design and in others to provide specific design requirements,
and the text is intended to make this distinction clear. In general, the use of
the term “shall” indicates a specific design requirement, whereas the term
“should” indicates design guidance. In order to obtain a special use permit to
develop an Urban Village, an applicant must demonstrate, among other things,
that the design of the proposed development (1) meets the specific standards
contained herein, (2) is generally in harmony with the design guidelines
contained herein, and (3) will result in a development which is consistent with
the purposes set forth herein.
         (a)   General site arrangement. Structures shall be placed and
arranged so as not to adversely affect adjacent property. Adverse effects shall
include, but are not limited to, the removal of lateral support on adjacent
property, the creation of hazard, nuisance, danger, or inconvenience, or
unreasonable loss of privacy. Development shall be arranged so as to be
visually harmonious within the district. Insofar as is practicable,
developments should be arranged so as to preserve or enhance vistas. Urban
villages shall be oriented around one or more significant public spaces, such
as parks or plazas.
         (b)   Physical integration of uses. All urban villages shall be
designed and developed to provide an appropriate interrelationship between the
various uses and structures within the development. Residential and commercial
uses may be located within the same or adjoining structures.
         (c)   Preservation of natural features and open space. Permitted
flexibility in lot sizes, setbacks, street alignments and widths, and
landscaping shall be utilized to preserve natural features and drainage
patterns and to provide open space.
         (d)   Architectural character.  The rich architectural vocabulary of
the Town of Franklin presents a wide variety of development opportunities using
traditional forms while avoiding any perception of monotony. Each building
proposed for an urban village district shall have a well-proportioned form
consistent with the building use, and its construction materials. Materials
shall be durable, attractive and compatible with the architectural vernacular
of the region. Massing of the building(s) shall create a building envelope that
reflects simple, clearly articulated building volumes.
         (e)   Building orientation. It is preferred that primary facades face
the adjacent street or significant public space. Apartment buildings and
buildings containing commercial or institutional uses shall have a main
entrance facing a connecting walkway with a direct, safe, pedestrian connection
to the street. Where the main entrance does not face the adjacent street,
buildings shall nonetheless be designed to provide an attractive streetside
facade.
         (f)   Building placement. Buildings shall be situated with regard to
pedestrian and vehicular connectivity. Apartment buildings and buildings
containing commercial or institutional uses should be located close to the
pedestrian street with off-street parking behind and/or beside the building.
Important mountain vistas and/or views of significant historic sites should be
protected and accentuated.
         (g)   Privacy considerations.  Elements of the development plan should
be arranged to maximize the opportunity for privacy by the residents of the
project and minimize infringement on the privacy of adjoining land uses.
         (h)   Architectural details. Architectural elements like openings,
details, bulkheads, posts, and other architectural features shall be used to
establish human scale at the street level. On corner lots, the applicant is
encouraged to provide a building entry, additional building mass, and
distinctive architectural elements at the corner of buildings. Windows, doors,
columns, eaves, parapets, and other building components shall be proportional
to the overall scale of the building. Windows shall be vertically aligned
wherever practical. The appearance of all exposed facades (not just the
streetside facade) is important and shall be addressed in development design.
         (i)   Building walls.  Buildings shall avoid long, monotonous,
uninterrupted walls or roof planes on their visible facades. It is preferred
that this design goal be achieved by means of building wall offsets, including
projections, recesses, and changes in floor level, and roofline offsets. Such
offsets add architectural interest and variety and can assist in creating human
size proportions. Parapets shall be designed as integral to the mass of the
building. When multiple wall materials are combined on one facade, the designer
is encouraged to place the heavier material(s) below.
         (j)   Building entrances.  All buildings should include well-defined
entrances facing the street at regular intervals. An operable entrance on each
primary facade should be provided to encourage access by pedestrians. For
buildings on corner lots, an entrance may be placed at the corner, thereby
eliminating the need for side entrances.
         (k)   Internal access and connectivity. The site shall be traversed by
a network of internal streets built according to city standards. Internal
streets should seek to avoid cul-de-sacs and dead end roads and other features
that hamper connectivity. However, roads may terminate at a monumental
structure or green space. In such cases a sidewalk or other connection must be
provided to ensure the goals of connectivity. In addition, internal streets are
also required to have sidewalks and street trees. If a bus line serves, or is
expected to serve, the district, a bus shelter is required. Larger projects may
require more shelters as determined by traffic impact analysis. Connectivity is
a goal of the internal street system and external connections to areas outside
and adjacent to the urban village should be created where possible. Only one
driveway per block face is allowed. Detached single-family housing and duplex
housing are exempt from the driveway restriction. Parking access from
alleyways, however, is encouraged.
         (l)   Block length. Block length may vary but shall not exceed 500
feet in length. For blocks on local streets that are 350 feet or longer, a mid-
block pedestrian street crossing is required which may also include a parking
lot driveway and/or pedestrian passageway between two or more buildings, and
shall have curb extensions (bulb-outs) for ease and safety of pedestrian street
crossing. Collector streets may also require mid-block pedestrian crossings as
noted above.
         (m)   Pedestrian zone and sidewalks. The pedestrian zone is the area
between the street curb and the building edge or, for access roads, the street
curb and the right-of-way area. The pedestrian zone includes sidewalks, street
trees and other pedestrian amenities. The pedestrian zone will generally be 15
feet wide but may be wider depending on the setback pattern. Sidewalks in urban
village districts shall be required along one side of access streets and both
sides of internal streets throughout the development. If appropriate to the
design of the village, greenway paths may be substituted for sidewalks in
residential areas to provide connections. The sidewalk shall be a minimum of
seven feet wide in the Urban Village Zoning District Classification. In solely
residential areas containing less than eight units per acres, sidewalks are
only required to be five feet wide. With institutional and public uses that
have an increased setback, a sidewalk shall connect the building facade
entrance with the street. The sidewalk may be as wide as the entire pedestrian
area. Arcades, awnings, outdoor dining, shelters, seating areas, fountains,
street trees, additional landscaped areas and other pedestrian amenities may be
a part of this pedestrian area so long as seven feet of clear walking space is
maintained. The pedestrian area may also be used to create an area for waiting,
pick-up and drop-off. At locations such as intersections and other crosswalks,
curb extensions (bulb-outs) are required to create safer pedestrian crossings.
         (n)   Parking/loading standards. Parking and loading facilities shall
be reviewed at the master plan level. The applicant shall demonstrate that the
amount of parking proposed is adequate to serve the needs of the district and
is located and designed in such a fashion that it does not detract from the
overall appearance of the district or unreasonably interfere with pedestrian
activity.
            1.   Amount of parking.  Owing to the possibilities for shared use
of parking, the number of parking spaces in the urban village district should
not exceed the minimum parking requirements for the district computed by means
of the formulas contained in (D)(8)(n)3.
            2.   On-street parking.  On-street parking is required for all
local streets and for collector streets and shall count toward meeting parking
needs for the district. On-street parking may take the form of parallel or
angle parking and shall be built according to city standards.
            3.   Off-street parking. Applicants for rezoning to the UV Urban
Village Zoning District Classification shall propose a master parking plan
which shall provide sufficient parking for the entire project consistent with
requirements of this section. Off-street parking lots are encouraged to be
provided at the side or rear of buildings or the interior of a block of
buildings and not closer to the street than the edge profile of the structures.
No more than 20% of parking that is provided in an urban village district may
be in the form of stand-alone surface lots not located to the side or rear of
buildings. Off-street parking shall not be adjacent to street intersections. No
parking is permitted in any setback area. Individual uses in the urban village
district are not required to provide off-street parking or loading.
            4.   Loading standards. Urban village districts may share off-
street loading facilities and are therefore allowed to provide these facilities
at half the rate listed for the applicable uses. On-street loading spaces may
be counted towards the project loading requirements.
         (o)   Street trees. Street trees are required in the pedestrian zone
and along access roads at an average of one tree every 30 feet for mid-story
and under-story trees, and one tree for every 40 feet for canopy trees. In
selecting street trees, priority should be given to long-lived species proven
to function well in urban settings with a form and branching pattern compatible
with the space and type of adjacent traffic. Trees may be planted in minimum
six-foot by six-foot pits. Tree frames and grates are not required but are
recommended especially near store entrances, other sidewalk constraints, points
of ingress, egress or public gathering areas. If tree grates are not used, an
organic surfacing material shall be used to level the surface of the tree pit
with the sidewalk. This material shall receive regular maintenance. To offer
flexibility in the tree planting requirement, trees may be planted in planting
strips adjacent to the curb edge of the sidewalk. Planting strips shall be no
narrower than six feet wide. Planting strips may include grass, flowers and
other plant material where appropriate. Planting strips may not be appropriate
in pedestrian gathering areas.
         (p)   Landscape/buffering standards. Landscaping and buffering shall
be in accordance with §§
152.170 -
152.179 except as noted herein. Parking lots shall include interior and
perimeter tree plantings made up of deciduous trees at a rate of one tree for
every 1,500 square feet of vehicular use area. No parking space may be farther
than 45 feet from a tree. No shrubs are required for interior plantings for
parking lots that are behind, to the side or located at the interior of the
block of buildings. Parking areas adjacent to roadways require buffering from
the street as specified in §§
152.170 -
152.179 with the exception that the planting area will be eight feet wide.
Stand-alone parking lots shall comply with all applicable landscape and
buffering standards except that trees shall be provided at a rate of one tree
for every 1,500 square feet of parking and parking spaces shall be no further
than 45 feet from a tree. Shrubs are also required as per the regular schedule.
Landscaped islands within parking lots should be a minimum of 162 square feet
in area with a minimum width of eight feet if they are to include tree
plantings. Residential structures within an urban village may have up to a 100%
reduction in buffering requirements from the rest of the urban village.
Buffering for urban village district projects is measured and reviewed from the
parcel lot lines used to establish the district and not on an internal lot by
lot basis.
         (q)   Open space standards. Functional open space enhances circulation
within a site and contributes to the site’s aesthetic qualities. All open space
should be designed to be accessible and usable for occupants and invitees of
the development. An urban village district shall have an open space ratio of
not less than 0.30. Open space includes any portion of the site not covered by
a building or vehicular use area and any common space meeting the standards
listed in the subsection below.
         (r)   Common space standards. Common space is intended to shape the
design and character of a project through a connecting system of pedestrian
areas that create a relationship among the various components of the built
environment. It shall be designed to create areas where workers, residents and
shoppers, as the case may be, are directly or indirectly invited to gather,
browse, sit, interact or congregate. It shall be arranged as community space
with open areas, landscaping, seating facilities and lighting fixtures which
provide for safety and visual effects. Common spaces are intended to be places
for social interaction and, thus, may include impervious surfaces. Unless
interior common space is approved by the reviewing authority, common space
shall be out-of-doors. Common space design shall comply with the following:
            1.   Size. At least 10% of the acreage of a site shall be devoted
to common space. Common space shall count toward meeting open space
requirements for a project.
            2.   Trees.  One tree shall be planted for each 500 square feet of
common space. Trees shall have a minimum caliper of three to three and one-half
inches measured six inches above ground at the time of planting.
            3.   Utilities.  All utilities service lines and connections shall
be underground.
            4.   Seating.  Seating shall be provided to accommodate workers,
residents, and/or shoppers. Seating may be accomplished in whole or in part
using planters or other similar structures.
            5.   Amenities.  Common space for a development shall include two
or more of the following amenities: ornamental fountains, stairways,
waterfalls, public art, arbors, trellises, planted beds, drinking fountains,
clock pedestals, public telephones, awnings, canopies, informational kiosks,
and similar structures.
         (s)   Stormwater treatment.  Applicants shall propose, install and
maintain a stormwater treatment system for the district which, at a minimum,
meets the requirements contained in §§
152.190 -
152.199. Applicants are encouraged to utilize best management practices, such
as green roofs, stormwater gardens, and the like, to develop a system which
treats stormwater efficiently and effectively, and which does not detract from
the appearance of the district.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08; Am. Ord. passed 6-2-14; Am.
Ord. passed 10-5-15; Am. Ord. passed 2-1-16; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.030 TN TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD OVERLAY.
   (A)   (1)   The Traditional Neighborhood Overlay Zoning District
Classification is primarily intended to allow the development of residentially
zoned areas as traditional neighborhood developments (“TNDs”) exhibiting the
characteristics of TNDs appropriate to their urban context. Thus, the
application of this overlay should result in a development utilizing elements
appropriate for its relationship to the surrounding and nearby uses and
oriented to pedestrians. Pedestrian orientation should be achieved using, among
other techniques, the following:
         (a)   By providing safe walking conditions which can be achieved
through: the reduction of street widths and turning ratios from those
conventionally utilized, encouraging parking along streets in order to slow
traffic and protect pedestrians, providing mostly alley access to uses to
reduce vehicular/pedestrian conflicts and bringing dwellings closer to the
street;
         (b)   By providing walking destinations within the typical range of
pedestrians in the form of civic buildings and spaces such as parks and limited
commercial areas meeting residents’ daily needs; and
         (c)   By providing enjoyable walking environments, by reducing the
amount of parking in the fronts of sites and providing for a streetscape
appropriate in scale and design for pedestrian use.
      (2)   The types of uses allowed and the standards established for
development in this zoning classification should be compatible with the
residential character of the area, and the uses should not cause traffic
congestion, obnoxious noise, dust, odors, fire hazards or lighting
objectionable to surrounding residences, nor visually detract from the overall
appearance of the neighborhood.
   (B)    Application of overlay zone.
      (1)   Area. In order to achieve the desired intent of the overlay, it
shall not be applied to any area less than seven acres in size unless the
applicant can show that the area surrounding the proposed area of application,
when taken into account with the proposed area of application, meets the intent
of these overlay regulations.
      (2)   Density bonus.  When an area qualifies for designation as a
Traditional Neighborhood Overlay Zone, then it shall be entitled to residential
density equal to the density of the underlying zone plus 75% if it is within
one-half mile walking distance of a business district or 25% if it is not.
Commercial uses, including their required on-site parking, shall not exceed 20%
of the project area.
      (3)   Densities. The specific residential and commercial densities of the
TN zoning district shall be set forth in the regulating plan and neighborhood
code submitted as part of the application for the approval of application of
the Overlay Zone. The regulating plan shall be a conceptual plan providing for
the general location of civic, commercial and residential uses, as well as
throughways, alleys and any other significant features of the proposed project.
The neighborhood code shall set forth the design and architectural regulations
of the project, including without limitation:
         (a)   The amount of residential and commercial use allowed in the
project;
         (b)   The types of residential, commercial, mixed-use and civic
buildings and uses permitted;
         (c)   The types and dimensions of streets and thoroughfares, together
with their turning ratios, sight triangles, parking, street tree and lighting
configurations;
         (d)   The dimensions of permitted buildings, their lot sizes,
setbacks, building lines and heights;
         (e)   Any intrusions permitted in required yards;
         (f)   The location of required parking areas according to building
types as well as landscape and signage elements of the project; and
         (g)   The architectural standards to be applied within the project.
      (4)   Controls. Subject to any specific standards and limitations set
forth in these Traditional Neighborhood Overlay regulations, the approved
provisions of the regulating plan and the neighborhood code (to the extent they
address the criteria described in this section shall control the project in
lieu of the regulations set forth in this chapter).
      (5)   Approval. The provisions of this Overlay Zone shall apply only when
specifically approved for a specific property by the Town Council.
   (C)   Use regulations.
      (1)   In areas subject to the Traditional Neighborhood Overlay
Regulations, no building or land shall be used and no building shall be
hereafter erected or structurally altered unless otherwise provided in this
chapter except for the following uses and only when complying with all sections
of this chapter, including definitions:
         (a)   Any use permitted in the R-1 Zoning District Classification
shall be permitted in the TN Traditional Neighborhood Overlay Zoning District
Classifications.
         (b)   Offices, financial, including banks, governmental, and
professional.
         (c)   Art studios and galleries, craft, antique and book shops.
         (d)   Services, personal, business, and repair.
         (e)   Retail sales, including convenience stores without petroleum
dispensing.
         (f)   Live/work or mixed use buildings in which any of the business
uses described above occur on the first floor and residential uses occur on
upper floors.
         (g)   Accessory uses and/or structures.
      (2)   Commercial establishments within this Overlay Zone shall not open
to the public before 7:00 a.m. nor remain open to the public after 10:00 p.m.
daily. Any establishment operating in this Overlay Zone shall maintain and/or
store all equipment or goods related to the business within the principal
building except for displays in the front yard or sidewalk that do not
interfere with the flow of sidewalk traffic nor endanger the public.
   (D)   Dimensional requirements.
      (1)   Minimum front yard requirement - 0 feet. The minimum front yard
setback from any street shall be measured from the nearest edge of the right-
of-way.
      (2)   Minimum rear yard requirement - 0 feet.
      (3)   Minimum side yard requirements - two side yards totaling at least
ten feet with one side not less than five feet and no buildings closer than ten
feet. On all corner lots, the side yard adjacent to the street shall be
adequately sized to allow for appropriate traffic sight triangles.
      (4)   Maximum building height - the greater of three stories (not to
exceed 14 feet each, with space within one story able to intrude through other
stories) together with a roof of reasonable proportions and an elevation of not
more than four feet before the first floor or 35 feet.
      (5)   Minimum lot size - none.
      (6)   Setbacks for commercial use properties adjoining residential uses
not subject to this Overlay Zone shall provide for a minimum of a ten-foot
setback along any side abutting a Residential District in which is located a
buffer strip as defined in §
152.175.
   (E)   Design and appearance standards. All development subject to the
Overlay Zone shall conform to the following design and appearance standards.
      (1)   Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting fixtures other than street
lights shall be designed and located so as to prevent material quantities of
light from shining directly on vehicular traffic or adjoining property.
Lighting shall generally be downward directed or shielded to help protect the
night sky.
      (2)   Landscaping. A minimum of 20% of the lot area, excluding paved or
unpaved parking areas, shall be reserved and developed only for yard,
landscaping, plaza, courtyard patio or similar uses. The landscaping may
include existing vegetation. The property owner shall be responsible for the
maintenance of the landscaping and the replacement of all dead plant material.
Street trees shall be incorporated in the landscaping for property abutting
public rights-of-way. The trees shall be deciduous and be maintained, and all
dead materials shall be replaced by the next growing season.
      (3)   Design. All new construction and renovation within this Overlay
Zone is encouraged to conform to the following standards: where possible, the
project should use indigenous materials of the region, including stone and
wood. Buildings, structures and grounds shall be designed using materials,
finishes and proportions in a manner that will produce a coordinated appearance
with adjacent properties.
      (4)   Off-street parking.  Adequate off-street parking shall be provided.
Residential uses shall meet the same requirements as provided in §
152.093. Business uses shall provide at least one space for each employee, plus
one parking space per 200 square feet of business or office floor space. In
determining whether a use meets the parking requirements set forth herein, any
parking space located along the street and contiguous to the lot of such use
may be counted toward the satisfaction of such use’s parking requirements up to
one half of such requirements. Spaces that straddle property lines shall count
toward the lot fronting the majority of the space unless this would render the
other lot without street parking.
      (5)   Signage. Signs shall be in compliance with the Town of Franklin
Sign Regulations (
Chapter 155) except that commercial uses with their parking behind their
building shall be allowed twice the area of signage normally allowed provided
not more than one-half of the signage is located at the rear of the building
and designed and positioned only to be seen from such parking area. Commercial
uses shall be allowed to use the signage permitted for non-residential uses in
residential developments, provided that the dimensions of the free-standing
sign permitted herein shall be added to those permitted in attached signs and
may be utilized in attached signs (perpendicular or parallel to the building)
or awning signs. Free-standing, detached signs are not allowed in the Overlay
Zone. Temporary sandwich board signs advertising restaurant menus are permitted
in the Overlay Zone immediately in front of the restaurant served thereby,
provided that they do not interfere with use of the sidewalk nor endanger the
public.
   (F)   Additional standards.
      (1)   Access. Alleys can provide the principal means of access to lots
fronting streets as well as lots fronting mews or courtyards, provided the mews
or courtyard has not less than 20 feet of street frontage.
      (2)   Buffers.  No buffers shall be required between commercial and
residential properties within the Overlay Zone.
      (3)   Roadways.  Street and thoroughfare layout, width and design shall
be as approved in the Regulating Plan and Neighborhood Code, provided that
where compliance with NCDOT regulations is required for acceptance of a public
road by NCDOTand such road is intended to be so dedicated, then such road will
be constructed to standards of NCDOT applicable to traditional neighborhood
development and to the extent permitted by law will recognize the equal or
primary role of the pedestrian.
      (4)   Easements. Easements for utilities for projects within the Overlay
Zone shall be located in alleys and within the street right-of-way where
practicable and shall be the minimum width practicable for safe and appropriate
installation, service, and replacement thereof.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08 ; Am. Ord. 2024-003, passed 6-3-
24)
§ 152.031 PRD PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT.
   This classification is designed to accommodate planned residential
developments for which a conditional zoning permit or a special use permit has
been issued in accordance with §
152.053 herein. Such permits are required as a prerequisite to any use or
development in the PRD Classification, and no use shall be permitted except
pursuant to such permit. Such permits shall insure that the proposed use or
development is consistent with the requirements of this section and may further
specify the timing of development, the location and extent of rights-of-way and
other areas to be dedicated for public use, and other such matters as the
applicant may propose as conditions upon the request. In granting conditional
zoning approval for a planned residential district pursuant to this section,
the Town Council may impose such additional reasonable and appropriate
safeguards upon such permit as it may deem necessary in order that the purpose
and intent of this chapter are served, public welfare secured and substantial
justice done.
   (A)   Application. The reclassification of property to PRD Planned
Residential Development District, or to the C2 Secondary Commercial Zoning
District or C3 Highway Commercial Zoning District for purposes of developing a
major planned residential development shall be initiated only by the owner(s)
of a legal interest in the affected property, any person(s) having an interest
in the property by reason of a written contract with the owner(s), or an agent
authorized in writing to act on behalf of the owner(s).
   (B)   Permissible uses, subject to issuance of a special use permit. Uses
notated with an “*” are minor.
      (1)   Accessory uses and/or structures.*
      (2)   Accessory dwelling units (SR).*
      (3)   Adult day care centers registered with the NC Department of Health
and Human Services Adult day care homes.
      (4)   Agriculture.*
      (5)   Cemeteries.*
      (6)   Child care homes.
      (7)   Child day care centers (SR).
      (8)   Golf courses.
      (9)   Golf driving ranges.
      (10)   Home occupations (SR).*
      (11)   Manufactured homes.
      (12)   Parks.*
      (13)   Places of worship.*
      (14)   Planned residential developments (major).
      (15)   Public utility facilities (SR).
      (16)   Residential dwellings, multi-family.*
      (17)   Residential dwellings, single-family.*
      (18)   Residential dwellings, two-family.*
      (19)   Schools, elementary and secondary.
   (C)   Site requirements.  Planned residential development shall have the
following site requirements: (1) the total land area of the district shall be
at least three acres; and (2) access to the planned residential development
shall be by means of a thoroughfare (major or minor) designated as such on the
current Franklin Thoroughfare Plan. Alternatively, access may be provided by
means of streets other than major or minor thoroughfares when it is clearly
demonstrated that the planned residential development will not result in a
significant increase in traffic on any such street.
   (D)   Density. The density for a planned residential development shall be
established by the Town Council in consideration of surrounding land uses and
the existence of adequate private and public facilities, including without
limitation, water, wastewater, solid waste, stormwater, roads and parks, to
serve the development. Unless a planned residential development qualifies for a
density bonus as provided in division (E) below, the density authorized for the
district shall not exceed ten units per acre.
   (E)   Density bonus.  One or more density bonuses, over and above the
maximum density specified in division (D) above, may be approved by the Town
Council only upon determining that the proposed planned residential development
complies with the general considerations listed therein, as well as the
following additional considerations:
      (1)   Affordable housing bonus.  A density bonus of four dwelling units
per acre may be awarded provided that such additional dwelling units shall be
affordable housing as defined by the North Carolina Housing Authority.
      (2)   Walkability bonus. A density bonus of four dwelling units per acre
may be awarded for developments which are situated within reasonable walking
distance of places of employment and/or shopping facilities and which provide
pedestrian amenities in order to foster pedestrian access to such facilities.
   (F)   Development standards.  Except as modified herein, all uses and
structures in the PRD Zoning District Classification shall meet the development
standards for planned residential developments contained in §
152.057, below.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08; Am. Ord. passed 3-3-14; Am.
Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2024-003, passed 6-3-24)
§ 152.032 PCD PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT.
   This classification is designed to accommodate the development of shopping
centers and retail establishments larger than 15,000 square feet of floor area
or which contain commercial uses which are proposed to be developed in
conjunction with residential uses. A conditional zoning permit or special use
permit, issued in accordance with §§
152.034 or
152.053, as applicable, is required as a prerequisite to any use or development
in a PCD District, and no use shall be permitted except pursuant to such
permit. Such permit shall insure that the proposed use or development is
consistent with the requirements of this section and may further specify the
timing of development, the location and extent of rights-of-way and other areas
to be dedicated for public use, and other such matters as the applicant may
propose as conditions upon the request. In granting the special use permit for
a planned commercial development district, the Town Council may impose such
additional reasonable and appropriate safeguards upon such permit as it may
deem necessary in order that the purpose and intent of this chapter are served,
public welfare secured and substantial justice done.
   (A)   Application.  The reclassification of property to PCD Planned
Commercial Development shall be initiated only by the owner(s) of a legal
interest in the affected property, any person(s) having an interest in the
property by reason of a written contract with the owner(s), or an agent
authorized in writing to act on behalf of the owner(s). No land development
permit shall be issued for any development within a PCD Planned Commercial
Development except in accordance with an approved special use permit.
   (B)   Permissible uses. A building or land shall be used only for those
purposes specified in the special use permit for the project which may include
one or more of the following:
      (1)   Accessory uses and structures.
      (2)   Adult day care centers registered with the NC Department of Health
and Human Services.
      (3)   Animal boarding facilities.
      (4)   Assisted living facilities.
      (5)   Automobile car washes.
      (6)   Automobile sales and service establishments.
      (7)   Banks and other financial institutions.
      (8)   Bed and breakfast facilities.
      (9)   Brewpubs.
      (10)   Business services.
      (11)   Child care center (SR).
      (12)   Civic clubs and fraternal organizations.
      (13)   Construction trades facilities.
      (14)   Dance, health and fitness facilities.
      (15)   Dry cleaning and laundry establishments.
      (16)   Farm and construction equipment sales and service.
      (17)   Food processing establishments.
      (18)   Funeral homes and crematoria.
      (19)   Golf courses.
      (20)   Golf driving ranges.
      (21)   Home occupations (SR).
      (22)   Hotels and motels.
      (23)   Laundries, coin-operated.
      (24)   Manufactured homes and recreational vehicle sales.
      (25)   Mini-warehouses.
      (26)   Mobile food vending (SR).
      (27)   Music, art studios and galleries.
      (28)   Newspaper offices and printing establishments.
      (29)   Offices, business, financial, including banks, governmental, and
professional.
      (30)   Parking lots and parking garages.
      (31)   Parks, public, including greenways.
      (32)   Personal services.
      (33)   Places of worship.
      (34)   Planned residential developments.
      (35)   Public utility facilities (SR).
      (36)   Recreational facilities, indoors.
      (37)   Recreational facilities, outdoors, commercial.
      (38)   Repair services, miscellaneous.
      (39)   Residential dwellings, single-family, two-family and multi-family.
      (40)   Restaurants.
      (41)   Restaurants, drive-in.
      (42)   Retail sales.
      (43)   RV Parks.
      (44)   Service stations.
      (45)   Signs
      (46)   Tasting rooms.
      (47)   Wholesale sales, distribution and warehousing.
   (C)   Development requirements. Primary vehicular access for a PCD Planned
Commercial Development shall be by means of a major or minor thoroughfare
designated as such on the current City Thoroughfare Plan. Alternatively, access
may be provided by means of streets other than major or minor thoroughfares
when it is clearly demonstrated that the development will not result in a
significant increase in traffic on any such street.
   (D)   Development standards. All uses and structures in the PCD
Classification shall meet the following development standards:
      (1)   Setbacks.  All buildings and structures shall be set back not less
than 40 feet from the nearest right-of-way line for any street adjoining the
site; provided, however, such setback may be reduced to ten feet when parking
is situated to the side or rear of the lot and screened from view from public
rights-of-way. Furthermore, such buildings and structures shall be set back not
less than 25 feet from any exterior property line, which is not contiguous with
a street or other right-of-way.
      (2)   Parking, driveways, and loading areas. Off-street parking,
driveways, and loading areas shall be provided as required in §§
152.090 -
152.105, below, and shall be paved according to the specifications of the
NCDOT.
      (3)   Buffering and landscaping. The applicant shall propose, plant,
construct, and make satisfactory arrangements for the preservation of a buffer
and/or setbacks adequate to protect adjoining properties from the impacts of
the proposed development. Such buffers, at a minimum, shall meet the
requirements of §§
152.170 -
152.179. Any part of the project area not used for buildings or other
structures, loading and access ways shall be left in a natural state or
landscaped with grass, trees, and shrubs.
      (4)   Building height.  The maximum height of any building in the
district shall be 48 feet.
      (5)   Circulation and access.  Streets, drives and parking areas in a
planned commercial development shall provide safe and convenient access to
appropriate project facilities. Sidewalks shall be included to provide a
logical, safe, and convenient system for pedestrian access to appropriate
project facilities. Greenways or pedestrian/bicycle pathways may be substituted
for sidewalks, if appropriate. Sidewalks meeting the town’s sidewalk standards
shall be provided along all public streets and roads in accordance with §§
152.090 -
152.105.
      (6)   Density. The density for a residential development planned as part
of a PCD Planned Commercial Development district shall be established by the
Town Council in consideration of surrounding land uses and the existence of
adequate private and public facilities, including, without limitation, water,
wastewater, solid waste, stormwater, roads and parks, to serve the development.
A planned commercial development may qualify for a density bonus in the manner
specified in §
152.039(E). Otherwise, the density authorized for the district shall not exceed
ten units per acre.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08; Am. Ord. passed 6-2-14; Am.
Ord. passed 10-5-15; Am. Ord. passed 2-1-16; Am. Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord.
2024-003, passed 6-3-24)
§ 152.033 PMH PLANNED MANUFACTURED HOUSING DEVELOPMENT.
   This classification is designed to accommodate planned manufactured housing
developments for which a conditional permit or special use permit has been
issued in accordance with §§
152.034 or
152.053, as applicable. The applicable permit is required as a prerequisite to
any use or development in the PMH, and no use shall be permitted except
pursuant to such permit. Such permit shall insure that the proposed use or
development is consistent with the requirements of this section and may further
specify the timing of development, the location and extent of rights-of-way and
other areas to be dedicated for public use, and other such matters as the
applicant may propose as conditions upon the request. In granting the special
use permit for a planned manufactured housing district, the Town Council may
impose such additional reasonable and appropriate safeguards upon such permit
as it may deem necessary in order that the purpose and intent of this chapter
are served, public welfare secured and substantial justice done.
   (A)   Application. The reclassification of property to PMH Planned
Manufactured Housing shall be initiated only by the owner(s) of a legal
interest in the affected property, any person(s) having an interest in the
property by reason of a written contract with the owner(s), or an agent
authorized in writing to act on behalf of the owner(s). No permit shall be
issued for any development within a PMH Planned Manufactured Housing except in
accordance with an approved special use permit. In addition to the requirements
for a planned development application contained in §§
152.120 -
152.123, the application for a special use permit for a planned manufactured
housing district shall contain a site plan depicting the location and
dimensions of all proposed manufactured home sites.
   (B)   Permissible uses, a building or land shall be used only for those
purposes specified for the project which may include the following:
      (1)   Accessory uses and structures.
      (2)   Adult day care centers registered with the NC Department of Human
Resources.
      (3)   Adult day care homes so long as the use is clearly incidental to
the residential use of the dwelling and does not change the essential
residential character of the dwelling.
      (4)   Child care centers (SR).
      (5)   Child care homes so long as the use is clearly incidental to the
residential use of the dwelling and does not change the essential residential
character of the dwelling.
      (6)   Home occupations (SR).
      (7)   Manufactured homes.
      (8)   Mobile homes.
      (9)   Parks, public, including greenways.
      (10)   Places of worship.
      (11)   Public utility structures (SR).
   (C)   Development requirements. A planned manufactured housing shall be at
least three acres in area and shall not exceed 15 acres in area. Any
development containing 26 or more sites shall have primary vehicular access to
the development by means of a subcollector classification or larger street
designated in §
152.098. Primary vehicular access for a planned manufactured housing
development of 25 units or less shall be by means of a local classification or
larger street as designated in §
152.098. Alternatively, access may be provided by means of streets other than
local or subcollector classification when it is clearly demonstrated that the
development will not result in a significant increase in traffic on any such
street.
   (D)   Development standards.  All uses and structures in a PMH shall meet
the following development standards:
      (1)   Lot size. Each manufactured home shall occupy a designated space
having at least 4,000 square feet, with a width of at least 40 feet, exclusive
of common driveways. No more than one home may be erected or installed on one
space.
      (2)   Streets.  Each manufactured home space shall abut a street within
the park. Said streets shall be graded and surfaced with not less than four
inches of crushed stone or other suitable material on a well compacted sub-base
to a continuous width of 25 feet, exclusive of required parking spaces.
Internal streets and circulation patterns shall be adequate to handle the
traffic to be generated by the development.
      (3)   Parking. One off-street parking space with not less than four
inches of crushed stone or other suitable material, on a well compacted sub-
base, shall be provided for each manufactured home space. The required parking
space may be included within the 4,000 square foot minimum lot size for a
manufactured home.
      (4)   Recreation space. At least 8% of the total area of a planned
manufactured housing district shall be devoted and developed to recreational
use by the residents of the district. Such use may include space for community
buildings, gardens, outdoor play areas, swimming pools, ball courts, etc.
      (5)   Interior setbacks.  Any structure shall be located at least 20 feet
from any internal street and at least ten feet from any adjacent space within
the district; provided, however, that these interior setbacks shall not apply
to storage or other auxiliary structures for the exclusive of a manufactured
home.
      (6)   Exterior setbacks.  No manufactured home shall be located closer
than 30 feet to the exterior boundary of the district or abutting street right-
of-way. Buildings used for laundry or recreation purposes shall be located no
closer than 40 feet to the exterior boundary or the right-of-way of an abutting
street.
      (7)   Density. The overall density of homes within the district shall not
exceed eight units per acre.
      (8)   Utilities. Each lot or space shall be equipped with electricity,
drinking water, and wastewater disposal facilities.
      (9)   Foundations, patios and walkways. Each home shall be placed on a
permanent stand in accordance with standards set by the North Carolina
Department of Insurance. Each home shall have an area on site for provision of
a permanent patio or deck adjacent or attached to the permanent stand of at
least 180 square feet. A walkway shall be constructed for each lot or space to
connect parking spaces to the manufactured home entrance. An attached structure
such as an awning, cabana, storage building, carport, windbreak, or porch,
which has a floor area larger than 25 square feet and is roofed shall be
considered part of the stand for purposes of all setback requirements. The area
beneath a home must be fully enclosed with durable skirting within 60 days of
placement in the district. As a minimum, such skirting must be a product
designed and sold for use as skirting or as approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
      (10)   Buffers. The applicant shall propose, plant, construct and make
satisfactory arrangements for the preservation of a buffer and/or setbacks
adequate to protect adjoining properties from the impacts of the proposed
development. Such buffers shall, at a minimum, meet the requirements of §§
152.170 -
152.179, below.
      (11)   Structure height.  No structure in a PMH Planned Manufactured
Housing shall exceed 35 feet in height.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08; Am. Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord.
2024-003, passed 6-3-24)
§ 152.034 CONDITIONAL ZONING DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. For each general use zoning district, this section authorizes
the creation of parallel conditional zoning districts that have the same
requirements as the general use district, as modified by one or more site-
specific conditions. The conditional zoning district classification allows the
Town Council to consider proposed uses and tailor the zoning to accommodate
those uses while addressing anticipated problems that may arise from the
establishment of the proposed uses. This section sets forth the types of
conditional zoning districts and explains their relationship to the general use
districts.
      (1)   District. Each general use district shall have a corresponding
conditional zoning district and shall be indicated on the official zoning map
by the initials “CZ” behind the associated base zoning district designation.
District  Classification
District                                                   Classification
R-1 (CZ)  Conditional Zoning Residential District           Residential
R-2 (CZ)  Conditional Zoning Residential District           Residential
NMU (CZ)  Conditional Zoning Neighborhood Mix Use District  Mixed Use
MICR (CZ) Conditional Zoning Medical Institutional Cultural Mixed Use
          Residential District
UV (CZ)   Conditional Zoning Urban Village                  Mixed Use
C-1 (CZ)  Conditional Zoning Central Commercial             Commercial
C-2 (CZ)  Conditional Zoning Secondary Commercial District  Commercial
C-3 (CZ)  Conditional Zoning Highway Commercial District    Commercial
I-1 (CZ)  Conditional Zoning Industrial District            Industrial
 
      (2)   Applicability. Due to their size and level of activity, major
developments are expected to have a significant impact on public services and
infrastructure and need to be managed for the benefit of the neighborhood or
town as a whole. Approval of any major development within the town's planning
jurisdiction requires rezoning to one of the conditional districts below. For
purposes of this section, MAJOR DEVELOPMENT is defined as a residential
development or common plan of development containing 20 or more dwelling units,
or a commercial or industrial development, or common plan of development,
containing more than 15,000 square feet of interior floor space. The
conditional zoning review process established by this section shall be required
prior to permitting any major development within the town's planning
jurisdiction, regardless of present zoning district.
   (B)   Fee. A fee shall be paid to the town for a conditional rezoning to
cover the costs of advertising and other administrative expenses. The fee shall
be set by a resolution of the Town Council.
   (C)   Pre-application conference. It is recommended that any person desiring
to use or develop land pursuant to a conditional rezoning schedule a pre-
application conference with the Land Use Administrator to become familiar with
the conditional rezoning process and to identify and correct, if possible,
potential problem areas with a development concept. Submittals for a pre-
application meeting include a location map and a sketch plan of the project,
including property boundaries, building footprints, parking, driveways,
entrance locations, and such other information which may be requested by the
Land Use Administrator.
   (D)   Application. Applications for a conditional rezoning shall be made to
the Land Use Administrator on forms prescribed by the Land Use Administrator.
The application must be signed by all owners of the property to be included.
      (1)   Contents. Applications shall include the name and address of the
applicant, the name and address of the owner of each zoning lot involved, and
the relationship of the applicant and property owner(s) in connection with the
application. If the applicant is other than the record owner of the property,
the consent of the record owner to the application shall be noted on the
application or in some other fashion acceptable to the Land Use Administrator.
The application shall also designate an agent for the project to whom notice
may be given by the town. The Land Use Administrator shall prescribe any other
material that may reasonably be required to determine compliance with this
subchapter, with sufficient copies for necessary referrals and records.
      (2)   Conceptual plan. To facilitate the discussion during the
neighborhood compatibility meeting required by division (E), the applicant
shall submit to the Land Use Administrator, as a part of the application for a
conditional rezoning, a conceptual plan showing how development is proposed for
the site. The conceptual plan shall show the location and boundaries of the
property and how individual buildings are to be situated on the site, including
distances from these buildings to property lines, as well as proposed drives
and parking. The locations of signs and outdoor lighting shall also be shown
where appropriate. Proposed restrictive covenants, if available, shall also be
presented. The conceptual plan need not be exactly to scale; although, all
distances and dimensions shall be shown.
   (E)   Neighborhood compatibility meeting. This subchapter provides a process
whereby affected property owners, residents and developers have an opportunity
to participate in a dialogue as to how development is to be integrated into
their neighborhoods. This is accomplished by a neighborhood compatibility
meeting to be facilitated by the Land Use Administrator or his or her designee
within 21 days of receipt of a complete application, including the required fee
and conceptual plan.
      (1)   Notification of participants. At least ten calendar days prior to
the meeting, notice of the meeting shall be given in the following fashion.
         (a)   The developer shall be informed of the meeting by mail. Failure
of the developer, or his or her authorized agent, to attend this meeting shall
lead to an automatic annulment of the application.
         (b)   Property owners within 400 feet of any property line of the
proposed sites shall be informed of the meeting by mail.
         (c)   All other persons shall be informed of the meeting by a
conspicuously placed standardized on-site sign.
      (2)   The developer's presentation. During the neighborhood compatibility
meeting the developer shall explain to the affected property owners the
proposed use for the site. The presentation shall include the developer's
position on the compatibility of the project. It is always the developer's
responsibility to propose a compatible project.
      (3)   Relevant topics to be discussed. Following the developer's
presentation, affected property owners and residents shall be permitted time to
question the developer about points which remain unclear. Questioning shall
center on the proposal's compatibility as presented, not the question of
whether the site should be developed or its use changed.
      (4)   Result of neighborhood compatibility meeting. Following the
exchange of views between the developer and affected property owners/residents,
the Land Use Administrator shall review orally the points voiced during the
informal compatibility meeting. Included in the review shall be proposals or
counter-proposals to which both parties have agreed in an effort to make the
project compatible, as well as those points where disagreement still exists.
Upon conclusion of the review, the Land Use Administrator shall ask those
assembled if the positions presented represent an accurate consensus of the
opinions expressed by the developer and affected property owners/residents.
When they do, the meeting shall be concluded and the Land Use Administrator
shall record the opinions in the Land Use Administrator's report. The Land Use
Administrator's report shall become a part of the application file.
   (F)   Preliminary development plan and completeness review.
      (1)   Upon completion of the neighborhood compatibility meeting, it shall
be the responsibility of the applicant to submit a preliminary development plan
meeting the requirements of division (F)(3), below. The Land Use Administrator
shall cause the application to be reviewed for completeness and shall notify
the developer in writing if the application is incomplete, specifying what
additional information is needed in order for the application to be deemed
complete.
      (2)   It shall then be incumbent upon the applicant either to provide the
additional information requested by the Land Use Administrator or, if he or she
believes providing the requested information is unreasonably burdensome, to
notify the Land Use Administrator in writing that he or she declines to provide
the information requested. Upon receipt of all requested information or, in the
alternative, written notice from the applicant that no further information will
be provided, the Land Use Administrator shall refer copies of the proposal to
such other representatives of the town and to such other agencies or officials
as may be appropriate to determine if it conforms to the provisions of this
chapter and to such other regulations applicable in the case. Alternatively,
the Land Use Administrator may determine that the incompletion of the
application renders it out of compliance with the requirements of this chapter
and that therefore it will not receive further consideration by the town. The
Land Use Administrator shall notify the applicant of this decision in writing.
The Land Use Administrator's determination that an application is incomplete
may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to §
152.075.
      (3)   Contents of preliminary development plan.
         (a)   The preliminary development plan for projects undergoing special
use review shall show the following:
            1.   The date of the development plan or submittal, including any
revisions thereto.
            2.   The proposed title of the project and the name of the
engineer, architect, landscape architect, planner and/or licensed surveyor;
developer; and owner of record.
            3.   The north arrow point, scale at not greater than one-inch
equals 40 feet and such information as the names of adjacent roads, streams,
railroads, subdivisions or other landmarks sufficient to clearly identify the
location of the property.
            4.   Location of site by an insert vicinity map at a scale no less
than one-inch equals 2,000 feet.
            5.   Existing project zoning and zoning of adjacent property, to
include properties abutting either side of a public right-of-way.
            6.   Town limits line, and/or extraterritorial jurisdiction
boundary, or a note indicating that the project site and any adjoining parcels
are totally within or without the town limits.
            7.   Names of adjacent property owners.
            8.   Boundary survey of site and the location of all existing
easements, buildings, rights-of-way or other encroachments.
            9.   Location of 100-year floodplain and floodway, if applicable.
Other significant natural features affecting the site including but not limited
to wetlands, major rock outcrops and lakes or streams.
            10.   The proposed transportation network for the project
including, but not limited to, the following.
               a.   All proposed streets, clearly identified as public or
private, with proposed names, pavement widths and rights-of-way;
               b.   Sight distances for all entrances and exits and their
relationship to street and driveway intersections within a 200-foot radius of
the intersection of such entrance and exit with any public right-of-way;
               c.   All alleys, driveways, and curb cuts for public streets
(provided further that, whenever any alley, driveway or curb cut will intersect
with a public sidewalk and/or street maintained by the town, the development
plan submitted shall include a form approved by the town's Public Works
Director, demonstrating compliance with applicable regulations, including
without limitation the North Carolina Department of Transportation Driveway
Manual);
               d.   All handicap ramps;
               e.    Off-street loading and unloading areas;
               f.    Provisions for off-street parking spaces including
calculations indicating the number of parking spaces required and the number
provided;
               g.    Typical cross-sections of public or private streets; and
               h.    Pedestrian and bicycle facilities.
            11.   Preliminary utility layout, including design plans for
location of the following.
               a.   Water mains, sanitary sewers, and functional fire
protection systems to be installed prior to final plan approval, in accordance
with adopted town policies and the town's Standard Specifications and Details
Manual.
               b.   All utility or other pipes, wiring, conduits, cables, and
fixtures, including but not limited to electrical, gas, telephone and
telecommunications lines, fiberoptic cables and the like. All such lines shall
be installed underground, except for transmission lines with a voltage of 11SkV
or greater or in situations where such placement is prohibited by law, or where
such requirement is relieved by a variance.
               c.    Easements to be provided to the town for utility
activities which shall include but not be limited to improving, upgrading,
removing, inspecting, replacing, repairing, maintaining, using, and operating
such pipelines, laterals, interceptors, mains, manholes, conduits, facilities,
and related appurtenances as may be necessary or convenient for the receipt,
conveyance, transmission, and distribution of water, reclaimed water, and/or
wastewater and for access thereto. Where necessary, easements shall be centered
along or adjacent to lot lines to the greatest extent practicable. Easements
shall be sized in accordance with the town's Standard Specifications and
Details Manual. No structures or other improvements shall be placed within any
town utility easement. Ground covers or grasses may be planted within an
easement. No trees or shrubbery of any size shall be placed within any town
utility easement because of the need for access by utility maintenance
personnel and line damage that tree and shrub roots can cause. Any improvements
installed within the easement area are subject to disturbance or damage, and
may be removed by the town. All permitted and special uses shall be connected
to and served by public water and sanitary sewer services.
               d.    Where connection to public water and sanitary sewer
systems is required, such systems shall be constructed to town standards,
sizes, and specifications and dedicated to the town for operation and
maintenance, thus allowing for the orderly expansion of the town, its water and
sanitary sewer systems, and fire protection services, which protect the health
of the town's citizens and environment.
               e.    Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring
the town to maintain individual service lines for water and sanitary sewer
beyond their point of connection to the town's systems, which shall be and
remain the responsibility of the property owner pursuant to town policy.
               f.   The requirements of this division may be relaxed, provided
that the application is for one or more land use activities for which relaxed
submittal requirements may be permitted by the Land Use Administrator pursuant
to §
152.052(A).
            12.   Location and size of all existing and proposed entrances and
exits to the site.
            13.   Proposed reservations or dedications for parks, playgrounds,
school sites and open spaces and a note indicating ownership and maintenance
provisions.
            14.   A survey showing tree line before site preparation with
typical species and average diameter of trees indicated.
            15.   Preliminary landscape plan indicating screening, buffering,
street trees, and typical ornamental plantings.
            16.   Any garbage disposal facilities must be located on the side
or rear and screened.
            17.   General location and intended use of all buildings with their
dimensions, the number of floors, total floor area and maximum height above
lowest ground point of each building. If several models of units are being
offered for sale and the type of unit at each building location is not known,
then a general outline of the unit to be constructed may be shown at the
building location.
            18.   Notations to include the total project area, proposed lot
areas (or individual areas to be owned by a homeowners association), the amount
and percentage of the site to be covered by buildings, open space, streets and
parking and other facilities.
            19.   General location, size, height, orientation and appearance of
proposed signs.
            20.   General location of proposed project phasing lines and
notation including special conditions pertinent to establishing sales or model
units, if applicable.
            21.   A traffic impact analysis, if one is required by the terms of
this chapter demonstrating the project will comply with the requirements of §
152.105, below.
            22.   Elevations of all facades, including existing structures to
remain, drawn to a reasonable scale which shall be not less than 1/8-inch
equals one foot. Plans shall designate proposed materials and colors of
architectural features.
         (b)   The Land Use Administrator has the authority to waive any
application requirement where the type of use or the scale of the project makes
providing that information unnecessary or impractical. The Land Use
Administrator or Town Council may request additional information from the
applicant where such is necessary to enable a fully-informed decision on the
matter.
      (4)   Completeness review. Upon receipt of a preliminary development
plan, the Land Use Administrator shall cause the application to be reviewed for
completeness and shall notify the applicant in writing if the application is
incomplete, specifying what additional information is needed in order for the
application to be deemed complete. It shall then be incumbent upon the
applicant either to provide the additional information requested by the Land
Use Administrator or, if he or she believes providing the requested information
is unreasonably burdensome, to notify the Land Use Administrator in writing
that he or she declines to provide the information requested. Upon receipt of
all requested information or, in the alternative, written notice from the
applicant that no further information will be provided, the Land Use
Administrator shall refer copies of the proposal to such other representatives
as may be appropriate to determine if it conforms to the provisions of this
chapter and to such other regulations applicable in the matter. Alternatively,
the Land Use Administrator may determine that the incompletion of the
application renders it out of compliance with the requirements of this chapter
and that therefore it will not receive further consideration by the town. The
Land Use Administrator shall notify the applicant of this decision in writing.
The Land Use Administrator's determination that an application is incomplete
may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to §
152.075.
   (G)   Processing of application. On the completion date the application will
then be scheduled for the next Planning Board meeting that is at least 24 days
in the future. Substantial modification of the application subsequent to the
complete date may result in the application being deferred to a subsequent
meeting of the Planning Board. Any material modification of the application
within seven days prior to the Planning Board meeting shall result in deferral
of the application to the next available meeting. For purposes of this section,
the application shall include the preliminary or conceptual development plan,
as the case may be.
   (H)   Review and approval. Conditional zoning applications are intended for
development proposals that are ready to proceed from plan approval to
construction in a timely manner. As a result, each project must include a site
plan that meets the requirements listed in this section, as modified by any
site-specific conditions, as well as any other plans, drawings, renderings,
elevations, maps, and documents specifically included as development documents
for approval.
      (1)   Formal staff review. Town staff shall review the development plan
to identify issues with the proposed development and determine compliance with
the requirements of this chapter. Town staff will provide detailed comments to
the applicable reviewing board regarding issues identified and recommend any
needed changes to the development plan to bring it into compliance with the
requirements of this chapter and/or other legal requirements.
      (2)   Public hearing. The conditional zoning district rezoning approval
decision is a legislative process subject to judicial review using the same
procedures and standard of review as apply to general use district rezoning
decisions. The conditional zoning application shall be considered and treated
as a zoning map amendment. In considering any petition for a conditional zoning
district rezoning, the town shall follow all of the procedures set forth in §
152.63, governing zoning map amendments.
   (I)   Final action. Upon completion of the hearing required in division (K),
the Town Council shall act on the application based on the findings of fact
contained herein. Action on the application shall be one of the following: (1)
approval; (2) approval subject to conditions; or (3) denial. The Land Use
Administrator shall notify the applicant of the Council's decision in writing.
If the application is approved with agreed upon conditions, the Land Use
Administrator shall issue the necessary conditional rezoning in accordance with
the action of Council. The conditional rezoning, including all conditions
attached thereto, shall run with the land and shall be binding on the original
applicant as well as all successors.
   (J)   Effect of approval.
      (1)   If a petition is approved under this section, the conditional
district that is established, the approved petition, and all conditions which
may have been attached to the approval, are binding on the property as an
amendment to this chapter and to the zoning map. All subsequent development and
use of the property shall be in accordance with the standards for the approved
conditional rezoning, including the conceptual or preliminary development plan,
and all conditions attached to the approval, unless such approval shall lapse
or the property is rezoned.
      (2)   If a petition is approved, the petitioner shall comply with all
requirements established for obtaining a land development permit, a building
permit and certificate of occupancy. Only those uses and structures indicated
in the approved petition and development plan shall be allowed on the subject
property. Any development in the district shall comply with all provisions of
and conditions to the approved petition and development plan.
   (K)   Final development plans. Final development plans shall be reviewed by
the Land Use Administrator to ensure conformance with the requirements set
forth in §
152.052(E). Final development plans shall include any modifications agreed to
as conditions of issuance of the conditional rezoning as well as a list of any
conditions and a list of any uses as stipulated in the conditional rezoning.
   (L)   Issuance of land development permit. A conditional rezoning does not
authorize development; rather, it approves a development concept for a
particular property. In order to develop the property in accordance with the
conditional rezoning, a land development permit is required. A land development
permit shall be issued upon certification by the Land Use Administrator that he
or she has received a final development plan demonstrating compliance with the
preliminary or conceptual development plan, as well as all terms and conditions
of the conditional rezoning.
(Ord. 2023-008, passed 12-4-23 ; Am. Ord. 2024-003, passed 6-3-24)
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
§ 152.050 PURPOSE AND STRUCTURE.
   It is the intent of this subchapter to provide the process by which proposed
development is reviewed and the standards by which it is to be evaluated. All
development shall require prior authorization from the appropriate person or
entity. This subchapter establishes two levels of review: (1) development plan
review, which applies to most development, subdivisions, and land use
activities, is set forth in §
152.052; and (2) special use review, which is designed for development expected
to have the greatest impacts, is set forth in §
152.053. The remaining sections of this subchapter contain requirements which
apply to one or more of the levels of review.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.051 LAND DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A land development permit, in conformance with the provisions of this
subchapter, is required prior to the commencement of any development,
subdivision, or land use activity. A land development permit shall not be
issued until development plans and necessary additional information demonstrate
full compliance with this subchapter. When a building permit or sign permit is
required, such permit shall not be issued prior to issuance of the land
development permit required for the development, and such building or sign
permit shall comply with the approved land development permit, including all
conditions of approval attached thereto. No building or structure for which a
land development permit has been issued shall be used or occupied until, after
final inspection, a certificate of occupancy has been issued indicating
compliance with the provisions of this subchapter and all other state and local
laws, including conditions of the land development permit. Review and issuance
of land development permits is a function of the Land Use Administrator or his
or her designee.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.052 DEVELOPMENT PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   Development plan review and approval in accordance with this section
is required prior to issuance of a land development permit for any development,
subdivision or land use activity except for projects required by this
subchapter to undergo special use review pursuant to §
152.053, below. The Land Use Administrator is authorized to relax the submittal
requirements for certain development activities described below so long as the
purposes and goals of this subchapter are not compromised and so long as such
requirements are contained in an administrative order and made readily
available to the public. The land use activities for which relaxed submittal
requirements are permissible are as follows:
      (1)   Development of a single- or two-family dwelling on a zoning lot, or
any uses accessory thereto;
      (2)   Any commercial, industrial, or institutional development consisting
of less than 5,000 square feet of floor area;
      (3)   Addition of not more than 15% of previously existing parking
spaces, or ten parking spaces, whichever is greater;
      (4)   Any sign;
      (5)   Any subdivision of a tract of land of five acres or less into five
or fewer lots and involving no new public or private streets or roads, right-
of-way dedication, easements, or utility extensions.
   (B)   Applications. There are two types of development plan review,
preliminary and final, as described below. All applications for development
plan approval shall be made to the Land Use Administrator on such forms as he
or she may prescribe. Applications shall include, without limitation, the name
and address of the applicant, the name and address of the owner of all the
property involved, the relationship of the applicant and property owner(s) in
connection with the application, and a development plan conforming to the
specifications of division (D). If the applicant is other than the record owner
of the property, the consent of the record owner to the application shall be
noted on the application or in some other fashion acceptable to the Land Use
Administrator. The application shall also designate an agent for the project to
whom notice may be given by the town. The Land Use Administrator shall
prescribe any other material that may reasonably be required to determine
compliance with this subchapter and shall require sufficient copies for
necessary referrals and records.
   (C)   Fees. A fee shall be paid to the Town of Franklin for each application
for development plan approval to cover the costs of advertising and other
administrative expenses. Such fee shall be set by a resolution of the Town
Council.
   (D)   Review of preliminary development plans. Preliminary development plan
approval is not required under this subchapter. It is recommended for large or
complicated projects where the costs of developing detailed final plans can be
substantial. It is designed to provide the applicant an opportunity to obtain
at a reasonable cost binding authorization to develop property in a certain
fashion. Review of preliminary plans is a function of the Land Use
Administrator.
      (1)   Processing of applications for preliminary development plan
approval. The Land Use Administrator shall conduct a preliminary review of an
application to determine if it is complete, which is to say, all information
requested on the application has been provided and the development plan
contains all items required by division (D)(2)(a). If the Land Use
Administrator determines that an application is incomplete, he or she shall
notify the applicant in writing of all deficiencies. Once the Land Use
Administrator determines the application to be complete, he or she may request
an analysis to be made by qualified representatives of the town and such other
agencies or officials as appear appropriate in the circumstances of the case,
to determine compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Contents of preliminary development plan.  
         (a)   Applicants for developments opting to undergo preliminary
development plan review shall, as a part of the application for such
development, submit a preliminary development plan which shall show the
following:
            1.   The date of the development plan or submittal, including any
revisions thereto.
            2.   The proposed title of the project and the name of the
engineer, architect, landscape architect, planner and/or licensed surveyor;
developer; and owner of record.
            3.   The north arrow point, scale at not greater than one inch
equals 40 feet and such information as the names of adjacent roads, streams,
railroads, subdivisions or other landmarks sufficient to clearly identify the
location of the property.
            4.   Location of site by an insert vicinity map at a scale no less
than one inch equals 2,000 feet.
            5.   Existing project zoning and zoning of adjacent property, to
include properties abutting either side of a public right-of-way.
            6.   Town limits line, and/or extraterritorial jurisdiction
boundary, or a note indicating that the project site and any adjoining parcels
are totally within or without the town limits.
            7.   Names of adjacent property owners.
            8.   Boundary survey of site and the location of all existing
easements, buildings, rights-of-way or other encroachments.
            9.   Location of 100-year floodplain and floodway, if applicable.
Other significant natural features affecting the site including but not limited
to wetlands, major rock outcrops and lakes or streams.
            10.   The proposed transportation network for the project
including, but not limited to, the following:
               a.   All proposed streets, clearly identified as public or
private, with proposed names, pavement widths and rights-of-way;
               b.   Sight distances for all entrances and exits and their
relationship to street and driveway intersections within a 200-foot radius of
the intersection of such entrance and exit with any public right-of-way;
               c.   All alleys, driveways, and curb cuts (provided further
that, whenever any alley, driveway or curb cut will intersect with a public
sidewalk and/or street maintained by the town, the development plan submitted
shall include a form approved by the town's Public Works Director,
demonstrating compliance with applicable regulations, including without
limitation the North Carolina Department of Transportation Driveway Manual);
               d.   All handicap ramps;
               e.   Off-street loading and unloading areas;
               f.   Provisions for off-street parking spaces including
calculations indicating the number of parking spaces required and the number
provided;
               g.   Typical cross-sections of public or private streets; and
               h.   Pedestrian and bicycle facilities.
            11.   Preliminary utility layout, including design plans for
location of the following:
               a.   Water mains, sanitary sewers, and functional fire
protection systems to be installed prior to final plan approval, in accordance
with adopted town policies and the town's Standard Specifications and Details
Manual.
               b.   All utility or other pipes, wiring, conduits, cables, and
fixtures, including but not limited to electrical, gas, telephone and
telecommunications lines, fiberoptic cables and the like. All such lines shall
be installed underground, except for transmission lines with a voltage of 115kV
or greater or in situations where such placement is prohibited by law, or where
such requirement is relieved by a variance.
               c.    Easements to be provided to the town for utility
activities which shall include but not be limited to improving, upgrading,
removing, inspecting, replacing, repairing, maintaining, using, and operating
such pipelines, laterals, interceptors, mains, manholes, conduits, facilities,
and related appurtenances as may be necessary or convenient for the receipt,
conveyance, transmission, and distribution of water, reclaimed water, and/or
wastewater and for access thereto. Where necessary, easements shall be centered
along or adjacent to lot lines to the greatest extent practicable. Easements
shall be sized in accordance with the town's Standard Specifications and
Details Manual. No structures or other improvements shall be placed within any
town utility easement. Ground covers or grasses may be planted within an
easement. No trees or shrubbery of any size shall be placed within any town
utility easement because of the need for access by utility maintenance
personnel and line damage that tree and shrub roots can cause. Any improvements
installed within the easement area are subject to disturbance or damage, and
may be removed by the town. All permitted and special uses shall be connected
to and served by public water and sanitary sewer services.
               d.    Where connection to public water and sanitary sewer
systems is required, such systems shall be constructed to town standards,
sizes, and specifications and dedicated to the town for operation and
maintenance, thus allowing for the orderly expansion of the town, its water and
sanitary sewer systems, and fire protection services, which protect the health
of the town's citizens and environment.
               e.    Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring
the town to maintain individual service lines for water and sanitary sewer
beyond their point of connection to the town's systems, which shall be and
remain the responsibility of the property owner pursuant to town policy.
               f.   The requirements of this division may be relaxed, provided
that the application is for one or more land use activities for which relaxed
submittal requirements may be permitted by the Land Use Administrator pursuant
to division (A) of this section.
            12.   Location and size of all existing and proposed entrances and
exits to the site.
            13.   Proposed reservations or dedications for parks, playgrounds,
school sites and open spaces and a note indicating ownership and maintenance
provisions.
            14.   A survey showing tree line before site preparation with
typical species and average diameter of trees indicated.
            15.   Preliminary landscape plan indicating screening, buffering,
street trees, and typical ornamental plantings.*
            16.    Any garbage disposal facilities must be located on the side
or rear and screened.*
            17.   General location and intended use of all buildings with their
dimensions, the number of floors, total floor area and maximum height above
lowest ground point of each building.*
            18.   Notations to include the total project area, proposed lot
areas (or individual areas to be owned by a homeowners association), the amount
and percentage of the site to be covered by buildings, open space, streets and
parking and other facilities.
            19.   General location, size, height, orientation and appearance of
proposed signs.
            20.   General location of proposed project phasing lines and
notation including special conditions pertinent to establishing sales or model
units, if applicable.
            21.   A traffic impact analysis, if one is required by the terms of
this chapter, demonstrating the project will comply with the requirements of §
152.060, below.
         (b)   Items marked with an asterisk are not required for development
plan review of subdivisions which are not associated with applications for
planned developments or special use permits.
         (c)   The Land Use Administrator has the authority to waive any
application requirement where the type of use or scale of the proposal makes
providing that information unnecessary or impractical. The Land Use
Administrator may require additional information from the applicant where such
is necessary to enable a fully informed decision on the matter.
      (3)   Standards for review. An application for preliminary development
plan approval shall not be approved unless the Land Use Administrator
determines that the application and preliminary development plan demonstrate
compliance with this chapter, including the provisions of §
152.060, below, and other applicable regulations. The Land Use Administrator
may impose such reasonable conditions on an approval as will ensure such
compliance with this subchapter.
      (4)   Review by Town Council.  Within 15 days of the date of the
rendition of a decision of the Land Use Administrator, the applicant may file a
notice with the Town Clerk requesting the Town Council to review such decision.
Upon receipt of a written notice of review, the Town Clerk shall schedule a
public hearing for the next available meeting of Town Council which shall
render a decision based upon the standards for review contained in division (D)
(3). Final development plan approval pursuant to division (E), below, shall not
be granted until such time as the time to seek review as provided herein has
passed or, if review is requested, until such time as the Town Council has
taken final action on such application.
      (5)   Effect of preliminary development plan approval. Approval of a
preliminary development plan entitles the applicant to the issuance of a land
development permit upon payment of the applicable fee and submittal of an
application and final development plans meeting the requirements of division
(E), below. The applicant shall have two years from the date of such approval
to obtain final development plan approval. An applicant who has been granted
preliminary development plan approval shall be divested of the right to develop
in accordance with such preliminary development plan approval if the applicant
fails to obtain final development plan approval in accordance with this
section.
   (E)   Review of final development plans.  All development for which
development plan approval is required shall undergo final development plan
review, including development which has received preliminary development plan
approval pursuant to division (D)(3), above, and development which has received
a special use permit pursuant to §
152.053, below. Final development plan review is a final step prior to issuance
of a land development permit. The process is intended to provide a means for
town staff to review detailed plans to ensure the project meets development
standards in this chapter as well as any other applicable regulations and any
conditions which may have been imposed as a part of any preliminary or
conceptual approval.
      (1)   Processing of applications for final development plan approval.
         (a)   The Land Use Administrator shall conduct a preliminary review of
an application to determine if it is complete, which is to say, all information
requested on the application has been provided and the development plan
contains all items required by division (E)(3). If the Land Use Administrator
determines that an application is incomplete, he or she shall notify the
applicant in writing of all deficiencies.
         (b)   Once the Land Use Administrator determines the application to be
complete, he or she may cause an analysis to be made by qualified
representatives of the town and such other agencies or officials as appear
appropriate in the circumstances of the case, to determine compliance with
applicable provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Standards for review.  The Land Use Administrator shall render a
decision in writing either approving or denying the application. An application
for final development plan approval shall not be approved unless the Land Use
Administrator determines that the application and final development plan (1)
conform with preliminary development plan approval, if applicable, (2) conform
with a special use permit, if applicable, and (3) demonstrate compliance with
this chapter and other applicable regulations. If the decision is to deny the
application, the Land Use Administrator shall recite with specificity the
reasons for such denial.
      (3)   Contents of final development plan.
         (a)   An application for final development plan approval, other than
final plat approval, shall be accompanied by a development plan showing the
following:
            1.   The date of the development plan or submittal, including any
revisions thereto.
            2.   The proposed title of the project and the name of the
engineer, architect, landscape architect, planner and/or licensed surveyor;
developer; and owner of record.
            3.   The north arrow point, scale at not greater than one inch
equals 40 feet and such information as the names of adjacent roads, streams,
railroads, subdivisions or other landmarks sufficient to clearly identify the
location of the property.
            4.   Location of site by an insert vicinity map at a scale no less
than one inch equals 2,000 feet.
            5.   Existing project zoning and zoning of adjacent property, to
include properties abutting either side of a public right-of-way.
            6.   Town limits line or a note indicating that the project site
and any adjoining parcels are totally within or without the town limits.
            7.   Names of adjacent property owners.
            8.   Boundary survey of site and the location of all existing
easements, buildings, rights-of-way or other encroachments.
            9.   Existing topography and proposed finished contours at not more
than two-foot intervals, with project bench mark clearly identified. Location
of 100-year floodplain and floodway, if applicable. Other significant natural
features affecting the site including but not limited to wetlands, major rock
outcrops and lakes or streams. The Land Use Administrator may require
topography at intervals smaller than two feet if such is necessary to permit an
informed analysis of the development plan.
            10.   All proposed streets and/or driveways with proposed names,
pavement widths and rights-of-way, and showing sight distances and their
relationship to all street and driveway intersections within a 200-foot radius
of the intersection of such entrances and exits with any public road. All
alleys, driveways, curb cuts for public streets and handicap ramps, loading
areas and provisions for off-street parking spaces and
sidewalks; calculations indicating the number of parking spaces required and
the number provided. All streets shall be clearly identified as public or
private; a typical cross-section of public or private streets and/or driveways
shall be included. Whenever any alley, driveway or curb cut will intersect with
a public sidewalk and/or street maintained by the town, the final development
plan must include the approved design required for the preliminary plan set
forth in §
152.052(D)(2)(c).
            11.   Utility layout, including location and size of existing and
proposed water, sanitary and storm sewer lines, electrical transmission lines,
gas pipelines, street lights, fire hydrants, and garbage disposal facilities.
The layout must demonstrate compliance with the requirements for utility
layouts set forth in §
152.052(D)(2)(a)(11), except to the extent that a variance has been granted as
to such requirements or that the same have been relaxed by the Land Use
Administrator pursuant to division (A) of this section.
            12.   Proposed reservations or dedications for parks, playgrounds,
school sites and open spaces and a note indicating ownership and maintenance
provisions. Include a copy of condominium declaration and/or maintenance
agreements, if applicable.
            13.   A survey showing tree line before site preparation with
typical species and average diameter of trees indicated.
            14.   Final landscape plan indicating screening, buffering, street
trees, ornamental plantings, grass areas and erosion control plantings, and
species list, including botanical and common names, sizes and quantities.
            15.   Proposed location and intended use of all buildings with
their dimensions, the number of floors, total floor area and maximum height
above average grade for each building.
            16.   Notations to include the total project area, proposed lot
areas (or individual areas owned by a homeowners association), the amount and
percentage of the site to be covered by buildings, open space, streets and
parking and other facilities.
            17.   General location, size, height, orientation and appearance of
proposed signs.
            18.   General location of proposed project phasing lines and
notation including special conditions pertinent to establishing sales or model
units, if applicable.
            19.   Site lighting plan.
            20.   Street profiles, if required by the Land Use Administrator.
            21.   A letter from the Macon County Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Officer indicating that plans have been filed and approved. In those
instances when a letter from the County Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Officer is not required, the applicant shall demonstrate on the development
plan and/or in such accompanying documents as may be necessary that the
proposed development will comply with the mandatory standards contained in G.S.
§ 113A-57.
            22.   Any other permits required by the project.
            23.   Final stormwater management plan meeting the requirements of
§§
152.190 -
152.199.
         (b)   The Land Use Administrator may establish additional requirements
for development plans, which may be triggered by conditions such as density,
topography, location and anticipated traffic volumes on or near the site. In
addition, if the Land Use Administrator determines that one or more of the
above submittal requirements is not applicable to the proposed project, it may
be waived.
         (c)   If work does not commence within one year of the approval date
on the Land Development Permit the permit will expire.
      (4)   Final plat requirements. The final plat shall be prepared by a
registered land surveyor, licensed to practice in the State of North Carolina,
must be drawn to a scale no less than one inch equals 100 feet, and shall meet
the requirements of the Macon County Register of Deeds Office. All approved
subdivisions, special uses, and boundary line change plats, plans, or surveys
must be recorded within 30 days. No final plat shall be approved unless and
until the subdivider has installed in the platted area all improvements
required by this chapter or has posted improvement guarantees in accordance
with this subchapter. The final plat shall contain the following:
         (a)   The exact boundary of the tract of land being subdivided showing
clearly the disposition of all portions of the tract.
         (b)   Scale denoted both graphically and numerically with north arrow
and declination. A vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision with
respect to adjacent streets and properties.
         (c)   As built drawings and plans of all water, sewer, and storm
drainage system facilities, illustrating their layouts and connections to
existing systems. Such plans shall show all easements and rights-of-way, to
demonstrate that the facilities are properly placed and the locations of all
fire hydrants, blow-off valves, manholes, pumps, force mains, and gate valves
are indicated. This information shall not be placed on the final plat but must
be submitted at the time of request for final plat approval or release of any
surety for required improvements, whichever comes later.
         (d)   Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce accurately on
the ground the location, bearing, and length of every street, alley line, lot
line, building line, easement line, and setback line. All dimensions shall be
measured to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot and all angles to the nearest
second.
         (e)   The lines and names of all streets, alley lines, lot lines, lot
and block numbers, lot addresses, building setback lines, easements,
reservations, protected areas or required open space, the special flood hazard
area, on-site demolition landfills and areas dedicated to public purpose with
notes stating their purposes. The final plat shall contain the following
statement:
            “Areas delineated upon this plat or plan as a protection area or
special flood hazard areas is subject to limitations upon development as set
forth in the Town of Franklin Unified Development Ordinance, and any
development, disturbance, or encroachment is prohibited except in accordance
therewith.”
         (f)   The accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments,
markers, and control points.
         (g)   Underground and aerial utility easements shall be shown.
         (h)   The name of the town in which the subdivision is located, the
name of the subdivision, the name of the owner, the name, registration number,
and seal of the registered surveyor under whose supervision the plat was
prepared, and the date of the plat.
         (i)    All the following certifications shall appear on the final
plat, including the Zoning Certificate of Approved Nonconformity, if
applicable:
            1.   Certificate of Survey and Accuracy. I,                  ,
certify that this map was (drawn by me)(drawn under my supervision) from (an
actual survey made by me) (an actual survey under my super- vision) (deed
description recorded in Book                ,
Page____, Book   , Page____, etc)(other); that the error of closure as
calculated by latitudes and departures is 1:___, that the boundaries not
surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted from information found in Book____,
Page____; that this map was prepared in accordance with G.S. § 47-30 as
amended. Witness my hand and seal this__ _ day of        , A.D.,    (year).
_________________________
Official Seal
                        _________________________
License or Registration Number
            2.   Certificate of Ownership and Dedication. I hereby certify that
I am (we are) the owner of the property shown and described, which is located
in the subdivision jurisdiction of the Town of Franklin and that I hereby adopt
this plan of subdivision with my free consent and establish minimum building
setback lines, as required. Furthermore, I hereby dedicate all streets, alleys,
walks, parks, and other sites and easements, to public or private uses as
noted. Furthermore, I hereby dedicate all sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and
water lines that are located in public utility easements or rights-of-way to
the Town of Franklin. Furthermore, I hereby set aside in perpetuity for
permanent preservation, all open space and protected natural areas as shown,
described, or otherwise noted hereupon.
___________________      ___________________
Date                      Owner(s)
            3.   Certificate of Approval of the Design and Installation of
Streets, Utilities, and Other Required Improve- ments. I hereby certify that
all streets, utilities, and other required improve- ments have been installed
in an acceptable manner and according to Town of Franklin specifications and
standards or that guaran- tees of the installation of the required improvements
in an amount and manner satisfactory to the Town of Franklin has been received.
___________________      _________________________
Date                  Land Use Administrator,
                  Town of Franklin
            4.   Certificate of Approval for Recording. I hereby certify that
the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the Unified
Development Ordinance for Franklin, North Carolina, and that this plat has been
approved by the Town of Franklin for recording in the Office of the Register of
Deeds of Macon County. I further certify that the Town Council only accepts the
dedication of the public open space as shown, if such parks are located within
the corporate limits of Franklin, but assumes no re-sponsibility to open or
maintain the dedicated open space until, in the opinion of the Town Council, it
is in the public interest to do so.
___________________      _________________________
Date                  Land Use Administrator
            5.   Zoning Certificate of Approved Nonconformity. The proposed
[boundary line adjustment, subdivision] depicted herein is not in conformance
with the requirements of the Unified Development Ordinance of the Town of
Franklin. This recording is now listed as a legal nonconforming use and is
hereby approved for recording in the Office of the Register of Deeds of Macon
County.
___________     ______________________________
Date   Land Use Administrator
            6.   Review Officer Certification. State of North Carolina, County
of Macon. I,                   , Review Officer of Macon County, certify that
the map or plat to which this certification is affixed meets all the statutory
requirements for recording.
___________________      ___________________
Date                  Review Officer
         (j)   Placement of monuments.  Unless otherwise specified by this
chapter, the Manual of Practice for Land Surveying, as adopted by the N.C.
State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors under
provisions of Chapter 89 of the General Statutes of North Carolina, shall apply
when conducting surveys of subdivision; in order to determine the accuracy for
surveys and placement of monuments, control corners, markers, and property
corner ties; to determine the location, design, and material of monuments,
markers, control corners, and property corner ties; and to determine other
standards and procedures governing the practice of land surveying for
subdivisions. In addition, for the purpose of identification and protection of
survey corners and monuments, each corner or monument within the subdivision
shall have a disk attached to a ferrous rod or placed in concrete that shall be
stamped to identify that point as a property corner and or control point. All
monuments shall be set flush with or just below ground level and shall be made
of durable materials. In addition ferrous materials will be present in
sufficient mass either in the monument or in close proximity to the monument to
allow for detection by electronic metal detection devices.
      (5)   Review by the Board of Aldermen.  Within 15 days of the rendition
of a decision denying an application for final development plan approval, the
applicant may file a written notice with the Town Clerk requesting the Board of
Aldermen to review such decision. Upon receipt of a notice of review, the Town
Clerk shall schedule a public hearing for the next available meeting of the
Board of Aldermen, which shall render a decision based upon the standards for
review contained in division (E)(5).
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08; Am. Ord. 2018-003, passed 6-4-
18; Am. Ord. 2019-005, passed 5-6-19)
§ 152.053 SPECIAL USE REVIEW.
   (A)   Special use review provides an alternative to traditional zoning by
coupling an application for rezoning with an application for a special use
permit specifying the intended use(s) along with a conceptual development plan
and any proposed conditions to be placed upon the property. Development or uses
required to undergo special use review pursuant to this subchapter shall occur
only after issuance and recordation of a special use permit. The following
developments or uses are required to undergo special use:
      (1)   Any uses in exceeding the max building size as described in §§
152.020 -
152.033; and
      (2)   Any uses designated as special uses in §§
152.020 -
152.033.
   (B)   Fee.  A fee shall be paid to the Town of Franklin for each application
for a special use permit to cover the costs of advertising and other
administrative expenses. The fee shall be set by a resolution of the Town
Council.
   (C)   Pre-application conference. It is recommended that any person desiring
to use or develop land pursuant to a special use permit schedule a pre-
application conference with the Land Use Administrator to become familiar with
the special use permit process and to identify and correct, if possible,
potential problem areas with a development concept. Submittals for a pre-
application meeting include a location map and a sketch plan of the project,
including property boundaries, building footprints, parking, driveways,
entrance locations, and such other information which may be requested by the
Land Use Administrator.
   (D)   Application. Applications for a special use permit shall be made to
the Land Use Administrator on forms prescribed by the Land Use Administrator.
      (1)   Contents. Applications shall include the name and address of the
applicant, the name and address of the owner of each zoning lot involved, and
the relationship of the applicant and property owner(s) in connection with the
application. If the applicant is other than the record owner of the property,
the consent of the record owner to the application shall be noted on the
application or in some other fashion acceptable to the Land Use Administrator.
The application shall also designate an agent for the project to whom notice
may be given by the town. The Land Use Administrator shall prescribe any other
material that may reasonably be required to determine compliance with this
subchapter, with sufficient copies for necessary referrals and records.
      (2)   Conceptual plan.  To facilitate the discussion during the
neighborhood compatibility meeting required by division (G), the applicant
shall submit to the Land Use Administrator, as a part of the application for a
special use permit, a conceptual plan showing how development is proposed for
the site. The conceptual plan shall show the location and boundaries of the
property and how individual buildings are to be situated on the site, including
distances from these buildings to property lines, as well as proposed drives
and parking. The locations of signs and outdoor lighting shall also be shown
where appropriate. Proposed restrictive covenants, if available, shall also be
presented. The conceptual plan need not be exactly to scale; although, all
distances and dimensions shall be shown.
   (E)   Neighborhood compatibility meeting.  This subchapter provides a
process whereby affected property owners, residents and developers have an
opportunity to participate in a dialog as to how development is to be
integrated into their neighborhoods. This is accomplished by a neighborhood
compatibility meeting to be facilitated by the Land Use Administrator or his or
her designee within 21 days of receipt of a complete application, including the
required fee and conceptual plan.
      (1)   Notification of participants. At least seven calendar days prior to
the meeting, notice of the meeting shall be given in the following fashion:
         (a)   The developer shall be informed of the meeting by mail. Failure
of the developer, or his or her authorized agent, to attend this meeting shall
lead to an automatic annulment of the application.
         (b)   Property owners within 400 feet of any property line of the
proposed sites shall be informed of the meeting by mail.
         (c)   All other persons shall be informed of the meeting by a
conspicuously placed standardized on-site sign.
      (2)   The developer’s presentation. During the neighborhood compatibility
meeting the developer shall explain to the affected property owners the
proposed use for the site. The presentation shall include the developer’s
position on the compatibility of the project. It is always the developer’s
responsibility to propose a compatible project.
      (3)   Relevant topics to be discussed. Following the developer’s
presentation, affected property owners and residents shall be permitted time to
question the developer about points which remain unclear. Questioning shall
center on the proposal’s compatibility as presented, not the question of
whether the site should be developed or its use changed.
      (4)   Result of neighborhood compatibility meeting. Following the
exchange of views between the developer and affected property owners/residents,
the Land Use Administrator shall review orally the points voiced during the
informal compatibility meeting. Included in the review shall be proposals or
counter-proposals to which both parties have agreed in an effort to make the
project compatible, as well as those points where disagreement still exists.
Upon conclusion of the review, the Land Use Administrator shall ask those
assembled if the positions presented represent an accurate consensus of the
opinions expressed by the developer and affected property owners/residents.
When they do, the meeting shall be concluded and the Land Use Administrator
shall record the opinions in the Land Use Administrator’s report. The Land Use
Administrator’s report shall become a part of the application file.
   (F)   Preliminary development plan and completeness review.  
      (1)   Upon completion of the neighborhood compatibility meeting, it shall
be the responsibility of the applicant to submit a preliminary development plan
meeting the requirements of division (H)(3), below. The Land Use Administrator
shall cause the application to be reviewed for completeness and shall notify
the developer in writing if the application is incomplete, specifying what
additional information is needed in order for the application to be deemed
complete.
      (2)   It shall then be incumbent upon the applicant either to provide the
additional information requested by the Land Use Administrator or, if he
believes providing the requested information is unreasonably burdensome, to
notify the Land Use Administrator in writing that he declines to provide the
information requested. Upon receipt of all requested information or, in the
alternative, written notice from the applicant that no further information will
be provided, the Land Use Administrator shall refer copies of the proposal to
such other representatives of the town and to such other agencies or officials
as may be appropriate to determine if it conforms to the provisions of this
zoning ordinance and to such other regulations applicable in the case.
Alternatively, the Land Use Administrator may determine that the incompletion
of the application renders it out of compliance with the requirements of this
chapter and that therefore it will not receive further consideration by the
town. The Land Use Administrator shall notify the applicant of this decision in
writing. The Land Use Administrator’s determination that an application is
incomplete may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to §
152.075.
      (3)   Contents of preliminary development plan.  
         (a)   The preliminary development plan for projects undergoing special
use review shall show the following:
            1.   The date of the development plan or submittal, including any
revisions thereto.
            2.   The proposed title of the project and the name of the
engineer, architect, landscape architect, planner and/or licensed surveyor;
developer; and owner of record.
            3.   The north arrow point, scale at not greater than one inch
equals 40 feet and such information as the names of adjacent roads, streams,
railroads, subdivisions or other landmarks sufficient to clearly identify the
location of the property.
            4.   Location of site by an insert vicinity map at a scale no less
than one inch equals 2,000 feet.
            5.   Existing project zoning and zoning of adjacent property, to
include properties abutting either side of a public right-of-way.
            6.   Town limits line, and/or extraterritorial jurisdiction
boundary, or a note indicating that the project site and any adjoining parcels
are totally within or without the town limits.
            7.   Names of adjacent property owners.
            8.   Boundary survey of site and the location of all existing
easements, buildings, rights-of-way or other encroachments.
            9.   Location of 100-year floodplain and floodway, if applicable.
Other significant natural features affecting the site including but not limited
to wetlands, major rock outcrops and lakes or streams.
            10.   The proposed transportation network for the project
including, but not limited to, the following:
               a.   All proposed streets, clearly identified as public or
private, with proposed names, pavement widths and rights-of-way;
               b.   Sight distances for all entrances and exits and their
relationship to street and driveway intersections within a 200-foot radius of
the intersection of such entrance and exit with any public right-of-way;
               c.   All alleys, driveways, and curb cuts for public streets
(provided further that, whenever any alley, driveway or curb cut will intersect
with a public sidewalk and/or street maintained by the town, the development
plan submitted shall include a form approved by the town's Public Works
Director, demonstrating compliance with applicable regulations, including
without limitation the North Carolina Department of Transportation Driveway
Manual);
               d.   All handicap ramps;
               e.    Off-street loading and unloading areas;
               f.    Provisions for off-street parking spaces including
calculations indicating the number of parking spaces required and the number
provided;
               g.    Typical cross-sections of public or private streets; and
               h.    Pedestrian and bicycle facilities.
            11.   Preliminary utility layout, including design plans for
location of the following:
               a.   Water mains, sanitary sewers, and functional fire
protection systems to be installed prior to final plan approval, in accordance
with adopted town policies and the town's Standard Specifications and Details
Manual.
               b.   All utility or other pipes, wiring, conduits, cables, and
fixtures, including but not limited to electrical, gas, telephone and
telecommunications lines, fiberoptic cables and the like. All such lines shall
be installed underground, except for transmission lines with a voltage of 115kV
or greater or in situations where such placement is prohibited by law, or where
such requirement is relieved by a variance.
               c.    Easements to be provided to the town for utility
activities which shall include but not be limited to improving, upgrading,
removing, inspecting, replacing, repairing, maintaining, using, and operating
such pipelines, laterals, interceptors, mains, manholes, conduits, facilities,
and related appurtenances as may be necessary or convenient for the receipt,
conveyance, transmission, and distribution of water, reclaimed water, and/or
wastewater and for access thereto. Where necessary, easements shall be centered
along or adjacent to lot lines to the greatest extent practicable. Easements
shall be sized in accordance with the town's Standard Specifications and
Details Manual No structures or other improvements shall be placed within any
town utility easement. Ground covers or grasses may be planted within an
easement. No trees or shrubbery of any size shall be placed within any town
utility easement because of the need for access by utility maintenance
personnel and line damage that tree and shrub roots can cause. Any improvements
installed within the easement area are subject to disturbance or damage, and
may be removed by the town. All permitted and special uses shall be connected
to and served by public water and sanitary sewer services.
               d.    Where connection to public water and sanitary sewer
systems is required, such systems shall be constructed to town standards,
sizes, and specifications and dedicated to the town for operation and
maintenance, thus allowing for the orderly expansion of the town, its water and
sanitary sewer systems, and fire protection services, which protect the health
of the town's citizens and environment.
               e.    Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring
the town to maintain individual service lines for water and sanitary sewer
beyond their point of connection to the town's systems, which shall be and
remain the responsibility of the property owner pursuant to town policy.
               f.   The requirements of this division may be relaxed, provided
that the application is for one or more land use activities for which relaxed
submittal requirements may be permitted by the Land Use Administrator pursuant
to §
152.052(A).
            12.   Location and size of all existing and proposed entrances and
exits to the site.
            13.   Proposed reservations or dedications for parks, playgrounds,
school sites and open spaces and a note indicating ownership and maintenance
provisions.
            14.   A survey showing tree line before site preparation with
typical species and average diameter of trees indicated.
            15.       Preliminary landscape plan indicating screening,
buffering, street trees, and typical ornamental plantings.
            16.   Any garbage disposal facilities must be located on the side
or rear and screened.
            17.   General location and intended use of all buildings with their
dimensions, the number of floors, total floor area and maximum height above
lowest ground point of each building. If several models of units are being
offered for sale and the type of unit at each building location is not known,
then a general outline of the unit to be constructed may be shown at the
building location.
            18.   Notations to include the total project area, proposed lot
areas (or individual areas to be owned by a homeowners association), the amount
and percentage of the site to be covered by buildings, open space, streets and
parking and other facilities.
            19.   General location, size, height, orientation and appearance of
proposed signs.
            20.   General location of proposed project phasing lines and
notation including special conditions pertinent to establishing sales or model
units, if applicable.
            21.   A traffic impact analysis, if one is required by the terms of
this chapter demonstrating the project will comply with the requirements of §
152.060, below.
            22.   Elevations of all facades, including existing structures to
remain, drawn to a reasonable scale which shall be not less than 1/8-inch
equals one foot. Plans shall designate proposed materials and colors of
architectural features.
         (b)   The Land Use Administrator has the authority to waive any
application requirement where the type of use or the scale of the project makes
providing that information unnecessary or impractical. The Land Use
Administrator or Board of Adjustment may request additional information from
the applicant where such is necessary to enable a fully-informed decision on
the matter.
      (4)   Completeness review. Upon receipt of a preliminary development
plan, the Land Use Administrator shall cause the application to be reviewed for
completeness and shall notify the applicant in writing if the application is
incomplete, specifying what additional information is needed in order for the
application to be deemed complete. It shall then be incumbent upon the
applicant either to provide the additional information requested by the Land
Use Administrator or, if he or she believes providing the requested information
is unreasonably burdensome, to notify the Land Use Administrator in writing
that he or she declines to provide the information requested. Upon receipt of
all requested information or, in the alternative, written notice from the
applicant that no further information will be provided, the Land Use
Administrator shall refer copies of the proposal to such other representatives
as may be appropriate to determine if it conforms to the provisions of this
chapter and to such other regulations applicable in the matter. Alternatively,
the Land Use Administrator may determine that the incompletion of the
application renders it out of compliance with the requirements of this chapter
and that therefore it will not receive further consideration by the town. The
Land Use Administrator shall notify the applicant of this decision in writing.
The Land Use Administrator’s determination that an application is incomplete
may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to §
152.075.
   (G)   Processing of application. The completion date for the application
shall be the date of receipt of either (1) all information requested by the
Land Use Administrator pursuant to division (H) or (2) written notice from the
applicant that no further information shall be provided. The application will
then be scheduled for the next Planning Board meeting that is at least 24 days
in the future. Substantial modification of the application subsequent to the
complete date may result in the application being deferred to a subsequent
meeting of the Planning Board. Any material modification of the application
within seven days prior to the Planning Board meeting shall result in deferral
of the application to the next available meeting. For purposes of this section,
the application shall include the preliminary or conceptual development plan,
as the case may be.
   (H)   Public hearing.  Within 45 days of receiving the application from the
Board of Adjustment shall conduct a quasi-judicial public hearing on the
application. Notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing shall be
published in a newspaper of general circulation once a week for two successive
weeks with the first notice to be published not less than ten nor more than 25
days prior to the date of the hearing. Similar notice shall also be mailed to
the owner of the property which is the subject of the application and the
owners of all parcels of land situated within 400 feet of any of the boundaries
of the subject parcel. Ownership shall be determined by reference to the Macon
County tax listing.
   (I)   Final action.  Upon completion of the hearing required in division
(K), the Board of Adjustment shall act on the application based on the findings
of fact contained herein. Action on the application shall be one of the
following: (1) approval; (2) approval subject to conditions; or (3) denial. The
Land Use Administrator shall notify the applicant of the Board’s decision in
writing. If the application is approved or approved with conditions, the Land
Use Administrator shall issue the necessary special use permit in accordance
with the action of Board. The special use permit, including all conditions
attached thereto, shall run with the land and shall be binding on the original
applicant as well as all successors.
   (J)   Findings of fact.  
      (1)   No special use permit shall be approved by the Board of Adjustment
unless each of the following findings is made.
         (a)   The use or development is located, designed, and proposed to be
operated so as to maintain or promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
         (b)   There are, or will be at the time they are required, adequate
public facilities to serve the use or development as specified in §
152.060, below.
         (c)   The use or development complies with all required regulations
and standards
of this chapter or with variances thereto, if any, granted pursuant to division
(S), below, and with all other applicable regulations.
         (d)   The use or development is located, designed, and proposed to be
operated so as to be compatible with the particular neighborhood in which it is
to be located.
         (e)   The use or development conforms with the general plans for the
physical development of the town as embodied in this chapter, the Comprehensive
Land Use Plan and any other duly adopted plans of the town.
      (2)   The burden of establishing these findings of fact shall lie upon
the applicant. In addressing the issue of compatibility, as required in
division (M)(1)(d), above, the applicant must demonstrate compatibility with
the particular neighborhood in which the development or use is to be located.
The fact that a use is authorized as a special use within a zoning district
classification shall not give rise to a presumption that such special use is
compatible with other uses authorized in the zoning district classification.
   (K)   Conditions to approval of the special use permit. In approving a
petition for the reclassification of property to a planned development district
or a special use district, the Board of Adjustment may request, that reasonable
and appropriate conditions be attached to approval of the petition. Any such
conditions should relate to the relationship of the proposed use to surrounding
property, proposed support facilities such as parking areas and driveways,
pedestrian and vehicular circulation systems, screening and buffer areas, the
timing of development, street and right-of-way improvements, water and sewer
improvements, stormwater drainage, the provision of open space, and other
matters that the Board of Aldermen may find appropriate or the petitioner may
propose. Such conditions to approval of the petition may include dedication to
the town, county or state, as appropriate, of any rights-of-way or easements
for streets, water, sewer, or other public utilities necessary to serve the
proposed development. The petitioner shall have a reasonable opportunity to
consider and respond to any such conditions prior to final action by Board of
Adjustment.
   (L)   Effect of approval.  
      (1)   If a petition is approved under this section, the district that is
established, the approved petition, and all conditions which may have been
attached to the approval, are binding on the property as an amendment to this
chapter and to the Zoning Map. All subsequent development and use of the
property shall be in accordance with the standards for the approved planned
development or special use district, the approved petition, including the
conceptual or preliminary development plan, and all conditions attached to the
approval, unless such approval shall lapse or the property is rezoned.
      (2)   If a petition is approved, the petitioner shall comply with all
requirements established for obtaining a land development permit, a building
permit and certificate of occupancy. Only those uses and structures indicated
in the approved petition and development plan shall be allowed on the subject
property. Any development in the district shall comply with all provisions of
and conditions to the approved petition and development plan.
   (M)   Final development plans.  Final development plans shall be reviewed by
the Land Use Administrator to ensure conformance with the requirements set
forth in §
152.052(E). Final development plans shall include any modifications agreed to
as conditions of issuance of the special use permit as well as a list of any
conditions and a list of any uses as stipulated in the special use permit.
   (N)   Issuance of land development permit.  A special use permit does not
authorize development; rather, it approves a development concept for a
particular property. In order to develop the property in accordance with the
special use permit, a land development permit is required. A land development
permit shall be issued upon certification by the Land Use Administrator that he
has received a final development plan demonstrating compliance with the
preliminary or conceptual development plan, as well as all terms and conditions
of the special use permit.
   (O)   Expiration and revocation of special use permits.  A special use
permit or modification of a special use permit shall run with the land covered
by the permit or modification. Once construction authorized by a special use
permit or modification of special use permit is started, no development other
than that authorized by the permit or modification shall be approved on that
land unless the permit or modification is first modified in accordance with §
152.055(E) or voided or revoked in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
      (1)   Commencement. If the use, construction, or activity authorized by
the Board of Adjustment approval of an application for a special use permit (or
modification thereof) is not commenced within two years of the date of approval
or within such further time stipulated in the approval, or modification
includes time (whichever is later), the approval shall expire and any town
permit issued pursuant to the approval shall be void. The Town Council may,
upon application prior to the expiration of a special use permit, or any
extensions thereof, extend such special use permit for an additional period not
to exceed 24 months. In order for such an extension to be granted, the
application must show that the plans and any additional conditions to the
special use permit will be complied with; changes in circumstances making
compliance impossible or burdensome will require a new special use permit
application in conformity with this section.
      (2)   Completion.  Unless a different period of time is authorized by the
Board of Adjustment, the right to construct improvements or otherwise develop
land pursuant to a special use permit shall expire three years after issuance
of the special use permit. If all of the construction and actions authorized or
required by a special use permit are not completed within the time established
for completion, or any authorized extensions thereof, the permit holder may
request an extension of the completion time limit from the Board of Adjustment,
which Board may grant one or more extensions upon making the following
determinations:
         (a)   The permit holder requested the extension prior to the
expiration of the special use permit, as it may have been previously extended;
         (b)   The permit holder has proceeded with due diligence and good
faith; and
         (c)   Conditions have not changed so substantially as to warrant the
Board of Adjustment to reconsider the approved special use.
      (3)   Abandonment.
         (a)   On request by the holder of a special use permit, the Board of
Adjustment shall approve the abandonment of such permit upon making one of the
following determinations:
            1.   No construction or activity authorized by the permit has been
started and the starting time limit has not yet expired; or
            2.   The development or use authorized by the permit no longer
requires a special use permit, and all conditions of the special use permit
have been satisfied.
         (b)   In addition, The Board must determine that the permit holder has
submitted a signed affidavit clearly stating the holder’s intent to abandon the
permit.
      (4)   Revocation. If any conditions of a special use permit, including
completion time limits, or requirements of this chapter applicable to the
permit are violated, the Board of Adjustment may revoke the permit. The Board
may reinstate a revoked special use permit when the holder of the revoked
permit submits a request for reinstatement to the Land Use Administrator within
90 days of the date of revocation demonstrating (1) that the violations which
were the cause of the revocation have been corrected and (2) the development
fully complies with all conditions of the permit and all applicable
requirements of this chapter.
      (5)   Voluntary revocation. On request by the holder of a special use
permit, the Board may revoke such permit if it determines all of the following:
         (a)   Construction authorized by the permit has been started and the
completion time limit has not yet expired;
         (b)   The request is made in conjunction with an application for
approval of a development other than that authorized the permit; and
         (c)   The proposed development as approved by the Board incorporates
adequate consideration for the site’s already disturbed land area in its design
and any previous commitments made under the special use permit process.
   (P)   Variances. For applications undergoing special use review, the Board
of Adjustment may authorize variances in specific cases from the dimensional
and improvements standards of this chapter upon finding that a literal
enforcement of such standards will result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship and so long as the granting of such variance or variances
will not result in a use or development which would violate the findings of
fact required by division (M), above. Variances may not be granted with regard
to uses or to density.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08; Am. Ord. passed 2-6-12; Am.
Ord. 2018-003, passed 6-4-18; Am. Ord. 2019-005, passed 5-6- 19; Am. Ord.
passed - - )
§ 152.054 PROJECT PHASING.
    If a project is to be developed in phases, the plan for the entire
development will be used to determine the nature of review it will receive.
Before development may commence, the entity with power to issue development
authorization, that is, the Land Use Administrator or the Board of Adjustment,
as the case may be, must approve a master plan for the entire development site.
Final plans for the development may be submitted in stages and may be approved
by the Land Use Administrator provided the following requirements are met:
   (A)   All stages shall be shown with precise boundaries on the master plan
and shall be numbered in the expected order of development.
   (B)   Each phase must be able to function independently of subsequent
phases.
   (C)   All the data required for the project as a whole shall be given for
each stage shown on the plan.
   (D)   A proportionate share of open space shall be included in each stage of
the development.
   (E)   The phasing shall be consistent with the traffic circulation,
drainage, and utilities plan for the entire development.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.055 MODIFICATION OF DEVELOPMENT AUTHORIZATIONS.
   (A)   Development may only take place in accordance with approvals granted
hereunder. Any deviation from approved development requires review and approval
pursuant to this section. In general, the entity which approved the development
for which modification is sought will be responsible for deciding whether to
approve modifications to such development. There are two exceptions to this
rule. First, in some circumstances, as defined herein, the Land Use
Administrator may authorize modifications which are deemed minor. Second, if
the density of the entire development, taking into consideration the proposed
modification and any previous modifications, would exceed the threshold for a
higher level of review and if such modifications, viewed cumulatively, do not
qualify as de minimis, as defined herein, the entire development will be
required to undergo the higher level of review.
   (B)   Proposed modifications shall qualify as de minimis if the cumulative
effect of such modifications would not increase the established density of the
development by more than 10%. Density shall be measured in terms of dwellings
per acre for residential developments and in terms of gross floor area for non-
residential developments. The established density shall be the density approved
in the initial land development permit for the development. By way of
illustration, if the owner of a commercial development with an established
density of 25,000 square feet of floor area proposed a 6,000-square-foot
addition, the entire development, including that which is existing or
previously approved, will be required to undergo special use review in
accordance with §
152.123. If the owner of such development proposed a 2,000-square-foot
addition, the modification would qualify as de minimis and would be processed
under development plan review.
   (C)   Modifications of developments authorized under land development
review. The Zoning Administrator shall approve modifications to developments
authorized under land development review so long as the total development,
including all modifications, complies with applicable provisions of this
chapter and so long as the total development does not exceed the thresholds for
development plan review.
   (D)   Modifications of developments authorized under development plan
review.  The Land Use Administrator may approve a modification of a land
development permit for changes to plans approved under development plan review
as long as such changes continue to comply with all applicable requirements and
so long as the total development, including all modifications, does not exceed
the threshold for special use review.
   (E)   Modifications of developments authorized under special use review.
The Land Use Administrator is authorized to approve minor modifications to the
approved final plans of developments authorized under special use review, but
major modifications may only be authorized by the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with the procedures set forth herein. A modification shall be deemed
minor if it is not a major modification. A modification shall be deemed major
if it proposes a substantial departure from the approving action of the Board
of Adjustment with regard to the original application or any subsequent
modifications. Substantial departure from such approving action shall exist
whenever the proposed modification would result in one or more of the
following:
      (1)   A substantial change in the boundaries of the site approved by the
Board;
      (2)   A substantial change from the use(s) approved by the Board;
      (3)   A substantial increase in the floor area approved by the Board;
      (4)   A substantial increase in the number of residential dwelling units;
      (5)   A substantial increase in the density of nursing homes, rest homes,
congregate care facilities or progressive care facilities;
      (6)   A substantial change in the location of one or more principal and/
or accessory structures approved by the Board;
      (7)   Structural alterations significantly affecting the basic size,
form, style, ornamentation, and appearance of principal and/or accessory
structures as shown on the plans approved by the Board;
      (8)   A substantial change in pedestrian or vehicular access or
circulation approved by the Board; and
      (9)   A substantial change in the amount or location of open space,
landscaping or buffer screens approved by the Board.
   (F)   If the proposed action is determined to be a major modification, the
Land Use Administrator shall require the filing of an application for approval
of the modification. The Land Use Administrator shall prescribe the form(s) of
application as well as any other material reasonably required to determine
compliance with this subchapter. An application for major modification of a
development authorized under special use review shall be reviewed in accordance
with the procedures established for special use review.
   (G)    No modification shall be allowed to a special use permit issued in a
special use zoning district or a planned development district unless the
applicant accepts all of the requirements and conditions the Board of
Adjustment proposes to impose on the modification. Acceptance of conditions by
the applicant may be indicated at the Board hearing on the special use permit
modification or by affidavit submitted prior to the Board taking action on the
modification application.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.056 EXPIRATION AND REVOCATION OF LAND DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   This section governs the expiration and revocation of land development
permits issued subsequent to land development review or development plan
review. The expiration and revocation of land development permits issued
subsequent to special use review are governed by the provisions of §
152.053.
   (A)   Commencement. If a building permit for the use, construction, or
activity authorized by approval of an application for a land development permit
or modification of a land development permit is not obtained within six months
of the date of approval, or within such further time stipulated in the
approval, the approval shall expire and any town permit issued pursuant to the
approval shall be void. The Land Use Administrator may grant a single extension
of the starting time limit for up to 12 months unless he or she determines that
paramount considerations of health, the general welfare, or public safety
require reconsideration by the entity which granted development authorization.
The Land Use Administrator shall determine whether the use, construction, or
activity has started.
   (B)   Completion. If all construction and actions authorized or required by
a land development permit or modification thereof are not completed within 18
months or such other completion date stipulated in the permit or modification,
the permit holder may request an extension of the completion time limit from
the Land Use Administrator. The Land Use Administrator may grant extensions of
the time limit for periods of up to 12 months if he or she determines the
following:
      (1)   The permit holder requested the extension prior to the expiration
of the completion time limit;
      (2)   The permit holder has proceeded with due diligence and good faith;
and
      (3)   Conditions have not changed so substantially as to warrant
reconsideration of the approved development. The Land Use Administrator shall
determine whether or not all construction and actions authorized or required
have been completed.
   (C)   Revocation. If any conditions of a land development permit or
modification, including completion time limits, or requirements of this
ordinance applicable to the permit or modification are violated, the Land Use
Administrator may revoke the permit or modification. The Land Use Administrator
may reinstate a revoked land development permit or modification of land
development permit if he or she determines the following: (1) the holder of the
revoked permit or modification submitted a request for reinstatement within 90
days of revocation; (2) the violations that were the cause of the revocation
have been corrected; and (3) the development fully complies with all conditions
of the permit or modification and all applicable requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.057 PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   This section applies to all planned developments regardless of use
district or classification and regardless of the development review process
required. A planned development consists of land that is under unified control
and planned and developed as a whole and which includes principal and accessory
structures and uses substantially related to the character and purposes of the
planned development. A planned development shall be constructed according to
comprehensive and detailed plans which include not only streets, utilities,
lots or building sites, and the like, but also development plans and floor
plans for all buildings as intended to be located, constructed, used, and
related to each other, and detailed plans for other uses and improvements on
the land as related to the buildings. A planned development shall include a
program for the provision, operation, and maintenance of such areas,
facilities, and improvements as will be for common use by some or all of the
occupants of the planned development district, but which will not be provided,
operated, or maintained at general public expense.
   (B)   Statement of purpose.  The purpose of this section is to promote the
efficient and well planned use of land through unified development of sites
while providing the town with open space, compatible uses, optimum service of
community facilities and adequate vehicular access and circulation. A planned
development is situated, designed, landscaped and buffered in such a manner
that it will be compatible with environmentally sensitive areas, such as flood
plains or steep slopes, and with existing or proposed land uses in adjoining
neighborhoods.
   (C)   Ownership control. The land in a planned development shall be under
single ownership or management at the time of construction or proper assurances
shall be provided that the project can be successfully completed.
   (D)   Establishment of planned developments. Except for minor planned
residential developments, which may be developed in certain use districts as
specified herein, major planned residential developments may be established in
the PRD, C-2SU or C-3SU zoning district classifications. Other planned
developments may only be established in the appropriate planned development
zoning district classifications, that is PCD or PMH. Planned developments shall
be appropriately located with respect to intended functions, to the pattern and
timing of development indicated in the principles of growth and to public and
private facilities existing or clearly to be available by the time the
development reaches the stage where they will be needed.
   (E)   Development standards for planned residential developments.
      (1)   Unless noted otherwise, the following development standards shall
apply to all planned residential developments, whether major or minor.
         (a)   Open space requirements.  Planned residential developments shall
have, as a minimum, the percentages of the site as open space in accordance
with the following table;
Zoning District Classification % Open Space Required
Zoning District Classification % Open Space Required
R-1                            40
R-2                            40
C-1                            10
C-2                            40
C-3                            40
1-1                            40
NMU                            20
MICR                           20
 
         (b)   Common space requirements. Planned residential developments
shall provide common space which shall be at least 10% of the site or 1% of the
site for each dwelling unit per acre, whichever is greater.
         (c)   Setbacks.  All dwellings and their accessory structures shall be
set back not less than 30 feet from the nearest right-of-way line for any
street or railroad adjoining the site; provided, however, such setback may be
reduced to ten feet when parking is situated to the side or rear of the lot and
screened from view from public rights-of-way. Furthermore, such buildings and
structures shall be set back not less than 30 feet from any exterior property
line which is not a right-of-way.
      (2)    The Land Use Administrator or Town Council,  as the case may be,
shall require reservations of rights-of-way, as well as increased setbacks, for
roads identified on the thoroughfare plan, including existing roads to be
widened as well as corridors of new roads.
      (3)   All dwellings and their accessory structures shall be located at
least ten feet from the edge of the paving for any street or drive and at least
five feet from the edge of the paving for any area devoted principally to
parking. Carports shall be situated at least ten feet from the edge of the
paving for any street or drive and may be physically connected to the principal
structure which they serve. In addition, dwellings and accessory structures
abutting a street intended to serve more than 32 dwelling units or intended to
be dedicated as a public street must be set back a minimum of 50 feet from the
center line of such street. The approved setback lines shall be shown on the
plan of development and on any recorded subdivision plat. In addition to the
foregoing setback requirements, minimum spacing between buildings shall be
provided as per the N.C. State Building Code Volume V-Fire Prevention.
         (a)   Subdivision of planned residential developments. Planned
residential development projects may be subdivided provided that arrangements
for such subdivision are made at the time of the planned residential
development application. Zero lot lines may be permitted on one or more lot
lines of each lot in accordance with these standards:
            1.   Any wall constructed on the lot line shall be a solid,
windowless wall. If there is an offset of the wall from the lot line, the
offset must be at least six feet.
            2.   A five-foot maintenance easement and a maximum eave
encroachment of 32 inches within the maintenance easement shall be established
in the deed restrictions and covenants of the adjoining lot. This will provide
ready access to the lot line wall at reasonable periods of the day for normal
maintenance.
         (b)   Circulation and access.  Internal streets, drives and parking
areas shall provide safe and convenient access to dwelling units and recreation
facilities, and for service and emergency vehicles. Streets shall not be
designed to encourage outside traffic to traverse the planned residential
development on local streets. Sidewalks shall be required along streets
adjacent to the planned residential development. Sidewalks shall form a
logical, safe, and convenient system for pedestrian access to all dwelling
units and appropriate project facilities and shall be required along such
streets, drives and parking areas within the planned residential development as
is necessary to accomplish this. Pedestrian/bicycle pathways may be substituted
for sidewalks, if appropriate.
         (c)   Streets.
            1.   Streets intended to serve more than 32 dwelling units as well
as those intended to be dedicated as public streets shall meet the design and
construction standards of the NCDOT. All other streets and drives need not
comply with NCDOT’s pavement width and road right-of-way standards, but they
shall comply with its pavement structure requirements. All dead-end streets and
drives shall terminate in a cul-de-sac or other adequate means of reversing
vehicular direction. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to submit
to the Director of Public Works core samples taken by a licensed testing firm
demonstrating that completed streets or drives meet such pavement structure
requirements.
            2.   Internal streets with minimum setbacks measuring less than 50
feet from center line shall be private streets and are not acceptable for
dedication to, or maintenance by, the town. Developments containing such
private internal streets with setbacks measuring less than 50 feet from center
line shall have the following disclaimer in large type placed in a prominent
position on the following applicable documents for the development: the
development plan, the plat, the restrictive covenants, the condominium
documents, and any contracts used in the sale of properties.
               Some or all of the streets and/or drives in this development
               do not meet minimum right-of-way requirements for the Town
               of Franklin. You are notified that these are proposed as private

               streets and that the Town of Franklin will not accept them for
maintenance.
         (d)   Buffering, screening and landscaping.  The applicant shall
propose and plant, construct and make satisfactory arrangements for the
preservation of a buffer and/or setbacks adequate to protect adjoining
properties from the impacts of the proposed development. Parking and service
areas and dumpsters shall be screened from view by adjacent single-family
residences. Existing vegetation shall be preserved whenever possible. In
addition, the developer shall provide an appropriate landscaping plan within
the project. Use of native species is highly encouraged.
         (e)   Off-street parking.
            1.   Off-Street parking requirements for planned residential
developments shall be as follows:
               a.   A minimum of one- and-one-half spaces per residential unit
containing one or two bedrooms.
               b.   A minimum of two spaces per residential unit containing
three or more bedrooms.
            2.   Enclosed garages and carports count towards meeting the
parking requirement. All parking spaces shall be located within 75 feet of the
residential unit they serve.
         (f)   Maintenance of common facilities. The developer, project owner,
or a properly established homeowners association shall provide for the
continuing maintenance of common open space, recreational facilities,
sidewalks, parking, private streets, and other privately owned common
facilities serving the project.
   (F)   Minor planned residential developments. An applicant may elect to have
a development processed as a minor planned residential development so long as
the proposed development, including all phases, does not exceed 30 dwelling
units and so long as no accessory commercial development is requested for the
project. A minor planned residential development may be located in one or more
of the following zoning district classifications: R1, R-2, C-1, C-2, C-3, NMU,
and MICR.
      (1)   Density. The maximum number of dwelling units which may be
constructed in a minor planned residential development shall be 30 dwelling
units or a number computed on the basis of the following table, whichever is
less:
Zoning District Classification Dwelling Units Per Acre
Zoning District Classification Dwelling Units Per Acre
R-1                            6
R-2                            8
C-1                            18
C-2                            10
C-3                            10
NMU                            10
MICR                           10
 
      (2)   Development standards for minor planned residential developments.
Except as otherwise noted herein, minor planned residential developments shall
be governed by the development standards for planned residential developments
contained in division (E), above. Unlike major planned residential
developments, there is no minimum site requirement for a minor planned
residential development, nor is there a requirement that access be by means of
a designated thoroughfare.
      (3)   Procedures for reviewing.  Unlike other planned developments which
undergo special use review, minor planned residential developments undergo
development plan review pursuant to §
152.052, above.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08; Am. Ord. passed 3-3-14; Am.
Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.058 “AS-BUILT” OR RECORD DRAWINGS.
   This section applies only to development which has undergone development
plan or special use review. “As built” or record drawings shall be submitted
prior to the issuance of the last Certificate of Occupancy for the project.
These drawings shall be submitted in two parts. The first, at a scale not
greater than one inch equals 40 feet, shall show all features on the
development plan. The second, at a scale not greater than one inch equals 200
feet, may show only all underground facilities on the site and the depth of
bury. Plans and verifications shall be signed and sealed by an architect,
engineer or surveyor licensed to practice in the State of North Carolina.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.059 PROJECT INFRASTRUCTURE.
   Project infrastructure refers to the improvements, such as water and
wastewater lines, streets and roads, stormwater management facilities,
sidewalks and street lighting, which are necessary to sustain the intended use
of a project.
   (A)   Construction of project infrastructure. Upon approval of the final
development plan by the Board, the applicant shall proceed with the
construction of project infrastructure, including but not limited to, streets,
water and sewer facilities, drainage, sedimentation and erosion control
facilities, and lighting. Except as provided in division (B) below, and prior
to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall complete, install and
provide for the dedication of all project infrastructure as specified on the
approved final development plan. The applicant shall certify the dedication of
said improvements in a form acceptable to the town. All construction undertaken
pursuant to the final development plan shall be inspected and approved by the
Town of Franklin and/or appropriate local, state, and federal agencies prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the development.
   (B)   Guarantee in lieu of construction of Project infrastructure.  
      (1)   In lieu of requiring the completion, installation and dedication of
all project infrastructure prior to the issuance of a building permit, the town
may accept a bond with approved surety or a letter of credit payable to the
Town of Franklin in an amount equal to 125% of the estimated cost of the
installation of the required improvements, whereby the improvements may be
constructed and utilities installed without cost to the town in the event of
default of the developer.
      (2)   The letter of credit or bond shall remain in full force and effect
until such time as the construction of project infrastructure is completed and
accepted by the town. No bond or letter of credit may be called without 60-days
prior written notice to the town. Failure to maintain in effect a town-approved
financial guarantee of any incomplete improvement shall suspend the approval of
the plan and any permits issued as a result of the plan approval.
      (3)   All financial guarantees must contain language requiring the
completion of all project infrastructure as shown on the approved final
development plan and the guarantee of these improvements for an 18-month
warranty after they have been accepted by the town. All financial guarantees
must either be issued from a financial institution incorporated in the State of
North Carolina or be redeemable at a financial institution incorporated in the
State of North Carolina.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.060 ADEQUATE FACILITIES REVIEW.
   (A)    Certain developments, due to their type, size and/or location, tend
to have greater impacts on public services and facilities than does development
generally. In order to ensure that such development is undertaken only when
there are adequate public facilities to serve it, no development undergoing
special use review shall be approved unless the Town Council first determines
that adequate facilities and services will be available to such development
before it is occupied. Specifically, no development undergoing special use
review shall be approved unless the Town Council finds that all of the
following conditions exist or will exist on or before the date that buildings
or land in the proposed development will be occupied.
      (1)   Water supply. There will be an adequate potable water supply
available for the proposed occupancy. An adequate public water supply shall
include adequate potable water for consumption and other inside and outside
uses, and adequate water pressure and fire flow to meet established standards
of the town for fire protection.
      (2)   Wastewater. There will be adequate connections to public wastewater
disposal systems with adequate capacity to handle the type and volume of flow
from the proposed occupancy.
      (3)   Streets.  The street system in the development will connect to
segments of the public street system with adequate capacity to handle the
projected traffic flow, both on an average basis and at peak hours.
Furthermore, the development shall be so located with respect to major street,
bicycle and pedestrian networks, or public transportation facilities, and shall
be so designed, as to provide direct access to the development without creating
substantial additional traffic in residential neighborhoods outside the
development.
   (B)   Developments failing to meet these criteria may be approved if the
applicant (1) provides private facilities, utilities, and services approved by
appropriate public agencies as substituting on an equivalent basis, and assures
their satisfactory continuing operation, permanently or until similar public
utilities, facilities, or services are available and used, or (2) makes
provision acceptable to the town for offsetting any added net public cost of
early commitment of public funds made necessary by such development. In
determining net public costs, the difference in anticipated public
installation, operation, and maintenance costs and the difference in
anticipated public revenue shall be considered. Expenses involved in making
such determinations shall be paid by the applicant. Determinations shall be
made by the town or by experts acceptable to the town.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.061 AGGREGATION.
   Two or more developments shall be aggregated and treated as a single
development under this chapter when they are determined to be part of a unified
plan of development and are physically proximate to one another. Each of the
criteria listed below is indicative of a unified plan of development. Whenever
one or more are found to exist, the reviewing authority may, but is not
required to, determine that two or more projects are part of a unified plan of
development.
   (A)   The same person has control of the developments;
   (B)   The same person has ownership or a significant legal or equitable
interest in the developments;
   (C)   There is common management controlling the form of physical
development or disposition of parcels of the development;
   (D)   There is a reasonable closeness in time between the completion of some
or all of one development and the submission of an application for
authorization of other development which is indicative of a common
developmental effort;
   (E)   A master plan or series of plans or drawings exists covering the
developments sought to be aggregated;
   (F)   There is a voluntary sharing of infrastructure that is indicative of a
common development effort or is designated specifically to accommodate the
developments sought to be aggregated;
   (G)   There is a common advertising scheme or promotional plan in effect for
the developments sought to be aggregated.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.062 APPEALS OF DEVELOPMENT DECISIONS.
   Development decisions rendered pursuant to this article are subject to
review in the manner set forth herein.
   (A)   Administrative remedies.  There are two separate bodies charged with
responsibility for administrative review of development decisions: the Board of
Adjustment and the Town Council. In no case will decisions of either of those
bodies be subject to review by the other. Judicial review from the decisions of
those boards may be available in accordance with division (B), below. The
following development decisions are subject to administrative review in the
manner indicated
      (1)   Land development permits.  Decisions regarding applications for
issuance of land development permits are subject to review by the Board of
Adjustment upon the timely filing of an appeal pursuant to §
152.075, below.
      (2)   Preliminary development plans and preliminary plats.  Decisions of
the Land Use Administrator regarding applications for preliminary development
plan approval or for preliminary plat approval are subject to review by the
Town Council upon the timely filing of a notice of review pursuant to §
152.052, above.
      (3)   Final development plans and final plat approval. Decisions of the
Land Use Administrator regarding applications for final development plan
approval and final plat approval are subject to review by the Town Council upon
the timely filing of a notice of review pursuant to §
152.052(E)(4), above.
   (B)   Judicial review. Judicial review of development decisions rendered
pursuant to this article shall be in accordance with this section and with the
North Carolina General Statutes. In no event shall a party be entitled to
judicial review until such time as all administrative remedies have been
exhausted.
      (1)   Land development permits.  Decisions of the Town Council regarding
appeals from development decisions concerning applications for land development
permits may be appealed to the Superior Court in accordance with §
152.078, below. Such appeals shall be in the nature of certiorari.
      (2)   Preliminary development plans and preliminary plats. Decisions of
the Town Council regarding appeals from development decisions concerning
applications for preliminary development plan approval or preliminary plat
approval may be appealed to the Superior Court by any aggrieved party. Such
appeals shall be in the nature of certiorari and must be filed within 30 days
after the filing of the decision in the office of the Town Clerk or after a
written copy thereof is delivered to every aggrieved party who has filed a
written request for such copy with the Clerk at the time of the hearing,
whichever is later. The copy of the decision of the Town Council may be
delivered to aggrieved parties either by personal service for by registered
mail or certified mail return receipt requested.
      (3)   Final development plans and final plats.  Decisions of the Town
Council regarding appeals from development decisions concerning applications
for final development plan approval or final plat approval may be appealed to
the Superior Court by any aggrieved party in the same manner as decisions
regarding preliminary development plans set forth in the preceding section.
      (4)   Special use review.  Judicial review of decisions regarding
applications processed under the provisions of special use review, established
in §
152.053, above, require special treatment due to the fact that they involve two
separate applications which, though processed simultaneously, require the Town
Council to make two separate decisions exercising two different types of
decision-making authority. One application requests enactment of an ordinance
amending the Official Zoning Map, and the other requests issuance of a special
use permit. The first application involves a legislative decision on the part
of the Council and the second a quasi-judicial decision. The quasi-judicial
decision, that is, the one concerning the application for a special use permit,
may be appealed to the Superior Court by any aggrieved party in the manner
prescribed in division (B)(2), above. Such appeal shall be in the nature of
certiorari. The legislative decision, which is the one concerning the request
for rezoning, may be contested, in accordance with G.S. § 160A-364.1, by a
cause of action commenced within two months of the date of the decision.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 152.070 ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERS.
    A Board of Adjustment is hereby established. Said Board shall consist of
seven members; five members of the Board shall be residents of the Town of
Franklin and shall be appointed by the Town Council and two members shall
reside in the town’s area of extraterritorial jurisdiction and shall be
appointed by the Board of Commissioners of Macon County.
   (A)   Terms. Terms shall be three years; however, the Board of Aldermen and
the Macon County Board of Commissioners may appoint members for a lesser term
in order to achieve a balanced system of overlapping terms. Any vacancy in the
membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the
initial appointment. Members shall serve without pay but may be reimbursed for
any expenses incurred while representing the Board.
   (B)   ETJ members. The two members appointed to the Board of Adjustment by
the Board of County Commissioners as representatives of the Franklin Area of
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction shall have equal rights, privileges and duties
with other members of the Board in all matters pertaining to the regulation of
this chapter in the town and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
   (C)   Alternates.  The Town Council or the County Board of Commissioners, as
appropriate, may appoint alternate members to serve on the Board in the absence
of any regular members. Alternate members shall be appointed for the same term
and in the same manner as regular members. Each alternate member, while
attending any regular or special meeting of the Board and serving in the
absence of any regular member, shall have and may exercise all the powers and
duties of a regular member.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 2-3-14; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.071 POWERS OF THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   The Board of Adjustment shall have the following powers:
   (A)   To hear and decide appeals from and review any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by any administrative official charged with the
enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   To hear and decide requests for variances from the dimensional
requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   To make interpretations of the Official Zoning Map and to pass upon
disputed questions of lot lines or district boundary lines and similar
questions as arise in the administration of this chapter.
   (D)   To enter, at reasonable times, upon private lands and make
examinations or surveys as necessary for the performance of its official
duties.
   (E)    To request the Town Council to hold public hearings on matters within
the purview of the Board.
   (F)   To hear and decide any other matter as required by the provisions of
this chapter and the Code of the Town of Franklin.
   (G)   To adopt rules not inconsistent with this chapter or the North
Carolina General Statutes governing the organization of the Board and
proceedings before the Board.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 2-3-14; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.072 OFFICERS.
   The Board shall elect one member to serve as Chair and preside over its
meetings and shall create and fill such offices and committees as it may deem
necessary. The term of the Chair and other offices shall be one year with
eligibility for re-election. The Chair, or any member temporarily acting as
chair, is authorized to administer oaths to any witnesses in any matter coming
before the Board.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 2-3-14)
§ 152.073 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Board shall establish a regular meeting schedule and shall meet
frequently enough so that it may take action as expeditiously as reasonably
possible. All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public, and reasonable
notice of the time and place thereof shall be given to the public in accordance
with the North Carolina General Statutes. The Board shall keep a record of its
meetings, including attendance of its members, the vote of each member on every
question, a complete summary of the evidence submitted to it, documents
submitted to it, and all official actions.
   (B)    Any member of the Board who misses more than three consecutive
regular meetings or more than half the regular meetings in a calendar year
shall lose his or her status as a member of the Board and shall be replaced or
reappointed by the Town Council or the County Board of Commissioners, as
appropriate. Absence due to sickness, death, or other emergencies of like
nature shall be recognized as excused absences, and shall not affect the
member’s status on the Board, except that in the event of a long illness or
other such cause for prolonged absence, the member shall be replaced.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08; Am. Ord. passed 2-3-14; Am.
Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.074 QUORUM AND VOTING.
   A quorum of the Board to hear and decide variances shall consist of four
fifths of the Board’s membership who are eligible to vote on the matter, or who
have recused themselves and been replaced by an available alternate. In all
other cases, quorum for a hearing by the Board of Adjustment shall, be four,
and a majority of the members shall be required to decide any other quasi-
judicial matter or determine an appeal made in the nature of certiorari.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 2-3-14)
§ 152.075 APPEALS OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS.
   The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals from and review any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an administrative
official charged with the enforcement of this chapter. An appeal may be taken
by any person having standing pursuant to G.S. § 160A-393(d), or by an officer,
department or board of the town. Such appeal shall be taken within 30 days of
the rendition of such decision by filing with the administrative official a
written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The administrative
official shall forthwith transmit to the Board, as well as the appellant and
property owner (if property owner is not appellant) all the papers constituting
the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal stays all
legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the
Administrative Officer certifies to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice
of appeal has been filed with him or her, that because of facts stated in the
certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life
or property or that because the violation charged is transitory in nature, a
stay would seriously interfere with enforcement of this chapter. In such case
proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order, which may be
granted by the Board or by a court of record on application, as provided for in
the North Carolina General Statutes. If enforcement proceedings are not stayed,
the appellant may file with the Administrative Official a request for an
expedited hearing of the appeal, and the Board of Adjustment shall meet to hear
the appeal within 15 days.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 2-3-14)
§ 152.076 VARIANCES.
   (A)   A variance is a means whereby the town may grant relief from the
effect of this chapter in cases of hardship. A variance constitutes permission
to depart from the literal requirements of this chapter. A variance from the
dimensional requirements of this chapter may be granted by the Board of
Adjustment if it finds the following:
      (1)   Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of
the ordinance. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of
the variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property.
      (2)   The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardship resulting from
personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are
common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for
granting a variance.
      (3)   The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or
the property owner. The act of purchasing property with the knowledge that
circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be
regarded as a self created hardship.
      (4)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose and
intent of the ordinance, such that public safety is secured and substantial
justice is achieved.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall not have authority to grant a variance
when to do so would (1) result in the extension of a nonconformity regulated
pursuant to §§
152.150 -
152.154, herein, or ( 2) permit a use of land, building or structure which is
not permitted within the applicable zoning district classification. Appropriate
conditions may be imposed on any variance, provided that the conditions are
reasonably related to the variance.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 2-3-14)
§ 152.077 PROCESSING OF APPLICATIONS BEFORE THE BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   An application to the Board of Adjustment pursuant to the terms of
this subchapter, whether it be in the nature of a request for a variance or an
appeal from an administrative determination, must be received by the Land Use
Administrator at least 30 days prior to the date of a Board of Adjustment
meeting in order to be scheduled for such meeting.
   (B)   Notice of hearing. Notice of hearings shall be mailed to the person or
entity whose appeal, application or request is the subject of the hearing; to
the owner of the property that is the subject of the hearing if the owner did
not initiate the hearing; to the owners of all parcels of land abutting the
parcel of land that is the subject of the hearing. The notice must be deposited
in the mail at least ten days, but not more than 25 days, prior to the date of
the hearing.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 2-3-14)
§ 152.078 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Every decision of the Board of Adjustment may be appealed to the Superior
Court by any aggrieved party. Such appeal shall be in the nature of certiorari
and must be filed within 30 days after the filing of the decision in the office
of the Land Use Administrator or after a written a copy thereof is delivered to
every aggrieved party who has filed a written request for such copy with the
chairman of the Board at the time of its hearing of the case, whichever is
later. The copy of the decision of the Board shall be delivered by personal
delivery, electronic mail, or by first-class mail to the applicant, property
owner, and to any person who has submitted a written request for copy, prior to
the date the decision becomes effective.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 2-3-14)
§ 152.079 PLANNING BOARD.
   The Town Council has created a Planning Board pursuant to G.S. § 160A-361.
The Board of Adjustment, as the same is created pursuant to §
152.070 of this chapter, is hereby appointed to be the town’s Planning Board,
to perform the duties of such planning board as the same are established by law
and as are assigned by the Town Council from time to time.
(Ord. passed 8-6-12; Am. Ord. passed 2-3-14; Am. Ord. passed - - )
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT PROVISIONS
§ 152.090 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   The regulations set forth in this chapter affect all land, every building,
and every use of land and/or building and shall apply as specified herein.
   (A)   Use. No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no
building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, moved or structurally
altered except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter for the
district in which it is located.
   (B)   Height and density.  No building shall hereafter be erected or altered
so as to exceed the height limit or to exceed the density regulations of this
chapter for the district in which it is located.
   (C)   Lot size.  No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent
lots of record in single ownership, shall be reduced in size so that the lot
width or depth, front, side or rear yard, lot area per dwelling unit, or other
requirements of this chapter are not maintained. This prohibition shall not be
construed to prevent the purchase or condemnation of narrow strips of land for
public utilities or street right-of-way purposes.
   (D)   Yard use limitations.  
      (1)   No part of a yard or other open space required about any building
or use for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall
be included as part of a yard or other open space similarly required for
another building or use.
      (2)   Allowable encroachments in yards. Only the following structures and
uses are permitted and may be encroachments in required yards as itemized in
the following list.
Item Allowable Encroachment  Yard Allowed
     in Required Area
Item Allowable Encroachment                                        Yard Allowed
     in Required Area
1    Awnings attached - not more than 42 inches, or in C-          F S R
     1 district only - not more than 60- inches (includes ROW)     F   R
2    Arbors or trellises - detached                                  R
3    Arbors or trellises - attached - not more than 3 feet         F  R
4    Air conditioning equipment enclosures, only as necessary on    S R
     existing homes
5    Balconies - not more than 5 feet                                R
     Bay windows - not extending to foundation and not more than 3
6    feet deep and not more than 50% of width of the room in which F  R
     it is a part
7    Canopies, marquees - attached - C-1 District only - not more  F  R
     than 72 inches (includes over ROW)                            F   R
8    Eaves or gutters - cantilevered not more than 3 feet          F S R
9    Fences, finished side of fence to face abutting property      F S F
10   Ornamental light standards                                    F S R
11   Parking spaces - except as otherwise provided                 F S R
12   Playground and laundry drying equipment                         R
13   Play houses and pergolas                                        R
14   Retaining walls - decorative block, brick, or stucco over     F S R
     plain block
15   Signs and nameplates - per sign regulations                   F S R
16   Sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features of the  F S R
     principal building - not more than 24 inches
     Steps and stairs, open, and handicap ramps - for access to
17   and from a principal building when required on existing       F S R
     buildings
18   Patios, no more than 5 feet on existing structures              R
19   Trees, shrubs, and other plants                               F S R
 
   (E)   One principal building on a lot.  Every building hereafter erected,
moved or structurally altered shall be located on a lot, and in no case shall
there be more than one principal building and its customary accessory buildings
on the lot, except in the case of specially designed complexes of
institutional, residential, commercial or industrial buildings in an
appropriate zoning district classification.
   (F)   Lot frontage.  All lots shall front on a public street.
   (G)   Combining parcels or lots.  If combining parcels or lots, all parcels
or lots shall be in the same zoning classification.
   (H)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall not be permanently
affixed to the ground or utilities as a principal building or accessory
structure on any lot. Recreational vehicles shall not be occupied for dwelling
purposes at any time, unless parked in an authorized recreational vehicle park.
   (H)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall not be permanently
affixed to the ground or utilities as a principal building or accessory
structure on any lot. Recreational vehicles shall not be occupied for dwelling
purposes at any time, unless parked in an authorized recreational vehicle park
or a temporary use permit has been approved.
   (I)   Temporary residence use. Trailer trailers/recreational vehicles/motor
homes and campers shall be permitted as a temporary residence during the
construction of the property owner's new single-family dwelling, major
remodeling to the existing single-family dwelling or under certain unforeseen
circumstances subject to the following requirements and conditions:
      (1)   Issuance of a Macon County building permit for a new single-family
dwelling or for a major remodeling to an existing single-family dwelling.
      (2)   Issuance of a temporary use permit (TUP) for a period not to exceed
one year. The temporary use permit may be renewed one time for six months and
in no case shall it be valid for more than one-and-one-half years from the
original issuance date.
      (3)   The temporary use permit shall become invalid upon completion,
expiration or cancellation of the building permit. The TUP may be cancelled for
non-compliance with the conditions as specific in the section.
      (4)   The property owner shall connect the temporary unit to an approved
septic system, public sewer system or dispose of the wastewater in a lawfully
approved way.
      (5)   The temporary unit shall comply with minimum building setbacks as
the district in which it is placed.
      (6)   After construction is completed and upon issuance of a certificate
of occupancy, the temporary unit shall be disconnected from all utilities and/
or sewage disposal systems within 60 days and can no longer be occupied as a
temporary dwelling unit.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08; Am. Ord. 2024-002, passed 3-4-
24)
§ 152.091 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
   The regulations for the various zoning district classifications shall be
enforced and interpreted according to the rules specified herein.
   (A)   Uses. Uses not designated as permitted, or special, shall be
prohibited. Permitted uses subject to special requirements, and special uses
shall be permitted only according to the additional regulations imposed.
Permits for a special use shall be approved or disapproved by the Town Council.
   (B)   Minimum regulations.  Regulations set forth by this subchapter shall
be general requirements applicable to all uses in all district classifications,
unless other regulations are more restrictive or establish a higher standard.
   (C)   Land covenants. Unless restrictions established by covenants with the
land are prohibited by or are contrary to the provisions of this chapter,
nothing herein contained shall be construed to render such covenants
inoperative.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.092 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   On a corner lot nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or allowed to grow
in such a manner as materially to impede vision between a height of two and
one-half feet and ten feet in a triangular area formed by a diagonal line
between two points on the right-of-way lines, 20 feet from where they
intersect. This regulation does not apply in the C-1 Central Business District.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.093 OFF-STREET PARKING.
   All developments, except for those situated within the C-1 Central
Commercial Zoning District, shall provide a sufficient number of parking spaces
to accommodate the number of vehicles that ordinarily are likely to be
attracted to the development in question. No certificate of occupancy will be
issued upon completion of the building unless all off-street parking and
loading requirements, shown upon the plans or made part of the building permit,
are in place and ready for use and conforming to requirements.
   (A)   Presumptions.  The presumptions established by this section are that
(1) a development must comply with the parking standards set forth in division
(E) to satisfy the standard stated in §
152.094 and (2) any development that does meet these standards is in
compliance. However, the parking space requirements contained in division (E)
are only intended to establish a presumption and should be flexibly
administered in accordance with division (F).
   (B)   Separate uses.  The required parking for separate uses may be combined
in one lot, but spaces assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use
at the same time; provided, however, one-half of the parking spaces required
for churches, theaters or assembly halls, whose peak attendance will be at
night or on Sundays, may be assigned to a use which will be closed at night or
on Sundays.
   (C)   Remote parking.  If the required number of parking spaces cannot
reasonably be provided on the same lot as the use being served, required
parking spaces may be provided on any lot a substantial portion of which is
within 200 feet of such uses.
   (D)   Parking space design. Each automobile parking space shall not be less
than nine feet by 18 feet in area exclusive of adequate access drives and
maneuvering space. Such space shall be provided with vehicular access to a
street or alley. Parking spaces shall not thereafter be encroached upon or
altered without prior development authorization as per §§
152.050 -
152.062, above.
   (E)   Use classifications and parking space requirements. The number of
parking spaces provided for any use or development shall equal or exceed the
number determined for the use or development by the standards contained herein.
It is recognized that the list of parking requirements contained in this
section cannot and does not cover every possible situation that may arise.
Therefore, in cases not specifically covered, the permit issuing authority is
authorized to determine the parking requirements using this table as a guide.
Type of Land Use One Parking Space Required for Each:
                 Minimum Maximum
Type of Land Use          One Parking Space Required for Each:
                          Minimum                    Maximum
Residential
                          1 per 2 boarding rooms,    1 per boarding room, plus
Boardinghouses            plus 1 per resident        1 per resident manager
                          manager
Dwellings, multi-family   1 per unit                 2 per unit
with 2 bedrooms or less
Dwellings, multi-family   2 per unit                 3 per unit
with 3 bedrooms or more
Dwellings, multi-family   1 per unit                 2 per unit
elderly or disabled
Dwellings, single-family  1 per unit                 2 per unit
with 2 bedrooms or less
Dwellings, single-family  2 per unit                 3 per unit
with 3 bedrooms or more
Dwellings, subsidized     1 per unit                 2 per unit
low-income
Public Facilities and Institutions
Assisted living           1 per 2 employees, plus 1  1 per employee, plus 1 per
facilities                per 2 units                2 units
Adult care facilities     1 per 2 employees, plus 1  1 per employee, plus 1 per
                          per 6 adults               6 adults
Child care facilities     1 per 2 employees, plus 1  1 per employee, plus 1 per
                          per 10 children            10 children
                          1 per each 4 seats or each 1 per 3 seats or each 30
Churches and wedding      40 sq. ft. of floor area   sq. ft. of floor area
chapels                   available for movable      available for movable
                          seats or for each 200 sq.  seats or for each 150 sq.
                          ft. of gross floor area    ft. of gross floor area
Civic, social service,
cultural, and fraternal   1 per 350 sq. ft.          1 per 250 sq. ft.
facilities
                          1 per 3 employees, plus
                          one per 3 full-time
                          students not residing on
Colleges and universities campus1 per employee, plus  
                          one per each full-time
                          student not residing on
                          campus
Family care homes and     1 per 2 employees          1 per employee
group homes, children
Family care homes and     1 per 2 employees, plus 1  1 per employee, plus 1 per
group homes, adults       per 2 residents            1 resident
                          1 per 350 sq. ft., plus    1 per 250 sq. ft., plus
Museums and art galleries one per 2 employees on     one per 2 employees on
                          shift of greatest          shift of greatest
                          employment                 employment
Medical facilities        1 per 250 sq. ft.          1 per 200 sq. ft.
Schools, elementary and   2 per classroom            3 per classrooms
middle
Schools, high             5 per classroom            10 per classroom
Shelters                  1 per 2 employees on shift 1 per employee on shift of
                          of greatest employment     greatest employment
Office, Business, and Industrial Uses
                          2 per operator station,    3 per operator station,
Barber shops and salons   plus one per 2 employees   plus one per 2 employees
                          on shift of greatest       on shift of greatest
                          employment                 employment
                          1 per room, plus 1 space   2 per room, plus 2 spaces
Bed and breakfast         for the resident manager/  for the resident manager/
homestays and inns        owner and 1 per each       owner and 1 per for each
                          employee                   employee
                          2 per wash bay, plus 2     3 per wash bay, no
Car wash                  stacking spaces per wash   stacking maximum
                          bay
                          1 per 350 sq. ft. (spaces  1 per 200 sq. ft. (spaces
Convenience stores with   at gas pumps are not       at gas pumps are not
gas pumps                 recognized as parking      recognized as parking
                          spaces)                    spaces)
                          1 per 4 seats of largest   1 per 2 seats of largest
Funeral establishments    public room, plus one per  public room, plus one per
                          2 employees on shift of    2 employees on shift of
                          greatest employment        greatest employment
Health and fitness        1 per 200 sq. ft.          1 per 100 sq. ft.
facilities
                          1 per 2 bedrooms , plus    1 per 1 bedroom , plus
Lodging                   additional spaces as       additional spaces as
                          required for other uses    required for other uses
                          within the hotel/motel     within the hotel/motel
                          1 per residential unit     1 per residential unit
Live-work unit            plus 1 per each 350 sq.    plus 1 per each 250 sq.
                          ft. of office/business     ft. of office/business
                          space                      space
Manufacturing, assembly   1 per 2 employees on shift 1 per employee on shift of
or finishing operations   of greatest employment     greatest employment
Office: professional,
business, or public,
including banks. (plus 3  1 per 350 sq. ft.          1 per 250 sq. ft.
spaces per lane for
stacking if drive-through
service is proposed)
Rental establishments     1 per 350 sq. ft.          1 per 250 sq. ft.
Repair and service
businesses providing on-  1 per 300 sq. ft.          1 per 200 sq. ft.
site services
Repair and service
businesses providing off- 2 employees                1 per employee
site services
Restaurants, bars,
breweries, private clubs, 1 per 3 seats, plus one    1 per 2 seats, plus one
wine tasting (plus 11     space per 2 employees on   space per 2 employees on
spaces for stacking if    shift of greatest          shift of greatest
drive-through service is  employment                 employment
proposed)
Retail sales              1 per 350 sq. ft.          1 per 200 sq. ft.
Self-service storage      1.4 per 100 units plus 1   2 per 100 units plus 1 per
facility                  per 2 employees on shift   every employee on shift
Servicing, packaging, and 1 per 2 employees on shift 1 per employee on shift of
storage of commodities    of greatest employment     greatest employment
Theaters, stadiums,       1 per 4 seats or 1 per 6   1 per 3 seats or 1 per 4
arenas, and sports fields feet of bench area         feet of bench area
and courts
Vehicle service stations  1 per service bay, plus    3 per service bay, plus
and auto repair garages   one per 2 employees on     one space per 2 employees
(spaces at gas pumps are  shift of greatest          on shift of greatest
not recognized as parking employment                 employment
spaces)
Warehouses, wholesale,    1 per 2 employees on shift 1 per employee on shift of
and distributive          of greatest employment,    greatest employment, plus
businesses                plus one per 350 sq. ft.   one per 350 sq. ft. of
                          of area open to the public area open to the public
 
   (F)   Flexible administration.  It is recognized that, due to the
particularities of any given development, the inflexible application of the
parking standards set forth in division (E) may result in a development either
with inadequate parking space or parking space far in excess of its needs. The
former situation may lead to traffic congestion or parking violations in
adjacent streets as well as unauthorized parking in nearby private lots. The
latter situation results in a waste of money as well as a waste of space that
could more desirably be used for valuable development or environmentally useful
open space. Therefore the permit-issuing authority may permit deviations from
the presumptive requirements of division (E) and may require more parking or
allow less parking whenever it finds that such deviations are more likely to
satisfy the standard set forth in division (A).
      (1)   Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the permit-
issuing authority may allow deviations from the parking requirements set forth
in division (E) when it finds the following:
         (a)   A residential development is irrevocably oriented toward the
elderly.
         (b)   A business is primarily oriented toward walk-in trade or trade
expected to arrive by means other than an automobile.
      (2)   Whenever the permit-issuing authority allows or requires a
deviation from the presumptive parking requirements set forth in division (E)
it shall enter on the face of the permit the parking requirement that it
imposes and the reasons for allowing or requiring the deviation.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.094 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING.
   Development and redevelopment projects in all districts except the C-
1 Central Commercial District shall provide space as indicated herein for the
loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space
shall have access to an alley or, if there is no alley, to a street. For the
purposes of this section an off-street loading space shall have a minimum
dimension adequate to accommodate the largest vehicles expected to be served
and, in any event, no less than 12 feet by 40 feet and an overhead clearance of
14 feet in height above the alley or street grade.
   (A)   Retail operations: One loading space for each 20,000 square feet of
gross floor area or fraction thereof.
   (B)   Wholesale and industrial operations:
Building Area in Square Feet Number of Spaces
Building Area in Square Feet Number of Spaces
0 - 40,000                   1
40,000 - 100,000             2
100,000 - 160,000            3
160,000 - 240,000            4
240,000 - 320,000            5
320,000 - 400,000            6
Each 90,000, above 400,000   1 additional
 
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.095 ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   Accessory structures shall not be located in any required front yard or any
required front or side yard of a corner lot. In all other cases, the accessory
structure shall meet the setback requirements for the zoning district
classification in which it is located.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.096 CALCULATION OF LOT AREAS.
   No part of a road right-of-way lying within lot lines may be used in
calculating minimum lot sizes requirements.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.097 STORAGE CONTAINERS.
   (A)   For purposes of administering this section, the term “storage
containers” shall include “storage trailers”. Storage containers shall require
permits from the Administrator; they shall be removed from the premises upon
which they are located upon the expiration of the time period designed in the
permit. One storage container per lot shall be permitted for a period not
exceeding 90 consecutive days in a 12- month period. Storage containers shall
meet all setback requirements for the zoning district in which they are located
and shall be placed in the rear yard wherever possible. No storage container
shall be permitted on a vacant lot. No storage container shall contain
facilities for utility service. No storage container shall display any signs,
lettering or advertising device, with the exception of a required owner
identification sign with letters not to exceed three inches in height. This
sign shall contain the name, address and phone number of the owner and may also
contain a storage container identification number. These regulations shall not
apply to the following:
      (1)   Construction service trailers used for offices or for storage of
tools or materials on job sites for the duration of construction;
      (2)   Storage trailers used as construction service facilities which are
a portion of the inventory of the equipment used by the business to transport
materials from one job to another, and not used for purposes of storage.
      (3)   Storage trailers, on the lot of a storage trailer sales or rental
business, that constitute part of the inventory of such business and that are
not currently used for purposes of storage.
   (B)   Storage containers shall be permitted only in the C-3 Highway
Commercial and I-1 Industrial zoning district classifications.
   (C)   Converted. The use of portable storage units as building materials to
create commercial structures for habitable purposes (which could include
storage). Habitable includes commercial restaurants, retail, and any other
building constructed out of multiple storage containers. The use of the storage
container as a building material must meet the NC building code. The below
matrix “Non-Residential Converted Storage Container Use Matrix” is where the
use is permitted in the zoning Districts. The designation “P” means permitted.
Shipping containers are not allowed in residential zoning districts. Containers
must either be screened or painted to neutral earth tone color or a color
consistent with the principal building.
 
Non- Residential Converted Storage Container Use Matrix
        Permitted Use                            C-1 C-2 C-3 I-1 MICR NMU
Storage Converted storage or Shipping Containers P   P   P   P   P    P
 
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.098 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   Street Classification. In all new subdivisions, streets that are
dedicated to public use shall be classified as provided in herein. The
classification shall be based upon the projected volume of traffic to be
carried by the street, stated in terms of the number of trips per day. The
number of dwelling units to be served by the street may be used as a useful
indicator of the number of trips but is not conclusive. Whenever a subdivision
street continues an existing street that formerly terminated outside the
subdivision or it is expected that a subdivision street will be continued
beyond the subdivision at some future time, the classification of the street
will be based upon the street in its entirety, both within and outside of the
subdivision. The classification of streets shall be as follows.
      (1)   Minor.  A street whose sole function is to provide access to
abutting properties. It serves or is designed to serve not more than nine
dwelling units and is expected to or does handle up to 75 trips per day.
      (2)   Local.  A street whose sole function is to provide access to
abutting properties. It serves or is designed to serve at least ten but not
more than 25 dwelling units and is expected to or does handle between 75 and
200 trips per day.
      (3)   Cul-de-sac.  A street that terminates in a vehicular turn-around.
      (4)   Subcollector.  A street whose sole principal function is to provide
access to abutting properties but is also designed to be used or is used to
connect minor and local streets with collector or arterial streets. Including
residences indirectly served through connecting streets, it serves or is
designed to serve at least 26 but not more than 100 dwelling units and is
expected to or does handle between 200 and 800 trips per day.
      (5)   Collector.  A street whose principal function is to carry traffic
between minor, local, and subcollector streets and arterial streets but that
may also provide direct access to abutting properties. It serves or is designed
to serve, directly or indirectly, more than 100 dwelling units and is designed
to be used or is used to carry more than 800 trips per day.
      (6)   Arterial. A major street in the town’s street system that serves as
an avenue for the circulation of traffic into, out, or around the town and
carries high volumes of traffic.
      (7)   Marginal access street.  A street that is parallel to and adjacent
to an arterial street and that is designed to provide access to abutting
properties so that these properties are somewhat sheltered from the effects of
the through traffic on the arterial street and so that the flow of traffic on
the arterial street is not impeded by direct driveway access from a large
number of abutting properties.
   (B)   Access to public streets in general.  Every lot shall have either
direct or indirect access to a public street. A lot has direct access to a
public street if a sufficient portion of a boundary of the lot abuts the public
street right-of-way so that an access way meeting the criteria set forth herein
can be established. A lot has indirect access if it connects to a public street
by means of one or more private roads that are of sufficient size to meet the
criteria set forth herein.
      (1)   Standard for access.  The access provided must be adequate to
afford a reasonable means of ingress and egress for emergency vehicles as well
as for all those likely to need or desire access to the property in its
intended use.
      (2)   Access to arterial streets. Whenever a major subdivision that
involves the creation of one or more new streets borders on or contains an
existing or proposed arterial street, no direct driveway access may be provided
from the lots within this subdivision onto this street.
   (C)   Entrances to streets.  All driveway entrances and other openings onto
streets within the town’s planning jurisdiction shall be constructed so that
(a) vehicles can enter and exit from the lot in question without posing any
substantial danger to themselves, pedestrians, or vehicles traveling in
abutting streets, and (b) interference with the free and convenient flow of
traffic in abutting or surrounding streets is minimized.
   (D)   Coordination with surrounding streets. The street system of a
subdivision or planned development shall be coordinated with existing, proposed
and anticipated streets outside the development or outside the portion of a
single tract that is being divided into lots (hereinafter, “surrounding
streets”) as provided in this section.
      (1)   Collector streets shall intersect with surrounding collector or
arterial streets at safe and convenient locations.
      (2)   Subcollector, local, and minor residential streets shall connect
with surrounding streets where necessary to permit the convenient movement of
traffic between residential neighborhoods or to facilitate access to
neighborhoods by emergency service vehicles or for other sufficient reasons,
but connections shall not be permitted where the effect would be to encourage
the use of such streets by substantial through-traffic.
      (3)   Whenever connections to anticipated or proposed surrounding streets
are required by this section, the street right-of-way shall be extended and the
street developed to the property line of the subdivided property (or to the
edge of the remaining undeveloped portion of a single tract) at the point where
the connection to the anticipated or proposed street is expected. In addition,
the permit issuing authority may require temporary turn-arounds to be
constructed at the end of such streets pending their extension when such
turnarounds appear necessary to facilitate the flow of traffic or accommodate
emergency vehicles. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, no
temporary dead-end street in excess of 1,000 feet may be created unless no
other practicable alternative is available.
   (E)   Street width and drainage requirements in subdivisions and planned
developments. Street rights-of-way are designed and developed to serve several
functions: (1) to carry motor vehicle traffic, and in some cases, allow on-
street parking; (2) to provide a safe and convenient passageway for pedestrian
traffic; and (3) to serve as an important link in the town’s drainage system.
All streets shall be constructed with curb and gutter and shall conform to the
other requirements of this section. Any style of curb and gutter design, if
designed as approved by the North Carolina Department of Transportation for use
on residential streets, may be used, subject to the prior approval of the Land
Use Administrator. Street pavement width shall be measured from the outer edge
of each curb.
 
Type Street  Minimum Right-of-Way Minimum Pavement Width
Minor        30'                  18'
Local        40'                  22'
Subcollector 50'                  34'
Collector    50'                  34'
 
   (F)   General layout of streets.
      (1)   Subcollector, local, and minor residential streets shall be curved
whenever practicable to the extent necessary to avoid conformity of lot
appearance.
      (2)   To the extent practicable, driveway access to collector streets
shall be minimized to facilitate the free flow of traffic and avoid traffic
hazards.
      (3)   All permanent dead-end streets shall be developed as cul-de-sacs in
accordance with the standards set forth in division (F)(4). Except where no
other practicable alternative is available, such streets may not extend more
than 550 feet (measured to the center of the turn-around).
      (4)   The right-of-way of a cul-de-sac shall have a radius of 30 feet.
The radius of the paved portion of the turn-around (measured to the outer edge
of the pavement) shall be 30 feet. The entire cul-de-sac shall be paved. No
parking shall be permitted on the cul-de-sac.
      (5)   Half streets (i.e., streets of less than the full required right-
of-way and pavement width) shall not be permitted except where such streets,
when combined with a similar street (developed previously or simultaneously) on
property adjacent to the subdivision, creates or comprises a street that meets
the right-of-way and pavement requirements of this chapter.
      (6)   Streets shall be laid out so that residential blocks do not exceed
1,000 feet, unless no other practicable alternative is available.
   (G)   Street intersections.
      (1)   Streets shall intersect as nearly as possible at right angles, and
no two streets may intersect at less than 60 degrees. No more than two streets
shall intersect at any one point, unless the public works director certifies to
the permit issuing authority that such an intersection can be constructed with
no extraordinary danger to public safety.
      (2)   Whenever possible, proposed intersections along one side of a
street shall coincide with existing or proposed intersections on the opposite
side of such street. In any event, where a center line offset (jog) occurs at
an intersection, the distance between centerlines of the intersecting streets
shall be not less than 150 feet.
      (3)   No two streets may intersect with any other street on the same side
at a distance of less than 400 feet measured from centerline to centerline of
the intersecting street. When the intersected street is an arterial, the
distance between intersecting streets shall be at least 1,000 feet.
   (H)   Construction standards and specifications. Except as modified herein,
streets shall be designed to comply with the design and construction standards
of the North Carolina Department of Transportation.
   (I)   Road and sidewalk requirements in unsubdivided developments. Within
unsubdivided developments, all private roads and access ways shall be designed
and constructed to facilitate the safe and convenient movement of motor vehicle
and pedestrian traffic. Width of roads, use of curb and gutter, and paving
specifications shall be determined by the provisions of this chapter dealing
with parking and drainage. To the extent not otherwise covered in the foregoing
subchapters, and to the extent that the requirements set forth in this
subchapter for subdivision streets may be relevant to the roads in unsubdivided
developments, the requirements of this subchapter may be applied to satisfy the
standard set forth in the first sentence of this subsection.
      (1)   Whenever a road in an unsubdivided development connects two or more
subcollector, collector, or arterial streets in such a manner that any
substantial volume of through traffic is likely to make use of this road, such
road shall be constructed in accordance with the standards applicable to
subdivision streets and shall be dedicated. In other cases when roads in
unsubdivided developments within the town are constructed in accordance with
the specifications for subdivision streets, the town may accept an offer of
dedication of such streets.
      (2)   In all unsubdivided multi-family residential developments,
sidewalks shall be provided linking dwelling units with other dwelling units,
the public street, and on-site activity centers such as parking areas, laundry
facilities, and recreational areas and facilities. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, sidewalks shall not be required where pedestrians have access to a
road that serves not more than nine dwelling units.
      (3)   Whenever the permit issuing authority finds that a means of
pedestrian access is necessary from an unsubdivided development to schools,
parks, playgrounds, or other roads or facilities and that such access is not
conveniently provided by sidewalks adjacent to the roads, the developer may be
required to reserve an unobstructed easement of at least ten feet to provide
such access.
      (4)   In unsubdivided nonresidential developments that abut a public
street, sidewalks shall be constructed adjacent to such street if a sidewalk in
that location is necessary to continue a pre-existing sidewalk. Whenever
possible, such sidewalk shall be constructed within the public right-of-way.
      (5)   The sidewalks required by this section shall be five feet wide, or
at the width currently required by the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990
as amended, whichever is wider, and otherwise constructed according to the
specifications of the town, except that the permit issuing authority may permit
the installation of walkways constructed with other suitable materials when it
concludes that (a) such walkways would serve the residents of the development
as adequately as concrete sidewalks and (b) such walkways could be more
environmentally desirable or more in keeping with the overall design of the
development. Variances of the width requirement in this section shall be
considered pursuant to applicable law, based on geographical obstacles or
structural obstacles. In the event that the sidewalk is permitted to be
constructed less than five feet width requirement, then a 60-inch passing space
must be located at least every 200 feet. Bus transit stops, driveways and
building entrances may be counted as passing spaces. The Land Use Administrator
may approve an alternate plan that proposes different pedestrian amenities
provided that the intent of this section is fulfilled.
      (6)   Attention to handicapped in street and sidewalk construction.
Whenever curb and gutter construction is used on public streets, wheelchair
ramps for the handicapped shall be provided at intersections and other major
points of pedestrian flow. Wheelchair ramps and depressed curbs shall be
constructed in accordance with published standards of the North Carolina
Department of Transportation, Division of Highways. In unsubdivided
developments, sidewalk construction for the handicapped shall conform to the
requirements of the North Carolina State Building Code.
      (7)   Street names and house numbers. 
         (a)   Street names shall be assigned by the developer subject to the
approval of the permit issuing authority. Proposed streets that are obviously
in alignment with existing streets shall be given the same name. Newly created
streets shall be given names that neither duplicate nor are phonetically
similar to existing streets within the town’s planning jurisdiction, regardless
of the use of different suffixes (such as those set forth in herein). Street
names shall include a suffix such as the following:
            1.   Circle: A short street that returns to itself.
            2.   Court or place: A cul-de-sac or dead-end street.
            3.   Loop: A street that begins at the intersection with one street
and circles back to end at another intersection with the same street.
            4.   Street: All public streets not designated by another suffix.
         (b)   Building numbers shall be assigned by the town in coordination
with the Macon County street-addressing program.
   (J)   Bridges.  All bridges in subdivided and unsubdivided developments
shall be constructed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the
North Carolina Department of Transportation, except that bridges on roads not
intended for public dedication in unsubdivided developments may be approved if
designed by a licensed architect or engineer.
   (K)   Sidewalk requirements.  All new development or redevelopment shall
have sidewalks, with curb and gutter and necessary storm sewer, along each
public street abutting the development in accordance with the standards of the
town, including without limitation the standards for sidewalks contained in
division (I) above.
      (1)   All costs associated with the sidewalk, curb and gutter, and storm
sewer shall be borne by the developer.
      (2)   All sidewalk, curb and gutter, and storm sewer shall be dedicated
to the town for perpetual maintenance. All such dedicated improvements shall be
guaranteed for one year following the date of acceptance by the town. Any
defects in material and/or workmanship during the one-year period shall be
immediately corrected by the developer.
      (3)   Payment of fee in lieu of construction of sidewalks. When site
characteristics and/or traffic patterns are such that the construction of
sidewalks in accordance with this section would be a hardship and would not
result in useful pedestrian walkways, the Town Administrator may allow the
applicant to pay the cost of constructing such sidewalks into the Town Sidewalk
Fund in lieu of requiring construction of the sidewalks.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Ord. passed 9-8-15; Am. Ord. 2018-004, passed 9-4-18; Am.
Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.099 NUISANCES.
   It shall be a violation of this chapter to operate any use in such a fashion
as to constitute a nuisance as specified in this section.
   (A)   Noise.  Other than ordinary construction activities, no use shall be
operated so as to generate recurring noises that are unreasonably loud, cause
injury, or create a nuisance to any person of ordinary sensitivities. No
nonresidential use shall be operated so as to generate any noise in an adjacent
district, as detected in that district without instruments, that is louder than
the noise which could be generally expected from uses permitted in that
district.
   (B)   Fumes and odors. No use shall emit fumes, gases, or odors in
concentrations or amounts that cause injury or create a nuisance to any person
of ordinary sensitivities on another property.
   (C)   Vibration.  Other than ordinary construction activities, no use shall
be operated so as to generate inherent or recurring ground vibrations
detectable at the property line which create a nuisance to any person of
ordinary sensitivities on another property.
   (D)   Lighting.  Lighting facilities, if provided, shall be aimed, directed,
shielded or arranged so the light sources for such facilities do not cause
undue glare on neighboring properties or interfere with the safe use of public
rights-of-way.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.100 BURDEN OF PROOF.
   The burden of proof shall rest with the applicant in all proceedings
required or authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.101 RIGHTS-OF-WAY FOR ROADS AND STREETS.
   (A)   Reservation of right-of-way.  The orderly development of land is
dependent upon the protection of existing and proposed major roadways in the
town. The provisions of this section are intended to provide for the
reservation of right-of-way for such roadways under appropriate conditions.
      (1)   Reservation under the roadway corridor official map act.  Pursuant
to authority granted by G.S. Ch.136, Art. 2E, the town or the NCDOT may from
time to time adopt, amend, supplement or change a roadway corridor official map
for any streets or roadways identified on the town’s thoroughfare plan.
         (a)   After a roadway corridor official map is filed with the Register
of Deeds, no building permit shall be issued for any building or structure or
part thereof located within the roadway corridor, nor shall approval of a
subdivision be granted with respect to property within the roadway corridor.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to valid building permits issued
prior to the effective date of this section or to building permits for
buildings and structures which existed prior to the filing of the roadway
corridor, provided the size of the building or structure is not increased and
the type of building code occupancy is not changed.
         (b)   No application for building permit issuance or subdivision plan
approval shall be delayed by the provisions of this section for more than three
years from the date of the original building permit or subdivision plan
submittal.
      (2)   Setbacks for existing roadways. Applicants for development
authorization for parcels adjoining existing roadways identified on the town’s
thoroughfare plan shall propose locations for structures and other improvements
which do not encroach upon the proposed rights-of-way listed in such plan.
      (3)   Variances.  A variance from the provisions of this section may be
granted by the Board of Adjustment or by Town Council, as appropriate, upon
demonstration (a) that the requirements of this section result in practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardships and (b) that no reasonable return may be
earned from the land. For purposes of determining whether any reasonable use
may be earned, the entire parcel will be considered, not just that portion
lying within the bounds of the existing or proposed roadway.
   (B)   Dedication of right-of-way with density transfer. Whenever a tract of
land located within the planning jurisdiction of the town is proposed for a use
requiring development authorization under §§
152.050 -
152.062 herein and a portion of it is embraced within a corridor for a street
or highway on a plan established and adopted pursuant to G.S. § 136-66.2, the
town may require the applicant to dedicate for street or highway purposes the
right-of-way within such corridor. If the town elects to require such
dedication it shall allow the applicant to transfer density credits
attributable to the dedicated right-of-way to contiguous land owned by the
applicant. No dedication of right-of-way shall be required pursuant to this
section unless the entity granting development authorization shall find, prior
to the grant, that the dedication does not result in the deprivation of a
reasonable use of the original tract and that the dedication is either
reasonably related to the traffic generated by the proposed subdivision or use
of the remaining land or the impact of the dedication is mitigated by measures
provided elsewhere in the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.102 OPEN SPACE STANDARDS.
   Open space is intended to provide recreational opportunities, to conserve
and protect significant natural areas and environmentally sensitive areas, to
conserve important historic resources, and/or to conserve productive farming
and forestry uses. Functional open space enhances circulation within a site and
contributes to the site’s aesthetic qualities. Open space may include any out-
of-doors common space and any portion of the site not covered by a building or
vehicular use area. Where required, open space shall meet or exceed the
standards contained in this section.
   (A)   Extent of open space. Open space requirements are expressed as a
percentage of the area of a development in the standards for some zoning
classifications contained in §§
152.020 -
152.033. Open space shall meet or exceed this stated percentage. The following
standards shall be used in determining which portions of a development site are
to be designated as open space.
      (1)   Primary conservation areas. The following areas are considered
primary conservation areas and shall be designated as open space on development
plans when open space is required.
         (a)   Designated floodways and floodway fringes identified as part of
a flood insurance study prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
         (b)   Natural watercourses and any adjoining stream buffers required
to be maintained in a natural vegetated and unaltered state pursuant to
§§
152.190 -
152.199 hereof. All primary conservation areas shall be designated as open
space even if doing so results in open space which exceeds the amount required
by the open space standard contained in §§
152.020 -
152.033.
      (2)   Secondary conservation areas.  The following areas are considered
secondary conservation areas. When open space is required for a development,
some or all the secondary conservation areas on the development site shall be
designated as open space to the extent it is necessary to meet the applicable
open space standard.
         (a)   Any identified significant natural areas (e.g., rare plant
communities, important wildlife habitat) or other environmentally sensitive
areas where development might threaten water quality or ecosystems (e.g.,
watershed buffers, groundwater recharge areas).
         (b)   Any identified important historic resources (e.g., homesteads,
mills, barns, archeological sites) identified from a local archeological or
architectural survey or an individual site survey.
         (c)   Productive farmland or forest land intended for continued
agricultural and/or forestry use.
      (3)   Additional open space. When primary and/or secondary conservation
areas do not equal or exceed the open space standard for a development site,
additional lands shall be designated as open space in order to meet such
standard.
   (B)   Open space design.  Provided such use is not inconsistent with §§
152.190 -
152.199 and with other applicable regulations, open space may be used to
provide active and/or passive outdoor recreation opportunities (e.g.,
ballfields, playgrounds, tennis courts, swimming pools, basketball courts, golf
courses, bikeways, walking trails, nature trails, and picnic areas), either for
the general public or for the subdivision’s residents or employees and their
guests.
      (1)   Open space may contain only such buildings, structures, access
ways, and parking facilities as are necessary and accessory to its principal
uses, e.g., pedestrian path, recreational clubhouse, utility lines, driveway,
small parking area, barns and other farm storage and processing facilities.
      (2)   The location, size, character, and shape of required open space
shall be appropriate to its intended use (e.g., open space proposed to be used
for recreation, particularly active recreation, shall be located and designed
so as to be conveniently and safely reached and used by those persons it is
intended to serve, and open space proposed to be used for ballfields, playing
fields, or other extensive active recreational facilities should be located on
land that is relatively flat and dry).
      (3)   Ownership and maintenance of open space. Arrangements for the
perpetual maintenance of open space must be approved in writing by the Land Use
Administrator. Any conveyance to a homeowners association shall be subject to
restrictive covenants and easements reviewed and approved by the Land Use
Administrator which shall prohibit future development of any open space for
other than open space or recreation purposes and shall provide for continued
maintenance of any open space and recreational facilities.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.103 COMMON SPACE STANDARDS.
   Certain developments are required to develop a specified portion of the
development site as common space. Where required, common space shall meet or
exceed the standards contained in this section.
   (A)   General design standards.  Common space is intended to shape the
design and character of a project through a connecting system of pedestrian
areas that create a relationship among the various components of the built
environment. It shall be designed to create areas where workers, residents and
shoppers, as the case may be, are directly or indirectly invited to gather,
browse, sit, interact or congregate. It shall be arranged as community space
with open areas, landscaping, seating facilities and lighting fixtures which
provide for safety and visual effects. Common spaces are intended to be places
for social interaction and, thus, may include impervious surfaces. Unless
interior common space is approved by the reviewing authority, common space
shall be out-of-doors.
   (B)   Specific design standards.  In addition to the general design
standards contained in §
152.105(A), common space design shall comply with the following.
      (1)   Trees.  One tree shall be planted for each 500 square feet of
common space. Trees shall have a minimum caliper of three to three and one-half
inches measured six inches above ground at the time of planting.
      (2)   Utilities.  All utilities service lines and connections shall be
underground.
      (3)   Seating. Seating shall be provided to accommodate workers,
residents and/or shoppers. Seating may be accomplished in whole or in part
using planters or other similar structures.
      (4)   Amenities. Common space for a development shall contain adequate
amenities to animate and enliven the environment and to make it conducive for
social interaction. Following is a list of such amenities: ornamental
fountains, stairways, waterfalls, public art, arbors, trellises, planted beds,
drinking fountains, clock pedestals, awnings, canopies, informational kiosks,
and similar structures. This list is not intended to be exhaustive.
   (C)   Lands which may be designated as common space. The following standards
control what lands in a development may be designated as common space.
      (1)   Primary conservation areas shall not be designated as common space
absent authorization from the town in those circumstances where, due to careful
design, the land in question can fulfill the function of common space without
compromising the purposes served by primary conservation areas.
      (2)   Land that is burdened with easements may be used provided that the
easements do not interfere with the use of the land for common space and do not
permit future development.
   (D)   Ownership and maintenance of common space.  Arrangements for the
perpetual maintenance of common space must be approved in writing by the Land
Use Administrator. Any conveyance to a homeowners association shall be subject
to restrictive covenants and easements reviewed by the Land Use Administrator
and recorded and filed in accordance with the times specified in this section.
The covenants and easements shall prohibit future development of any common
space for other than the purposes specified herein and shall provide for
continued maintenance of any such common space.
   (E)   Completion of common space.  All common space shall be set aside and
improved no later than the following applicable date:
      (1)   For subdivisions: prior to the sale of any lot;
      (2)   For planned developments: no later than the date on which
certificates of occupancy are issued for the first 75% of the total number of
dwelling units to be constructed in the project area.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.104 SEPARABILITY.
   Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared invalid by any
court, such declaration shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a
whole or any part thereof which is not specifically declared to be invalid.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.105 TRANSPORTATION IMPACT ANALYSIS.
   The purpose of a transportation impact analysis (TIA) is to assess the
impact of a proposed development on the existing transportation system. A TIA
will (1) ensure that the transportation network has adequate capacity to handle
projected transportation demand associated with the project, (2) identify
problems with the transportation system, (3) delineate solutions to identified
problems, and (4) identify improvements to be incorporated into the proposed
development.
   (A)   Required. Applicants for development authorization in which the
proposed development, redevelopment, or change of use is expected to generate
100 or more peak-hour trips (a.m. or p.m.) or 1,000 or more trips daily shall
have prepared by a qualified professional a TIA meeting the guidelines
established in this section. In addition to the foregoing, the Planning
Director shall have the discretion to require a TIA when there are localized
safety or capacity deficiencies.
   (B)   Presubmittal conference.  An applicant for development authorization
for any project expected to meet or exceed one or both of the TIA thresholds
specified in division (A), above, shall schedule a presubmittal conference with
the town. The engineering firm selected to prepare the TIA shall attend this
meeting the purpose of which is to establish the study area, the trip
distribution, the traffic counts to be utilized, approved developments in the
area, pass-by and internal capture percentages, additional hours of analysis,
if required (other than a.m. or p.m. peak), and resolve any other questions
specific to the site.
   (C)   TIA submission. Three copies of the TIA, if required, shall accompany
the application for development authorization. The TIA shall be prepared by a
licensed engineer registered to practice in the State of North Carolina who
shall have traffic assessment and transportation management experience. At a
minimum, the TIA shall include the following:
      (1)   Study purpose and objectives.
      (2)   Description of the site and study area boundaries including
appropriate mapping and rationale for selection of the study area boundaries.
      (3)   A summary of existing conditions including, but not limited to,
surrounding street and key intersection traffic volumes (daily and peak-hour),
turning movements, capacities, safety deficiencies, and funded transportation
improvements.
      (4)   Anticipated or approved development in the area.
      (5)   Trip generation, trip distribution, and discussion of the
following:
         (a)   Trip generation rates shall be based on trip generation rates
contained in the latest edition of Trip Generation published by the Institute
of Transportation Engineers (ITE). The applicant shall also provide the ITE
code used to identify the development trip generation rate and assumptions used
or data collected for any variations from generally accepted ITE rates or
equations.
         (b)   Pass-by trip factors and assumptions.
         (c)   Internal trip assumptions for mixed use developments.
         (d)   Trip distribution assumptions.
      (6)   Projection of future traffic volumes and assessment of future
roadway and intersection operating conditions for the year of the ultimate
completion of the project. All projections should specifically document
projected background traffic as well as the traffic generated by the proposed
development. If the project is to be phased; projections for each phase of the
development is required. If the unphased build-out period of the project is
greater than nine years, then a minimum of one intermediate and one full build-
out projection is required. All projections and assessments should include the
following three scenarios:
         (a)   No build.
         (b)   Maximum possible development under existing use or zoning.
Applicant shall conduct assessment of project phasing. The impact of the
development of a particular phase is not to be compared with the total possible
build-out of the entire project location.
         (c)   The development as proposed.
      (7)   Analysis of the key elements of the development and evaluation of
the impacts of the development on the following:
         (a)   Generalized peak hour and/or daily Link Level of Service (LOS)
analysis.  Using the peak hour directional volumes and daily traffic volumes
forecast and service thresholds, a general evaluation shall be made of the
street system for the short term and long-term horizon years. If the project is
to be phased; then an assessment of conditions after the completion of each
phase of the development is required. Incremental differences attributable to
the land use action shall be identified. A map showing generalized levels of
service shall be presented for each design year.
         (b)   Access analysis. The deign, number, and location of access
points to collector and arterial roadways must be fully analyzed. The number of
access points shall be kept to a minimum and be designed to be consistent with
the type of roadway facility. Access analysis shall include a strip accident,
intersection accident analysis and bicycle/ pedestrian analysis.
         (c)   Intersection analysis (signal warrant analysis, phasing
analysis, intersection crash analysis and progression analysis).  The
appropriateness of the development’s access locations and type must be
established. For full-access locations, a signal warrant analysis based on the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices must be conducted for each design
year. Traffic signals specifically warranted by the land use action shall be
identified.
         (d)   Peak hour intersection level of service.  An a.m. and p.m. peak
hour intersection level of service analysis shall be conducted for each
intersection, based on procedures specified in the most recent release of the
Highway Capacity Manual. Levels of service for signalized intersections shall
be based on the signal timings developed for the signal progression analysis.
         (e)   Turn lane storage requirements.  Turn lane storage needs shall
be identified for the “warranted” situation, based on projected turning volumes
and AASHTO analytic techniques. Appropriate documentation of the calculations
must be provided.
         (f)   Sight distance. The identification of sight distance at the
development entrances and all internal streets shall be conducted.
         (g)   Appropriateness of acceleration or deceleration lanes.  All
proposed development access points on arterials shall be evaluated to determine
the need for acceleration lanes or deceleration lanes, with justification and
basis provided for recommendations.
         (h)   Pedestrian and bicycle analysis. Continuity and adequacy of
pedestrian and bike facilities shall be provided to the nearest attraction
(exiting or planned) within 1/4 mile of the development site. Destinations of
significance include bus stops, elementary schools, parks, activity centers and
major bicycle facilities. Adherence to the Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) shall be required.
         (i)   Public transportation analysis. Existing and proposed (if any)
public transportation facilities analysis shall be provided.
         (j)   Special analysis/issues.  The town may require specific focused
traffic analyses relative to the proposed development.
      (8)   Recommendations for site access and transportation improvements or
mitigation measures needed to maintain traffic flow to, from, within and
adjacent to the proposed development at an acceptable and safe level of service
(generally assumed at LOS D or better). Any recommendations for roadway
improvements should identify funding sources for these improvements.
      (9)   Data collected for the study shall be made available to the town
for evaluation of the study conclusions. The format for date submission as well
as format for data to be provided to the town will be determined at a pre-
consultation meeting between the applicant and the town.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
OUTDOOR DISPLAY OF MERCHANDISE
§ 152.110 OUTDOOR DISPLAYS PERMITTED.
   Subject to the regulations and requirements of the section, outdoor displays
of merchandise shall be permitted in conjunction with permitted uses in the
following Zoning District Classifications: C-1 Central Commercial, C-
2 Secondary Commercial, C-3 Highway Commercial, I-1 Industrial, NMU
Neighborhood Mixed Use, and MICR Medical Institutional Cultural Residential.
(Ord. passed 5-5-14)
§ 152.111 REGULATION OF OUTDOOR DISPLAYS.
   (A)   Businesses intending to display merchandise outdoors should indicate
such at the time of business license approval, in according with
Chapter 110 of this Code, or prior to the commencement of business operations.
   (B)   Prior to approval of business license or commencement of business
operations, all businesses displaying merchandise outdoors must submit a sketch
showing the location of the outdoor display or sales area and how the following
requirements are to be met:
      (1)   All outdoor displays shall be located immediately adjacent to the
storefront and not in drive aisles, loading zones or fire lanes.
      (2)   Outdoor display and/or sales areas may be located within parking
lots, provided that:
         (a)   The area is located within a designated area of the parking lot
not to exceed 4,000 square feet;
         (b)   Any parking spaces located within the designated area are in
addition to the minimum number of parking spaces required for the principal
use;
         (c)   Any parking spaces within the designated area that are not
occupied by merchandise are marked so as to prevent parking within the area;
         (d)   The area is located so as to minimize the need to cross drive
aisles; and
         (e)   Merchandise, vehicles, trailers or containers within the area
will not interfere with the movement of emergency vehicles or disrupt vehicular
or pedestrian traffic.
      (3)   At least five feet along the parking lot side of the display shall
be maintained free of obstruction to allow for pedestrian and handicap
movement, such that handicapped pedestrians and others do not have to enter the
parking lot or drive aisle to walk around the display. Storefronts bordering
public sidewalks or streets are prohibited from displaying merchandise upon the
same, pursuant to §
95.20 of this Code.
      (4)   The height of the outdoor display shall not exceed six feet in
height unless an exception to this provisions has been granted by the Land Use
Administrator.
      (5)   The area of outdoor display and/or sales shall not encompass the
width of the entrance doors to the facility as projected straight out from the
facility. For example, if the width of the entrance doors is ten feet, then
there shall be at least a ten foot clearance from the doors as projected
straight out from the facility.
      (6)   The area used for outdoor display and/or sales shall not be located
upon the side or rear yards of buildings, and shall be limited to no more than
one-half of the length of the storefront. In the case of a shopping center, the
“storefront” shall include the entire frontage of the shopping center, meaning
that the total amount of display for all the in-line tenants combined shall not
exceed 50% of the aggregate storefront of the overall shopping center.
(Ord. passed 5-5-14)
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN USES
§ 152.120 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter provides for the regulation of certain land uses which,
because of their nature or locational requirements, demand additional unique
standards in order to be compatible with other permitted or permissible uses
within the relevant zoning district.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.121 APPLICABILITY.
    These standards apply to a particular use only when it is designated as a
special use, or a “permitted use subject to special requirements” in any
particular zoning classification. They do not apply when a use is a permitted
use, that is, permitted by right. In such a situation, the development and
dimensional standards for the zoning classification and other applicable
standards will guide development and use. It is important to note this
distinction because the same use may be a special use or a permitted use
subject to special requirements in one zoning classification, in which case the
standards contained in this subchapter would apply, and a permitted use in
another classification, in which case they would not. The standards contained
in this subchapter also serve as minimum requirements for developments
undergoing special use review; provided, however, nothing herein shall be
construed to limit applicants from proposing, and the Town Council from
approving, plans which exceed these standards.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.122 PROCEDURES FOR APPLYING STANDARDS.
   This subchapter does not distinguish between standards on the basis of
procedural review. Please refer to the appropriate zoning classification to
determine if the proposed use is a special use or a permitted use subject to
special requirements. If the proposed use is a special use or a permitted use
subject to special requirements, the standards will be applied during the
applicable development review procedure in accordance with §§
152.050 -
152.062, above.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.123 STANDARDS.
   As stated herein, the following standards apply to the indicated use when
such use is either a special use or a permitted use subject to special
requirements. These standards are in addition to other applicable development
standards contained in this chapter.
   (A)   Accessory dwelling units.
      (1)   Accessory dwelling units may only be situated on a lot on which a
principal residential dwelling unit is also situated and shall be clearly
incidental or accessory to such principal residential structure.
      (2)   No more than one accessory dwelling unit may be situated on any
lot.
      (3)   Accessory dwelling units may not exceed 800 square feet of floor
area.
      (4)   The lot shall comply with the minimum lot size requirement for the
zoning classification in which it is situated.
      (5)   The structure containing the accessory dwelling unit shall comply
with the set back requirements for the zoning classification in which it is
situated.
   (B)   Adaptive reuses.
      (1)   This section is intended to allow a means for the development of
new uses for a building originally designed for a different use. It is intended
to have application in two particular areas. The first is for the reuse of a
structure which has been used historically for a use permitted in the zoning
district classification but for which there is no longer any reasonable demand
for such previous use. Example of this first class include church buildings and
schools. The second class involves situations in which structures have been
devoted historically to a nonconforming use, the owner of the property no
longer desires to devote the property to that use or the use has ceased, and
there is no reasonable likelihood that the property will revert to a use
permitted in the zoning district classification.
      (2)   Adaptive reuses may only be authorized by means of special use
permits processed through the special use review requirements of §§
152.050 -
152.062, above. In addition to the standards set forth therein, adaptive reuses
must also meet the following special requirements.
         (a)   The developer proposes the reuse of a structure or structures
used historically for a use permitted in the zoning district classification but
for which there is no longer any reasonable demand for such previous use, or
the developer proposes the reuse of a structure or structures used historically
as nonconforming use and there is no reasonable likelihood that the property
will revert to a use permitted in the zoning district classification.
         (b)   The developer shall state the precise nature of the proposed
adaptive reuse, which shall be compatible with neighboring residential uses. If
a special use permit is granted for the adaptive reuse, future use of the
property shall be limited to the specified use unless (1) the use is changed to
another use permitted in the zoning classification or (2) a new adaptive reuse
is approved.
         (c)   The adaptive reuse shall be housed in an existing structure or
structures.
         (d)   Such structures may be modified or expanded so long as the gross
floor area is not increased by more than 10%, so long as the development
complies with the open space requirement in division (B)(2)(h), below, and so
long as the appearance of the modification is in harmony with the neighboring
residential uses.
         (e)   Off-street parking meeting the requirements of §
152.093, herein, shall be provided. Such off-street parking shall be screened
so that it is not readily visible from the street or from adjoining residential
uses.
         (f)   The adaptive reuse may have one sign not to exceed six square
feet in area or conforming to the sign requirements for the zoning district
where adaptive reuse is located.
         (g)   The developer shall propose, install and maintain landscaping
which will assist in giving it a residential appearance.
         (h)   The adaptive reuse shall provide open space which shall be not
less than the existing open space on the property or 60% of the total area of
the development parcel, whichever is less.
         (i)   Lighting for the adaptive reuse shall be no more than is
necessary for safe use of the facility, and shall be designed and installed so
that it is directed away from the roadway and any adjacent properties.
         (j)   Traffic generated by the adaptive reuse shall not be expected to
cause an inconvenience to residents of the neighborhood.
         (k)   The developer shall propose hours of operation for the adaptive
reuse which are designed to be compatible with neighboring residential uses.
Such hours of operation shall become a condition of the special use permit,
violation of which shall be grounds for revocation of the permit.
   (C)   Animal boarding facilities.  The standards in this section apply to
facilities, such as animal kennels and animal shelters, where the primary
purpose is the boarding of household pets. It shall not apply to boarding
facilities incidental to the operation of an animal hospital or clinic or to
pet stores.
      (1)   No animal boarding facility shall be operated without all necessary
licensure, certification or other form of permission from the state and any
other governmental agency with jurisdiction over its operation. Loss of such
permission shall be grounds for revocation of any conditional or special use
permit authorizing an animal boarding facility.
      (2)   No animal boarding facility shall be located within 500 feet of the
nearest lot line of a residential use or a residential zoning district.
      (3)   Animal boarding facilities shall be adequately buffered to prevent
sounds from constituting a nuisance to neighboring properties.
      (4)   Housing facilities for animals shall be structurally sound and
shall be maintained in good repair, shall be designed so as to protect the
animals from injury, shall contain the animals, and shall restrict the entrance
of other animals.
      (5)   Electric power shall be supplied in conformance with the state
electrical codes adequate to supply lighting and heat as may be required by
this section. Water shall be supplied at sufficient pressure and quantity to
clean indoor housing facilities and primary enclosures of debris and excreta.
      (6)   Food and bedding shall be stored at facilities adequate to provide
protection against infestation or contamination by insects or rodents.
Refrigeration shall be provided for the protection of perishable foods.
      (7)   The applicant shall establish procedures for the safe and sanitary
removal and disposal of animal and food waste, bedding, dead animals and debris
and shall abide by such procedures. Disposal facilities shall be maintained in
a sanitary condition, free from the infestation or contamination of insects or
rodents or disease, and from obnoxious or foul odors.
      (8)   Washroom facilities, including sinks and toilets, shall be provided
for animal caretakers.
      (9)   Indoor housing facilities shall be adequately ventilated to provide
for the health of animals contained therein and to assist in the removal of
foul and obnoxious odors. Provision shall be made so that the volume of air
within any enclosed indoor facility shall be changed three times or more each
hour. This may be accomplished through the location and periodic opening of
doors and windows. If fans or ventilating equipment are used, they shall be
constructed in conformance with current standards of good engineering practice
with respect to noise and minimization of drafts.
      (10)   Indoor housing facilities for animals shall have sufficient
natural or artificial lighting to permit routine inspection and cleaning at any
time of day. In addition, sufficient natural or artificial lighting shall be
supplied in the area of sinks and toilets to provide for the hygiene of animal
caretakers.
      (11)   Interior wall, ceiling and floor surfaces of indoor housing
facilities shall be constructed of materials which are resistant to the
absorption of moisture and odors, or such surfaces shall be treated with a
sealant or with paint when such materials are not originally resistant to
moisture or odors. Floor surfaces shall not be unsealed wood. In addition,
interior walls shall be constructed so that the interface with floor surfaces
is sealed from the flow or accumulation of moisture or debris.
      (12)   Indoor housing facilities shall contain a drainage system which
shall be connected to a sanitary sewer or septic tank system which conforms to
the standards of the state building code and shall be designed to rapidly
remove water and excreta in the cleaning of such indoor housing facility under
any condition or weather or temperature.
      (13)   Outdoor facilities shall be constructed to provide shelter from
excessive sunlight, rain, snow, wind or other elements. In addition, such
facilities shall be constructed to provide sufficient space for the exercise
and movement of each animal contained therein.
      (14)   All outdoor facilities shall be constructed to provide drainage
and to prevent the accumulation of water, mud, debris, excreta or other
materials, and shall be designed so that all animal and food wastes are
directed into an approved sanitary sewer system or septic tank.
      (15)   All outdoor facilities shall be constructed with adequate walls or
fences to contain the animals kept therein and to prevent entrance of other
animals.
      (16)   Primary enclosures for animals shall be constructed and maintained
so as to provide sufficient space to allow each animal to turn about freely and
to easily stand, sit and lie in a comfortably normal position.
      (17)   Facilities shall be operated in compliance with regulations
adopted pursuant to the Animal Welfare Act, G.S. §§ 19A-20, et seq., as it may
be amended from time to time.
      (18)   No animal boarding facility shall be operated at any time after it
has been designated by a public health official pursuant to town, state or
federal statues or regulations concerning health, as being infested with
insects, rodents or disease which may endanger the public health, until the
health officer having jurisdiction shall have certified that the condition has
been corrected and the premises then comply with applicable health standards
and regulations.
   (D)   Assisted living facilities.
      (1)   Such facilities may only be situated on a site which contains no
less than three acres.
      (2)   A minimum of 65% of the project tract shall be designated as open
space.
      (3)    Maximum density for rest homes shall be 26 people per acre in all
zoning district classifications. In determining the number of people per acre,
it is assumed that each room where ambulatory assistance or skilled nursing
care is given contains one person per bed in the room. The Town Council shall
have the right to determine a lower density applying as criteria the following:
site constraints including but not limited to slopes over 20%, poor soils,
presence of floodplain, or other factors such as the traffic-bearing capability
of existing roads that would pose a threat to public health, safety or welfare,
or violate any of the review standards contained in this subchapter.
      (4)   Density under this subsection shall be calculated according to the
following formula:
         (a)   Studio apartments shall be assumed to house one person;
         (b)   One-bedroom apartments shall be assumed to house 1.5 persons;
         (c)   Two-bedroom apartments shall be assumed to house two persons;
and
         (d)   Each bed assigned to ambulatory assistance or skilled nursing
care is assumed to accommodate one person.
      (5)   No application for a development authorization for an assisted
living facility shall be considered unless a certificate of need, if required,
has been issued by the North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services,
or successor thereto. The certificate of need shall accompany the application.
   (E)   Bed and breakfast facilities.
      (1)   The facility shall be located in a structure originally constructed
as a single-family dwelling or as an inn.
      (2)   The facility shall be limited in the number of guest rooms it
contains. Bed and breakfast facilities in residential districts shall contain
no more than six guest rooms. Bed and breakfast facilities in other zoning
districts shall contain no more than eight guest rooms.
      (3)   The owner of the bed and breakfast or a resident manager shall live
on the premises.
      (4)   There shall be no exterior advertising except a sign not to exceed
six square feet in area in a residential district or conforming to the sign
requirements for the zoning district where the bed and breakfast facility is
located.
      (5)   The facility shall meet all building and fire codes, as well as all
health regulations and all other applicable requirements, including any
regulations adopted under authority of, the North Carolina General Statutes.
      (6)   There shall be a buffer strip meeting the specifications of §§
152.170 -
152.179 along any property adjoining a residential use or district.
      (7)   No cooking facilities shall be allowed in the lodging units unless
authorized by the Macon County Health Department.
      (8)   Two off-street parking spaces shall be provided for the dwelling
unit, and one off-street space shall be provided for each lodging unit. Parking
area(s) in or adjacent to residential use districts shall be screened by
vegetation, fencing or walls so that vehicles are not visible from the street
or from adjacent properties. The applicant shall submit a site plan which shall
indicate where the parking is to be located and the manner in which it is to be
screened.
   (F)   Cemeteries.
      (1)   Tombstones, crypts, monuments, mausoleums, columbaria, and other
structures associated with cemeteries must be located at least 25 feet from any
side or rear lot line which adjoins lots in a residential district and at least
ten feet from any side or rear lot line which adjoins lots in nonresidential
districts. In any case, they must be at least 40 feet from any street right-of-
way.
      (2)   Buildings for the maintenance, management, rent and/or sale of
cemetery lots must be located at least 100 feet from any lot lines which
adjoin lots in any residential district. Otherwise any such buildings must
conform to the requirements for principal uses in the district where they are
located.
      (3)   Crematory services may be provided for human corpses as an
accessory use within cemeteries situated on a site containing at least 30
acres, subject to the following special requirements:
         (a)   All applicable local, state, and federal laws and regulations
shall be complied with.
         (b)   The crematory shall be enclosed within a building meeting
Building and Fire Code requirements.
         (c)   The placement of crematory facilities within property in any
residential district shall be 100 feet or more from any exterior property line.
   (G)   Child care centers.
      (1)   Play space must be provided in accordance with the regulations of
the North Carolina Department of Human Resources. Any required outdoor play
space must be fenced or otherwise enclosed on all sides and may not include
driveways, parking areas or land otherwise unsuited for children’s play space
and may not be in the required setback.
      (2)   Setback, yard and height requirements will be the minimum required
for the zoning classification in which it is located.
      (3)   Parking shall be provided as specified in §§
152.090 -
152.105, above.
      (4)   No outdoor play shall be permitted after sundown.
   (H)   Civic clubs and fraternal organizations.
      (1)   All buildings, off-street parking and service areas will be
separated by a buffer meeting the requirements of §§
152.170 -
152.179 from any abutting residential use or residential district.
      (2)   The use will be located on a lot that fronts a minor or major
thoroughfare and primary vehicular access will be provided by means of such
minor or major thoroughfare.
   (I)   Cultural arts buildings.
      (1)   The provision of off-street parking in accordance with the standard
for places of public assembly contained in §§
152.090 -
152.105, herein.
      (2)   When the facility is to be located adjacent to either a residential
district or existing residential uses, any boundaries adjoining such
residential district or use shall contain a ten-foot B-type buffer consistent
with the requirements of §§
152.170 -
152.179, below.
      (3)   Any structures associated with the cultural arts building shall be
set back from any adjoining residential use or district a minimum of 100 feet.
   (J)   Golf driving ranges.
      (1)   Lighting, if any, shall be designed and installed so that it is
directed away from the roadway and adjacent residentially-zoned or used
properties and does not interfere with the safe use of public rights-of-way.
      (2)   Adequate assurance shall be provided, by means of separation,
fencing or other means, that the operation of such facility shall not
constitute a danger to person or property.
      (3)   Total signage on the property shall not exceed 32 square feet. One
freestanding sign may be installed provided it does not exceed eight feet in
height. Signs shall not be illuminated except internally or by means of one
light bulb per sign face not exceeding 150 watts.
   (K)   Home occupation.
      (1)   No person other than members of the family residing on the premises
shall be engaged in such occupation.
      (2)   The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be
clearly incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants, and not more than 25% of the floor area of the principal structure
or 1,000 square feet, whichever is smaller, shall be used in the conduct of the
home occupation.
      (3)   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building
or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home occupation
other than one sign, not exceeding six square feet in area, non-illuminated,
and mounted flat against the wall of the principal building.
      (4)   No outside storage of materials or equipment shall be allowed in
connection with the home occupation.
      (5)   There shall be no sales on the premises in connection with such
home occupation.
      (6)   No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater
volumes than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood, and any
need for parking generated by the conduct of such home occupation shall be met
off the street and other than in a required front yard or side yard.
      (7)   Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles (passenger
automobiles, passenger vans and passenger pick-up trucks) shall be permitted in
connection with the home occupation.
      (8)   Home occupations may be in operation only between the hours of 7:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
   (L)   Mini-warehouses.
      (1)   One-way interior travel lanes shall have a minimum width of 15 feet
in addition to a ten- foot wide parking lane. All two-way interior travel lanes
serving storage units shall have two 12-foot wide travel lanes and be provided
with a ten-foot wide parking lane. All portions of the site shall be readily
accessible by police and fire equipment and personnel.
      (2)   Storage units shall be designed for individual storage. They shall
contain no facilities for utility service. They shall not be used for sales or
service or for habitation by humans or animals.
      (3)   No outside storage shall be permitted when the proposed use is
situated in a zoning district classification other than I-1.
   (M)   Mobile food vending.
      (1)   Each mobile food vendor must obtain a business license pursuant to
Chapter 110 of this code. Before such permit may issue, the Land Use
Administrator shall ensure compliance with this chapter, including these
special requirements, pursuant to §
110.15 of this code. A mobile food vendor is permitted to vend at more than a
single site but each location must be approved by individual permit. Each
permit will be renewed annually along with requirements of the Macon County
Health Department, and approval of the Macon County Health Department for
mobile vendor to serve food shall be a condition of each permit. A copy of the
valid, approved permit and health inspection grade card issued by the Macon
County Health Department shall be visually displayed on the mobile kitchen in
clear view of all patrons.
      (2)   Mobile food vending may take place upon any property located in a
zoning classification in which such activity is permitted in this chapter,
provided that the mobile food vendor can demonstrate either ownership of the
property or permission of the owner and/or lessee or other occupant of the
property. Mobile vending may only take place upon property owned by the town by
specific written agreement approved by the town. Mobile vending may only take
place upon the streets and sidewalks or within the rights-of-way within the
town pursuant to
Chapter 95 of this code.
      (3)   Access into the site and parking for vendor patrons at the rate of
one parking space per mobile food vendor shall be provided, except that no
parking is required to be provided in zoning districts where off-street parking
is not required. In zoning districts where off-street parking is required, the
primary site user must be able to maintain compliance with minimum parking
standards for the specific zoning district.
      (4)   Setbacks for individual mobile food vendors will be ten feet from
side and rear property lines. There is no required setback from frontage lines
except that no portion of the mobile kitchen will be permitted to encroach into
the right-of-way. Mobile food vendors shall maintain 20 feet, or more as
required by fire code or any other applicable safety regulations, of separation
from any other mobile food vendor.
      (5)   Permanent electric power infrastructure is the preferred method for
supplying power at the mobile food site. If this is pursued, then applicable
permits must be obtained.
      (6)   Mobile food vendors will be limited to the sale of food and non-
alcoholic drinks. The sale of other merchandise or services will not be
permitted; provided, however, that sales of t-shirts. hats, or other small
items bearing the logo of or otherwise promoting the mobile food vendor are
permitted directly from the mobile kitchen (i.e., displays of merchandise
outside of the mobile kitchen are not permitted).
      (7)   Mobile food vendors may have signage outside of the mobile food
site, not to exceed 45 total square feet including letters and/or logos
advertising the business. Signage mounted on the mobile kitchen shall not be
included in the allowable signage. Movable signs may be placed on the mobile
food site, but may not be placed upon sidewalks or within road rights-of-way.
No roof signs will be allowed.
      (8)   Mobile food vendors shall be required to remove trash and litter
from the mobile food site each day and to maintain cleanliness of the site
during hours of operation. As a condition of the permit, mobile food vendors
must demonstrate and abide by an acceptable plan to dispose of waste requiring
special disposal, in compliance with the town’s fats, oils and grease policy.
Failure to remove trash or properly dispose of fats, oils and grease shall be
grounds for immediate revocation of the permit. Mobile food vendors are
encouraged to use recyclable and/or compostable containers, cups and utensils.
      (9)    Mobile food vendors will be subject to random inspection to ensure
compliance with all applicable requirements.
      (10)   All mobile food vendors shall operate at a noise level that
complies with the town’s noise ordinance in order to avoid creating a public
nuisance, and in no case shall utilize a generator rated to create a noise
level greater than 60 decibels, and shall maintain said generator such that no
noise in excess of 60 decibels is emitted. Sound absobing devices may be used
to contain or deflect the noise from external generators.
   (N)   Private clubs.
      (1)   No private club shall be located within a 500-foot radius of
another private club nor within 250 feet of a residential use or residential
zoning classification.
      (2)   The parking lot for such facility shall be adequately lighted to
provide security for its patrons and to otherwise comply with §§
152.090 -
152.105, herein.
   (O)   Public utility facilities.
      (1)   Lots shall conform to minimum setback and yard requirements of the
district in which they are located. Unstaffed utility structures with internal
floor space of less than 300 square feet are exempted from the minimum lot size
requirement.
      (2)   Electric and gas substations and sewage treatment plants shall be
separated by a ten-foot B-type buffer meeting the specifications of §§
152.170 -
152.179 from the street and any abutting residential use or any property
located in a residential zoning district.
      (3)   Control houses, pump and lift stations, and other similar uses
shall be screened from the street and any abutting residential use or any
property located in a residential zoning district.
      (4)   A fence not easily climbable or comparable safety devices must be
installed and maintained in order to deter access to the facility.
      (5)   The design of buildings, structures and facilities on a site should
conform as closely as possible to the character of the area or neighborhood.
      (6)   The facility’s lighting shall be shielded to prevent light and
glare spill-over on to any adjacent residential properties, if such exist.
      (7)   The Town Council may give relief from these requirements so long as
public safety and neighborhood compatibility are protected, if strict adherence
would constitute a hardship or is unnecessary.
   (P)   Restaurants.
      (1)   The use must be located on, and have primary access from, a major
or minor thoroughfare.
      (2)   All outside storage areas including dumpsters must be:
         (a)   Sited to the rear of the building;
         (b)   Comply with the setback requirements for the zoning district
classification within which it is located; and
         (c)   Screened from view from both adjacent residential properties and
public rights-of- way through installation of screening meeting the
specifications of §§
152.170 -
152.179.
      (3)   The use shall be limited to no more than 40 seats in an NMU zoning
district and 60 seats in an MICR zoning district.
      (4)    Permissible hours of operation shall be limited to the hours
between 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m.
      (5)   No restaurant shall provide drive-in or drive-through service.
   (Q)   Schools, elementary and secondary.
      (1)   The following standards shall be used to govern the establishment
or development of new public and private schools:
         (a)   No structure or parking shall be placed within 50 feet of a
property line in the following zoning classifications: R-1, R-2, NMU, MICR;
         (b)   Off-street parking meeting the requirements of §§
152.090 -
152.105 shall be provided;
         (c)   The use will be on a lot which may be accessed by means of a
collector, minor thoroughfare or major thoroughfare for elementary schools and
junior high schools, and by means of a minor thoroughfare or major thoroughfare
for senior high schools; provided, however, the Town Council may waive this
requirement to accommodate a public need so long as traffic shall not be
increased on residential streets to an unacceptable level.
      (2)   The foregoing standards shall serve as guidelines for the expansion
or redevelopment of existing schools; however, the Town Council may waive any
such guidelines when their application would constitute a hardship.
   (R)   Sawmills, Lumber Yards and Mulch Grinding.
      (1)   Major Site Plan required in accordance with §§
152.050 –
152.052.
      (2)   A sawmill shall not be constructed or newly located within 500 feet
of an existing dwelling unit (located in a residential zoning district and not
located on the same property as the use), existing school, library, day care
facility, healthcare facility, park and/or religious institution.
      (3)   Perimeter Setback. Fifty feet.
      (4)   Disposal of excess inert debris is prohibited on site unless
operation is in compliance with development standards for land clearing debris
and inert debris storage or disposal operations.
      (5)   Hours of Operation. 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday.
      (6)   A portable sawmill may be permitted as a temporary use not to
exceed 90 days. The Zoning Administrator may allow for 90 day extension upon
request by the applicant.
   (S)   Shelter facilities.
      (1)   A shelter facility shall not be permitted to locate within 1,500
feet of another shelter facility.
      (2)   The parcel on which a shelter facility is situated shall not be
adjacent to a residential use. For purposes of this subsection, properties
situated across a street right-of-way from a proposed shelter facility shall be
deemed to be adjacent.
      (3)   The parcel on which a shelter facility is situated shall not be
situated within 200 feet of a residential zoning district.
   (T)   Indoor shooting ranges.
      (1)   The applicant shall submit as a required part of the application
for a special use permit plans and specifications certified by a licensed
architect or engineer demonstrating that the shooting range shall be
constructed to satisfy all requirements set forth in this chapter, as well as
any additional requirements of the Town Council.
      (2)   No indoor shooting range shall be located within a 500-foot radius
of another indoor shooting range.
      (3)   Lead particles shall at all times be contained on-site and properly
contained and disposed of. Appropriate devices shall be utilized to contain
lead bullets and/or shot, and such devices shall be periodically cleaned and
lead particulates properly disposed of. Ventilation systems shall be designed,
and other appropriate steps taken, to prevent the discharge of lead from within
the structure housing the indoor shooting range in to the external environment
and to prevent the exposure of clients and employees to unsafe levels of lead,
as defined by applicable federal or state levels. The detection of lead in the
external environment on the same property as the indoor shooting range, or off-
site detection in the vicinity of the indoor shooting range, or unsafe levels
of lead within the structure housing the indoor shooting range, shall be
grounds for revocation of the special use permit.
      (4)   Each indoor shooting range facility shall be designed to minimize
off-site noise impacts generated by the activities conducted in the facility.
      (5)   The applicant, and any subsequent operator of an indoor shooting
range, shall carry a general liability policy in an amount not less than
$1,000,000 per occurrence, and $2,000,000 in the aggregate ($1,000,000/
$2,000.000). Such insurance shall name the Town of Franklin as additional
insured. The applicant and any subsequent operator shall save and hold the Town
of Franklin, its elected and appointed officials, and employees working within
the scope of their duties harmless from and against all claims, demands and
causes of action of any kind or character, including the cost of defense
thereof, arising in favor of any person or group on account of any acts or
omissions of the applicant and/or subsequent operator.
      (6)   At least one qualified individual shall be employed or otherwise
associated with the applicant or subsequent operator who shall be certified
according to National Rifle Association, North Carolina Criminal Justice or
equivalent standards for shooting range supervision.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08; Am. Ord. passed 10-5-15; Am.
Ord. passed 10-5-15; Am. Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2025- 003, passed 4-7-25)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.130 LAND USE ADMINISTRATOR.
    A Land Use Administrator, designated by the Town Council, shall administer
and enforce this chapter. If the Land Use Administrator shall find that any of
the provisions of this chapter are being violated, he or she shall notify in
writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the nature of
the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He or she shall
order discontinuance of illegal buildings or structures or illegal additions,
alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being
done; or shall take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure
compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.131 LAND DEVELOPMENT PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No building or other structure shall be erected, moved, added to or
structurally altered, nor shall a building permit be issued, without a land
development permit issued by the Land Use Administrator. No land development
permit shall be issued by the Land Use Administrator except in conformity with
the provisions of this chapter, unless he or she receives a written order from
the Board of Adjustment in the form of an administrative review or variance as
provided by this chapter.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.132 APPLICATION FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   All applications for a land development permit shall be accompanied by
a fee according to a sliding scale currently in use by the town and plans in
duplicate drawn to scale which indicate the following. An electronic copy for
all submissions for commercial, industrial, and new subdivision developments
shall also be provided in a format readable by the town’s hardware and software
resources. In the case of special use applications additional paper copies will
be required for inclusion in the minutes of the meetings as may be required.
      (1)   The shape and dimensions of the lot on which the proposed building
or use is to be erected or constructed.
      (2)   The location of the said lot with respect to adjacent rights-of-
way.
      (3)   The shape, dimensions and location of all buildings, existing and
proposed on the said lot.
      (4)   The nature of the proposed use of the buildings or land, including
the extent and location of the use on the said lot.
      (5)   The location and dimensions of off-street parking and means of
ingress and egress to such space.
      (6)   Any other information which the Land Use Administrator may deem
necessary for consideration in enforcing the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   One copy of the plans shall be returned to the applicant by the Land
Use Administrator, after he or she shall have marked such copy either as
approved or disapproved and attested to same by his or her signature on such
copy. The original of the plans similarly marked shall be retained by the Land
Use Administrator.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08)
§ 152.133 CONSTRUCTION AND USE TO BE AS PROVIDED IN APPLICATIONS, PLANS,
PERMITS AND CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.
   Building permits or certificates or zoning compliance issued in the basis of
plans and applications approved by the Land Use Administrator authorize only
the use, arrangement and construction set forth in such approved plans and
applications, and no other use, arrangement, or construction. Use, arrangement,
or construction differing with that authorized shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter and punishable as provided by §
152.136 hereof.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.134 REMEDIES.
   If any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, repaired, converted
or maintained or any building, structure or land is used in violation of this
chapter, the Land Use Administrator or other appropriate authority or any
adjacent or other property owner who would be damaged by such violation, may
institute injunction or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the
violation.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.135 PROCEDURES UPON DISCOVERY OF VIOLATIONS.
   If the Land Use Administrator finds that any provision of this chapter is
being violated, he or she shall send a notice of violation by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or by hand delivery to the owner of record of the
real property. He or she may also deliver such notice to the occupant, tenant
or user of the property subject to the violation. He or she shall indicate the
nature of the violation and order the action necessary to correct it.
Additional written notices may be sent at the Land Use Administrator’s
discretion.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.136 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
   Any act constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter or a
failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violations of any
conditions and safeguards established in connection with the grants of
variances or special use permits, shall subject the offender to a civil penalty
in the amount of $500.
   (A)   Violators shall be issued a written notice which must be paid within
ten days. Each day’s continuing violation shall be a separate and distinct
offense. A civil penalty may not be appealed to the Board of Adjustment if the
offender was sent a notice of violation in accordance with §
152.135 and did not take an appeal to the Board of Adjustment within the
prescribed time.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, provisions of this chapter may be
enforced through equitable remedies issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (C)   In addition to or in lieu of remedies authorized herein, violations of
this chapter or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including
violations of any conditions and safeguards established in connection with
grants of variances or special use permits, may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor,
punishable as provided in G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
NONCONFORMITIES
§ 152.150 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this section is to regulate and limit the continued existence
of uses and structures lawfully established prior to the effective date of this
chapter, or any amendment thereto, that do not conform to this chapter, as
amended. Any nonconformity created by a change in the classification of
property or the text of these regulations shall be regulated by the provisions
of this subchapter. As used in this subchapter the term, “effective date of
this chapter, or any amendment thereto,” refers to the date of the chapter
which first rendered a use, structure or land nonconforming.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.151 NONCONFORMING USES.
   A nonconforming use is a use of land, buildings, or structures that was
lawfully established prior to the effective date of this chapter, or any
amendment thereto, but which does not conform to the regulations for the zoning
classification in which it is located. Nonconforming uses may be continued
subject to the limitations noted herein.
   (A)   No nonconforming use shall be extended, expanded, enlarged, or moved
to occupy a different or greater area of land, buildings or structures than was
occupied by such use at the time it became nonconforming; provided, however, a
nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were
specifically designed and arranged for such use at the time it became
nonconforming.
   (B)   No building or structure devoted to a nonconforming use shall be
enlarged, extended, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered unless such
building or structure is thereafter devoted to a conforming use; provided,
however, such building or structure may be enlarged or extended upon prior
authorization from the Board of Adjustment, which authorization shall not be
granted unless the Board of Adjustment makes each of the following findings of
fact:
      (1)   The proposed enlargement or extension shall be de minimis in
relation to the existing building or structure;
      (2)   The proposed enlargement or extension shall not increase the
intensity of the nonconforming use, which is to say, it will not result in an
increase in dwelling units for a residential use nor in gross floor area for a
nonresidential use;
      (3)   The proposed enlargement or extension is designed so that it will
not render the use of the property any less compatible than it is in its
existing circumstances;
      (4)   The authorization of such proposed enlargement or extension is not
otherwise contrary to the public health, safety or welfare.
   (C)   (1)   A nonconforming use of a structure may not be changed to another
nonconforming use unless such change is authorized by the Board of Adjustment.
In order to authorize a change in nonconforming use, the Board of Adjustment
shall consider the relative impacts of the existing nonconforming use and the
proposed nonconforming use with regard to traffic, noise, pollution, visual
appearance and compatibility with the neighborhood, and shall make each of the
following findings:
         (a)   The proposed use is expected to result in impacts which are less
than those associated with the existing use;
         (b)   The proposed use will be more compatible with the surrounding
neighborhood than is the existing use;
         (c)   Approval of the change in nonconforming use serves the public
health, safety and general welfare;
         (d)   Failure to approve the change in nonconforming use would result
in a hardship to the owner of the property on which the nonconforming use is
situated.
      (2)   An existing nonconforming use shall be discontinued within 60 days
of the date of approval of a change in nonconforming use. Subsequent to that
time, such existing use shall become unlawful.
   (D)   Where a nonconforming use ceases for 180 consecutive days, then the
use shall not be re-established or resumed, and any subsequent use of the land
or structure shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. Vacancy and
non-use of the building or structure, regardless of the intent of the owner,
shall constitute discontinuance under this provision.
   (E)   Where a building or structure devoted to a nonconforming use is
damaged to the extent of 50% or more of its current value, such building or
structure, if restored, shall thereafter be devoted to conforming uses.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.152 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   A nonconforming structure is a building or other structure which lawfully
existed prior to the effective date of this chapter, or an amendment thereto,
and which no longer could be built under the terms of this chapter, as amended,
by reason of restrictions on area, footprint, open space, building height,
setbacks, lot width, or other requirements concerning the structure.
   (A)   A nonconforming structure devoted to a use permitted in the zoning
classification in which it is located may continue to be used only in
accordance with the provisions of this section.
   (B)   Normal repair and maintenance may be performed to allow the
continuation of nonconforming structures.
   (C)   Except as provided in divisions (D) and (E), below, a nonconforming
structure shall not undergo a change of use, renovation or expansion.
   (D)   A nonconforming structure may undergo a change of use or renovation
without having to bring the structure into conformity with the requirements of
these regulations, provided that:
      (1)   The change in use or renovation does not increase the floor area of
the structure;
      (2)   The change in use is to a permitted use within the district; and
      (3)   The number of parking spaces provided for the use is in conformity
with the requirements of these regulations.
   (E)   A nonconforming structure may be expanded, without bringing the
nonconforming structure into conformity with these regulations, only if the
part of the structure to be expanded and the area of the lot into which the
expansion is taking place are both brought into conformity with the
requirements of this chapter.
   (F)   A nonconforming structure shall not be moved unless it thereafter
conforms to the standards of the zoning classification in which it is located.
   (G)   Where a nonconforming structure is damaged by fire, flood, wind, or
other act of God, and such damage does not exceed 50% of the current assessed
taxable value of the structure, it may be restored to its original dimensions
and conditions as long as a building permit for the restoration is issued
within twelve months of the date of the damage.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.153 NONCONFORMING VACANT LOTS.
   A nonconforming vacant lot is a lot that was lawfully created prior to the
effective date of this chapter, or any amendment thereto, but which does not
conform to the minimum gross land area or minimum lot requirements for the
zoning classification in which it is located.
   (A)   Except as provided herein, a nonconforming vacant lot may be used for
any of the uses permitted by this chapter in the zoning classification in which
it is located, provided that the use meets all limitations and minimum
requirements for setback and yards, height, open space, buffers, screening,
parking, density and floor area required in this ordinance for the zoning
classification in which the lot is located.
   (B)   If compliance of the structure(s) intended on the nonconforming lot
with applicable setback requirements is not reasonably possible, the
nonconforming lot may be used as a building site subject to the granting of a
variance from such setback requirements by the Board of Adjustment in
accordance with the provisions of §§
152.070 -
152.078.
   (C)   With regard to residential dwellings, variances authorized pursuant to
division (B), above, shall be limited to single-family dwellings. Two-family or
multi-family residential dwellings shall not be entitled to such a variance.
   (D)   Where a nonconforming lot abuts another lot of record (whether
conforming or nonconforming) held in the same ownership at or subsequent to
enactment of this section, such lots shall be combined or recombined as
necessary to form a conforming lot or lots and shall not thereafter be
subdivided except in compliance with all of the requirements of this chapter.
Where a nonconforming lot was created by public taking action or as a result of
a court order, the above combination or recombination of lots shall not be
required.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.154 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   Minor repairs to and routine maintenance of land, buildings, structures, or
other development of land devoted to a nonconforming use or having
nonconforming structures are permitted, provided the cost of such repairs and
maintenance within any 12-month period does not exceed 10% of the current
assessed taxable value of the land, buildings, structure, or other development
of land. Any structure or other development of land devoted to a nonconforming
use that is declared unsafe by the Land Use Administrator because of lack of
repairs and maintenance shall not be restored, repaired, reconstructed, or used
except in conformity with the provisions of this section. Any structure or
other development of land devoted to a nonconforming use that is declared
unsafe by the Land Use Administrator, but not because of lack of repairs and
maintenance, may be repaired and restored subject to the requirements of this
section.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
AMENDMENTS
§ 152.160 INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS.
    This Unified Development chapter, including the zoning map, may be amended
only by the Town Council. Changes or amendments may be initiated by the Town
Council, the Planning Board, the Board of Adjustment, town staff, or by one or
more private citizens.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.161 APPLICATION.
    An application for any amendment shall contain a description and/or
statement of the present and proposed zoning regulation or district boundary to
be applied, the names and addresses of the owner or owners of the lot in
question, the use of each adjacent property and such other information as may
be requested by the Land Use Administrator. If an application is denied, no
application for any change in the zoning regulations applicable to the same
property or any part thereof shall be filed until the expiration of one year
from the date of final determination by the Town Council. Provided, however,
the one-year waiting period shall not be applicable to the rezoning of all or
any part of property previously considered by the Town Council where the new
application requests assignment of a different zoning district classification.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 2-3-14; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.162 FEE.
    A fee shall be paid to the Town of Franklin for each application for an
amendment to cover the cost of advertising and other administrative expenses.
The fee shall be determined by a resolution of the Town Council and may be
amended at any time in like manner.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.163 PROCESSING OF APPLICATION.
    An application for amendment shall be processed in accordance with the
provisions of this section.
   (A)   Action by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall consider and
make recommendations to the Town Council concerning each proposed zoning map
amendment/rezoning, and/or amendment to the text of this chapter, in conformity
with this section.
      (1)   Plan consistency statement. The Planning Board shall by majority
vote make a recommendation to the Town Council whether it should adopt or
reject any zoning map amendment/rezoning and/or text amendment. The
recommendation shall be made in reference to the town's comprehensive land use
plan, and shall specify whether and in what way the proposed amendment is
either a) consistent with the comprehensive plan, b) inconsistent with the
comprehensive plan and should be rejected, or c) inconsistent with the
comprehensive plan but nevertheless be adopted, thereby amending the future
land use map contained within the comprehensive plan accordingly. The proposal
will place all property similarly situated in the area in the same category, or
in appropriate complementary categories.
      (2)   Reasonableness statements for map amendments/rezonings. If the
matter under consideration is a zoning map amendment/rezoning, the Planning
Board shall also specify whether the zoning map amendment/rezoning is
reasonable. The Planning Board may, but is not required, to propose a statement
of reasonableness concerning a text amendment. This statement may consider,
among other factors:
         a.   The size, physical conditions, and other attributes of the area
proposed to be rezoned;
         b.    The benefits and detriments to the landowners, neighbors, and
surrounding community;
         c.   The relationship between current and actual permissible
development on the tract and adjoining areas and the development that would be
permissible under the proposed amendment;
         d.   Why the zoning map amendment/rezoning is in the public interest;
and
         e.   Any changed conditions warranting the amendment.
      (3)   Large-scale rezonings. If a zoning map amendment meets the
statutory definition of a “large-scale rezoning,” when a) the plan consistency
statement may address the overall rezoning and describe how the analysis and
policies in the comprehensive plan were considered; and b) the reasonableness
statement may address the overall rezoning.
   (B)   Notice of public hearing.  No amendment shall be adopted by the Town
Council until after a public notice and hearing. Notice of the date, time and
place of the public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation once a week for two successive weeks, with the first notice to be
published not less than ten nor more than 25 days prior to the date of the
hearing.
      (1)   When a zoning map amendment is proposed, the owner of that parcel
of land as shown on the county tax listing, and the owners of all parcels of
land abutting that parcel of land as shown on the county tax listing, shall be
mailed a notice of a public hearing on the proposed amendment by first class
mail at the last addresses listed for such owners on the county tax abstracts.
This notice must be deposited in the mail not less than ten nor more than 25
days prior to the date of the public hearing. The person or persons mailing
such notices shall certify to the Town Council that fact, and such certificate
shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud.
      (2)   When a proposed zoning map amendment directly affects more than 50
properties, owned by a total of at least 50 different property owners, the town
may elect to use the expanded published notice provided for in this section
rather than the notice stipulated in division (B)(1), above. In this
circumstance, the town may provide notice of the hearing by means of an
advertisement not less than one-half newspaper page in size published in a
newspaper of general circulation once a week for two successive weeks, with the
first notice to be published not less than ten nor more than 25 days prior to
the date of the hearing.
      (3)   When a zoning map amendment is proposed, the town shall prominently
post a notice of the public hearing on the site proposed for rezoning or on an
adjacent public street or highway right-of-way. The notice shall be a minimum
of 18 inches by 24 inches in size. When multiple parcels are included within a
proposed zoning map amendment, a posting on each individual parcel is not
required, but the town shall post sufficient notices to provide reasonable
notice to interested persons.
   (C)   Nature of proceedings.  It is the intent of this ordinance that
applicants for rezoning to any district other than a special use district or a
planned development district shall be prohibited from offering any testimony or
evidence concerning the specific manner in which they intend to use or develop
the property.
   (D)   Citizen comments. If any resident or property owner in the town
submits a written statement regarding a proposed amendment, modification, or
repeal to a zoning ordinance to the Town Clerk at least two business days prior
to the proposed vote on such change, the Town Clerk shall deliver such written
statement to the Town Council. If the proposed change is the subject of a
quasi-judicial proceeding under G.S. § 160-338, the Town Clerk shall provide
only the names and addresses of the individuals providing written comment, and
the provision of such names and addresses to all members of the Town Council
shall not disqualify any member of the Council from voting.
   (E)   Statements of consistency, reasonableness; voting. The Town Council
shall adopt a statement of consistency of each amendment considered pursuat to
this section; it shall also adopt a statement of reasonableness for each zoning
map amendment/rezoning. In adopting such statement(s) as required by law, the
Town Council may adopt by reference the statement(s) proposed by the Planning
Board, may modify such proposed statement(s), or may specify entirely separate
grounds for such statement(s). Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-75, as amended, a
failure to vote by any member of the Town Council physically present in the
Council Room, or who has withdrawn without being excused by a majority vote of
the remaining Council members present, shall not be recorded as an affirmative
vote.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. 10-5-15; Am. Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 2024-
003, passed 6-3-24)
§ 152.164 PROPERTY OWNER CONSENT UNDER CERTAIN CIRCUMSTANCES.
   Amendments, modifications, supplements, repeal or other changes in zoning
regulations and restrictions and zone boundaries shall not be applicable or
enforceable without the consent of the owner with regard to lots for which
building permits have been issued pursuant to G.S. § 160A-417 prior to the
enactment of this chapter making the change or changes so long as the permits
remain valid and unexpired pursuant to G.S. § 160A-418 and unrevoked pursuant
to G.S. § 160A-422.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
BUFFERING, SCREENING AND LANDSCAPING
§ 152.170 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The Town of Franklin has an abundant and diverse tree and vegetative cover
that contributes to the aesthetic value of the town and provides numerous
ecological and economic benefits. The landscaping, buffering, and screening
standards set forth below require landscaping in certain circumstances and
locations in order to achieve the following:
   (A)   Encourage the preservation of existing trees and vegetation and
replenish removed vegetation;
   (B)   Improve the visual quality of the town and minimize potential negative
impacts of development such as noise, dust, glare of lights, parking lots,
traffic, heat, overcrowding, and odor;
   (C)   Provide environmental benefits such as climate modification, decreased
energy consumption, reduced stormwater runoff, decreased erosion, improved
water and air quality, and protection of wildlife habitat;
   (D)   Provide a transition between dissimilar land uses to protect abutting
properties from potential negative impacts of neighboring development and
preserve the character and value of a property and provide a sense of privacy;
   (E)   Improve standards for quantity, location, size, spacing, protection,
and maintenance of plants and other screening materials to assure a high level
of quality in the appearance of Franklin while allowing flexibility to promote
well designed and creative landscape plantings;
   (F)   Require the maintenance of landscaping installed to meet the
requirements of these standards to ensure that the landscaping continues to
thrive and enhance the visual quality of the Town of Franklin.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.171 LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING AND SCREENING REQUIRED.
   Landscaping, buffering and screening shall be required for developments
within the planning jurisdiction of the Town of Franklin, including its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, as set forth herein.
   (A)   The following developments must bring the entire site into full
compliance with the requirements of this subchapter:
      (1)   Any new public or private development with the exception of single
or two-family homes.
      (2)   A change of use to a higher impact. For purposes of this section,
the following list ranks differing uses from lowest to highest impact:
residential, mobile home park, institutional and cultural, commercial,
industrial.
      (3)   Renovations with a total cost exceeding 50% of the assessed value
of the building according to Macon County tax records or an appraisal by a
state licensed appraiser.
      (4)   Expansions exceeding 50% of the pre-expansion floor area or paved
surface.
      (5)   Existing unpaved parking lots which are paved over.
   (B)   Expansions or additions that are less than 50% of the pre-expansion
floor area and/or pavement surface must meet the landscaping requirements only
in the area around the addition, which is parallel to any edge of the expansion
area and extending to the property line or street pavement edge.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.172 ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE.
   The landscape requirements are intended to set minimum standards for quality
development and environmental protection and are not intended to be arbitrary
or inhibit creative solutions. Site conditions or other reasons may justify the
need to request an alternate method of compliance with the landscape
requirements. The reviewing authority, as specified in §§
152.050 -
152.062, above, may alter the requirements of this section as long as existing
or added landscape features of the development site comply with the intent of
this subchapter. Requests for alternative compliance shall be accepted if one
or more of the following conditions are met.
   (A)   Topography, geologic features, drainage channels or streams, existing
natural vegetation, overhead or underground utilities, or other conditions make
it unreasonable or meaningless to plant a buffer or meet other landscape
requirements.
   (B)   Space limitations, unusually shaped lots, unique relationships to
other properties, and/or prevailing practices in the surrounding neighborhood
(such as use of a specific type of vegetation) may justify alternative
compliance when changing the use type of an existing building in an established
mature neighborhood or when developing in an historic district.
   (C)   An alternative compliance proposal is equal or better than normal
compliance in its ability to fulfill the intent of this article and exhibits
superior design quality.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.173 EXISTING VEGETATION.
   (A)   This section seeks to provide incentives to developers to utilize
existing vegetation on a development site in meeting the requirements of this
subchapter.
      (1)   Preservation of existing vegetation. Preserving trees can improve
the aesthetic quality of the site and improve property values, provide
environmental benefits, mitigate the impacts of development on the community,
and help minimize opposition to a proposed development. It is recommended that
groups of trees be preserved, as well as individual trees. Existing preserved
trees and shrubs may be credited towards required buffer trees, street trees,
and parking lot trees, in accordance with division (A)(2), below.
      (2)   Credits and other incentives to preserve vegetation. Preserved
trees may be credited at the following rate:
         2 - 6 inch caliper tree = 1 tree
         7 - 12 inch caliper tree = 2 trees
         13 - 18 inch caliper tree = 3 trees
         19 - 24 inch caliper tree = 4 trees
         25+ inch caliper tree = 5 trees
   (B)   If the developer chooses to receive credit, preserved vegetation must
be in good health and condition. Trees designated to be preserved must be
indicated on the site plan and on landscape and grading plans. Protective
barriers, if utilized in accordance with division (C), below, must also be
shown on the landscape and grading plans. A preserved tree shall be replaced
with the total number of trees which were credited to the existing tree if the
preserved tree dies within one year of preservation.
   (C)   Protection of existing trees during construction. The regulations
contained in this section shall apply in those circumstances when a developer
has elected to protect trees during construction and, thus, after the passage
of five years, be excused from the requirement to replace preserved trees.
      (1)   No grading or other land-disturbing activity can occur on a site
with existing trees which are designated to be preserved in order to meet
landscaping requirements until protective barriers are installed by the
developer and approved by the Land Use Administrator or his or her designee.
Trees designated for preservation which are counted toward the landscape
requirements must be protected by barriers, while trees designated for
preservation which do not count toward the landscape requirements are
encouraged to be protected by barriers. The diameter of the preserved trees and
the location of protective barriers must be shown on landscape and grading
plans with the dimension between the tree trunk and barrier indicated.
      (2)   (a)   Protective barriers shall be placed around the critical root
zone of preserved trees that are within 50 feet of any grading or construction
activity. The critical root zone is a circle extending around the tree with a
one-foot radius for every one-inch of tree diameter. For example, a ten-inch
diameter tree would have a barricade surrounding it, erected ten feet away from
the trunk. All protective barriers must be maintained throughout the building
construction process. Protective barriers shall consist of one or more of the
following:
            1.   A fence which is at least three feet high and constructed in a
post and rail configuration, using two-by-four posts and one-by-four rails; or
            2.   A fence with posts placed no farther than ten feet apart
covered with four-foot orange polyethylene laminar safety fencing.
         (b)   The Land Use Administrator may authorize other protective
barriers which meet or exceed the protection offered by the above.
      (3)   (a)   All contractors must be made aware of the areas designated
for protection. No disturbance can occur within the tree protection areas
including the following:
            1.   Grading;
            2.   Filling, unless an aeration system, certified by a registered
landscape architect, certified arborist, or North Carolina Agricultural
Extension Specialist, is installed to protect the tree from suffocation;
            3.   Parking;
            4.   Storage of debris or materials, including topsoil;
            5.   Disposal of hazardous wastes or concrete washout; and
            6.   Attaching of nails, ropes, cables, signs, or fencing to any
tree designated for preservation.
         (b)   If any area within the critical root zone will be disturbed for
any reason, a registered landscape architect, certified arborist, or North
Carolina Agricultural Extension Specialist must recommend measures to minimize
any potential impact and certify that the activity will not damage the tree
under normal circumstances.
      (4)   The developer should coordinate with utility providers early in the
design process to resolve potential conflicts about the placement of utilities
and landscape requirements. Utilities must either be placed outside of the tree
protection area or, with Planning Department approval, tunneled at least two
feet directly below the tree roots, to minimize root damage.
      (5)   If silt fencing is required to control sedimentation, the fencing
must be placed along the uphill edge of a tree protection zone in order to
prevent sediment from accumulating in the critical root zone area.
   (D)   Trees in public rights-of-way.  Trees located in any municipal right-
of-way cannot be pruned or removed without permission from the Public Works
Department.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.174 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   The following general standards shall apply to all landscaping requirements
in this subchapter.
   (A)   Design.  Unless otherwise specified, the exact placement of required
plants and structures shall be the decision of the developer. The type of
plants used shall be limited to those on the approved “species list” which
shall be published and revised from time to time by the Land Use Administrator.
Required landscaping shall be designed in such a manner as to impart its
aesthetic character when viewed from any area accessible to the public or from
adjacent properties.
   (B)   Plant material.  Plant materials used for installation shall conform
to the standards established by the American Association of Nurserymen in the
“American Standard for Nursery Stock,” for each type (i.e., canopy tree, shrub,
etc.) with minimum size as appropriate for the minimum caliper size designated
in the approved species list. Grass sod, when made a part of a buffer, must be
healthy, clean, and reasonably free of weeds, noxious pests, or diseases.
   (C)   Installation.  All landscaping/screening shall be installed in a
sound, workmanlike manner and according to accepted good planting procedures
with the quantity and quality of plant materials as described. All elements of
landscaping shall be installed so as to meet all other applicable ordinances
and code requirements.
   (D)   Maintenance.  The owner, occupant, tenant, and the respective agent of
each, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of
all buffers and landscaping. Buffers and landscaping shall be maintained in a
good condition to present a healthy, neat, and orderly appearance at least
equal to the original installation and shall be kept free from refuse and
debris. Dead vegetation and landscaping material shall be promptly replaced
with healthy, living plantings. Evergreen hedges shall be trimmed annually or
as needed to provide a full visual screen and, in any event, shall not be
allowed to exceed eight feet in height without written approval of the Land Use
Administrator.
   (E)   Walls and fences. Any walls used for screening or as part of a buffer
shall be constructed in a durable fashion of brick, stone, or other masonry
materials. When concrete block is utilized, it shall be finished with stucco on
both sides. Wood posts and planks or metal or other materials specifically
designed as fencing materials may be approved by the Land Use Administrator for
use in a Type C Buffer. Other materials may also be considered through the
alternative buffer and screening process described in §
152.172. No more than 10% of the surface of a fence or wall shall be left open,
and the finished side of the fence or wall shall face the abutting property. A
chain link fence may not be used to satisfy the requirements of this
subchapter.
   (F)   Overhead utilities.  Landscaping plans, including plant spacing and
species selection shall be such that landscaping required under this subchapter
does not conflict with overhead utilities.
   (G)   Species diversity.  When the total number of trees required under the
provisions of this subchapter equals 20 or more, then no single tree species
shall comprise more than 25% of the trees planted on the development site.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.175 BUFFERYARDS AND BUFFERS.
   Certain land uses may create an adverse impact when developed adjacent to
other less intensive land uses. A bufferyard is a permanent unit of land
together with plantings and structure(s), if any, which is designed to
ameliorate such adverse impacts. Bufferyards, as required in this section,
shall be depicted on any site plans reviewed under this ordinance and shall be
depicted and described on drawings submitted for the purpose of development
plan review. Unless deferred pursuant to a letter of compliance issued under §
152.177, below, buffers shall be emplaced and approved prior to issuance of any
certificate of occupancy for the development.
   (A)   Location of buffers. Buffers shall be located on lot or parcel
boundary lines. Buffers shall not be located on any portion of an existing
public or private street or right-of-way, whether opened or unopened.
   (B)   Determination of buffer requirements.  To determine a buffer required
between two adjacent parcels or between a parcel and a street, the following
procedure shall be followed:
      (1)   Identify the proposed land use.
      (2)   Identify the use or, if vacant, the zoning district classification,
of land adjacent to the proposed use.
      (3)   Determine the buffer required on each boundary (or segment thereof)
of the subject parcel by referring to the following Table of Buffer
Requirements. This specifies the buffer required between proposed land uses and
existing adjacent land uses or zoning districts.
   TABLE OF BUFFER REQUIREMENTS
 
Proposed Land Use                    Existing Land Use/Zoning Classification
                         Residential Institutional and Commercial Industrial
                                     Cultural
Residential              x           x                 x          x
Institutional & Cultural 10-foot B   x                 x          x
Commercial               10-foot B   8-foot A          x          x
Industrial               25-foot C   15-foot B         15-foot B  x
 
   Notes for table of buffer requirements: Indicated buffering is required if
adjacent parcel of land is used or zoned for the category noted regardless
whether adjacent parcel is located in the town, the town’s extraterritorial
jurisdiction (ETJ), or the planning jurisdiction of another governmental
entity. Existing adjacent land use takes precedence over zoning district.
Buffer requirement for the district will be used if adjacent land is vacant.
   Institutional and cultural category includes religious, recreational, child
care and educational uses and the MICR zoning classification.
   (C)   Buffer specifications. The following schedule sets forth the
specifications of each of the buffers included in the Table of Buffer
Requirements. Unless noted differently, the column entitled planting
requirements refers to number of individual plants required per 100 linear feet
of the buffer. The column entitled size requirements refers to the minimum size
of individual plants at the time of planting. Unless otherwise noted,
dimensions refer to height.
 
Type of Buffer Planting Requirement/100 Linear Feet Size Requirements
               3 Broadleaf canopy trees             5 - 6 feet
A              20 Evergreen shrubs                  18 - 24 inches
               (4-foot centers)                      
               25 Flowering shrubs                  12 - 18 inches
               4 Broadleaf canopy trees             1 1/2 - 1 3/4 inch caliper
B              25 Evergreen shrubs                  18 - 24 inches
               (4-foot centers)                      
               33 Flowering shrubs                  18 - 24 inches
               4 Broadleaf canopy trees             1 3/4 - 2 inch caliper
               10 Understory trees                  5 - 6 feet
C              33 Flowering shrubs                  18 - 24 inches
               Berm                                 6 feet
               Fence or wall on top of berm         8 feet
X              No buffer required                   Not applicable
 
   For type A and B buffers, the developer may, at his or her option,
substitute a masonry wall for the evergreen shrubs. A wooden fence may be
incorporated into a buffer but shall not be allowed to substitute for evergreen
shrubs.
   (D)   Use of buffer. If approved by the Land Use Administrator, a buffer may
be used for passive recreation; however, no plant material may be removed and
such use shall not be a nuisance.
   (E)   Buffers part of required yards. Where front, side and rear yards are
required by this chapter, buffers may be established within such required
yards.
   (F)   Buffer requirements when a street separates incompatible uses.  If a
street with right-of-way of more than 30 feet lies between two land uses which
would require a bufferyard between them, a buffer shall be required along the
affected side or rear property lines of the developing use. No bufferyard is
required along the front property line.
   (G)   Bufferyards in the central commercial district.  In order to preserve
and promote existing development patterns within the C-1 Central Commercial
District, the bufferyard requirements of this subchapter shall not apply
therein.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08)
§ 152.176 SCREENING.
   (A)   These screening requirements shall apply to any development or use
other than single-family or two-family residences. A buffer as specified in
this subchapter may be used to meet the requirements of this section. Where
practicable, the following uses must be screened from abutting property and
from public view from a public right-of-way or a parking lot:
      (1)   Dumpsters or trash handling areas;
      (2)   Utility structures associated with a building;
      (3)   Loading docks or spaces;
      (4)   Outdoor storage of materials, stock and equipment, which shall not
include the display of goods for sale; and
      (5)   Any other uses for which screening is required under this chapter.
   (B)   As far as practicable, any screening used to comply with the
provisions of this section shall consist of a planting area which is at least
five feet wide. This area may contain any type screening materials sufficient
to separate visually the land uses, provided such materials meet the
requirements of this subchapter. If only a wall or fence is used, then the area
devoted to the screen need only be wide enough to accommodate the wall or fence
and allow for its maintenance. Where practicable, screening shall be designed
and maintained in such a manner as to conceal the use from view from the
street, from vehicular use areas, and from adjoining properties.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.177 LETTER OF COMPLIANCE.
   It is recognized that land development occurs continuously and that
vegetation used in buffers should be planted at certain times of the year to
ensure the best chance of survival. In order to ensure compliance with this
subchapter and to reduce the potential expense of replacing buffering,
landscaping, or screening materials which were installed in an untimely or
improper fashion, a letter of compliance must be filed with the Land Use
Administrator at the time of development plan review. A letter of compliance
will allow the issuance of a conditional certificate of occupancy. This letter
will acknowledge that the applicant for a certificate of development plan is
aware of any buffer, landscaping or screening requirements which may apply to
his or her property and that he or she will comply with those requirements by a
specific date, generally to be within the next planting season, but in no case
more than one year after the completion of construction of that portion of the
project or building for which the certificate was issued. In no event shall a
final certificate of occupancy be issued prior to emplacement and approval of
the required buffer, landscaping, or screening. Failure to comply with the
provisions of this section within the time noted in the letter of compliance
will be a violation of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.178 LANDSCAPING FOR VEHICULAR USE AREAS.
   Trees and shrubs are required in and around vehicular use areas with more
than six spaces to provide attractive views from roads and adjacent properties,
provide shade to reduce the heat generated by impervious surfaces, reduce glare
from vehicular use areas, and to help filter exhaust from vehicles.
   (A)   Perimeter and interior plantings. Vehicular use areas must be planted
with at least one tree and two shrubs for every 4,000 square feet of vehicular
use area, which includes parking spaces, aisles, driveways, and loading areas.
Trees shall be spaced so that no parking space is more than 63 feet from a
tree. At least 75% of the required parking lot trees must be broadleaf canopy
trees. Trees and shrubs must be planted within 20 feet of the vehicular use
area to count as parking lot landscaping; provided, however, all street trees
required by other provisions of this chapter shall count as parking lot
landscaping.
      (1)   When a development contains 20 or more parking spaces, 50% of the
trees and shrubs must be planted in islands or medians located within the
parking lot. Tree islands shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking
lot in order to provide an even tree canopy throughout the lot. At a minimum,
such tree islands shall consist of an area at least equal in size to two
parking places side-by-side (360 square feet). Parking bays shall be broken up
with landscaped islands or medians to avoid long monotonous rows of parking.
Planting trees in groups is encouraged to increase the total amount of planting
area for roots to grow.
      (2)   At the time of planting, trees and shrubs required in this section
shall meet the following minimum size requirements:
         (a)   Broadleaf canopy trees: one and one-half to two-inch caliper;
         (b)   All other trees: five to six feet in height;
         (c)   All shrubs: height or spread of 18 to 24 inches.
   (B)   Planting strips. When a vehicular use area lot is located within 100
feet of an abutting property and no bufferyard is required, a planting strip
which is a minimum of five feet wide shall be planted between the vehicular use
area and the abutting property, except along approved driveway openings which
run perpendicular to the planting strip. One large evergreen or deciduous tree
and five evergreen or deciduous shrubs shall be planted for every 40 linear
feet of property line that parallels the vehicular use area. Fifty percent of
these trees and shrubs may be counted toward the parking lot trees and shrubs
required in division (A) if the planting strip is located within 20 feet of the
vehicular use area. Adjacent businesses on separate lots which share parking or
driveways shall be exempt from this requirement provided that the required
planting strip would interfere with the reasonable use of the shared parking or
driveway. Vehicular use areas located behind buildings and screened from view
from public rights-of-way shall be exempt from this requirement.
   (C)   Buffering from street. Vehicular use areas greater than 4,000 square
feet any portion of which is located within 50 feet of the right-of-way of a
street must be buffered from the street. The buffer shall be at least three
feet high at maturity and can consist of plant material alone, or berms,
fences, walls, or grade changed combined with plant material. A vegetative
buffer shall consist of at least one evergreen or deciduous shrub planted for
every five linear feet of buffer required. If a fence or wall is used, it must
be constructed of wood, brick, stone or other masonry and be architecturally
compatible with the proposed structure. Seventy-five percent of the fence or
wall must be opaque with any spaces evenly distributed. The finished side of
the fence or wall shall face the street. At least one shrub shall be planted on
the street side for each eight linear feet of fence or wall. Berms and grade
changes must be completely covered with vegetation. All shrubs planted can
count toward the parking lot landscaping requirements.
   (D)   Structured parking facilities. Structured parking facilities, or
parking decks, shall be excused from the parking lot landscaping requirements
contained in this section but shall comply with the provisions of this
paragraph. In the event that any openings for ventilation, service, or
emergency access are located at the first floor level in the building facade,
then they shall be an integral part of the overall building design. These
openings as well as pedestrian and vehicular entrances shall be designed to
minimize visibility of parked cars. The remainder of street level frontage
shall be either commercial space or an architecturally articulated facade
designed to minimize the visibility of parked cars. All levels of a structured
parking facility shall be designed and screened in such a way as to minimize
visibility of parked cars. In no instance will rails or cabling alone be
sufficient to meet this screening requirement. The design elements of this
paragraph shall only apply to building facades which are visible from a public
right-of-way.
   (E)   Automobile sales facilities. Automobile sales facilities, due to the
fact that inventory is typically stored and displayed for sale on vehicular use
areas, require separate analysis with regard to the parking lot landscaping
requirements in this section. Automobile sales facilities are, accordingly,
exempted from the need to comply with interior parking lot landscaping
requirements for that portion of an automobile sales facility utilized
exclusively for the display of goods for sale. Automobile sales facilities are
required to comply with the perimeter and planting strip requirements of this
section; provided, however, such facilities shall be permitted one display
area, which shall not be required to be screened, for each 100 feet of roadway
frontage. Each display area shall extend no more than 50 feet in length.
   (F)   Effect on other regulations.  Areas devoted to meeting the landscaping
requirements of this section may count toward the common open space
requirements contained in §§
152.090 -
152.105, hereof. Where site characteristics and development considerations make
it prudent and feasible, landscaping proposed to meet the requirements of this
section may also contribute toward meeting the buffering and screening
requirements contained in this subchapter.
   (G)   Small lots. Small lots, defined as lots with less than 75 feet of
frontage on a roadway or with less than 75 feet of depth, may have site
constraints which make strict compliance with the regulations contained in this
section a hardship. In such cases, the approving authority for the town may
approve deviations from such regulations so long as the plans of development
are consistent with the goals and objectives stated herein.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.179 BUFFER REQUIREMENTS WHEN A STREET SEPARATES INCOMPATIBLE USES.
   If a street with right-of-way of less than 30 feet lies between two land
uses which would require a bufferyard between them, a buffer shall be required
along the affected side or rear property lines of the developing use. No
bufferyard is required along the front property line.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
§ 152.190 STATUTORY AUTHORITY AND LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS OF FACT.
    The General Assembly of the State of North Carolina has delegated to local
governmental the responsibility to adopt regulations designed to promote the
public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Pursuant thereto,
the Town Council of the Town of Franklin, North Carolina, makes the following
legislative findings of fact.
   (A)   The flood prone areas within the Town of Franklin and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction are subject to periodic inundation which results
in loss of life, property, health hazards, safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood
protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely
affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   The development activities listed herein contribute, individually and
cumulatively, to the flood losses addressed above: (1) obstructions in flood
plains causing increases in flood heights and velocities; (2) the occupancy in
flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards; (3) the loss
of wetlands, streamside riparian areas, and other lands that slow, absorb,
retain, and cleanse storm and flood waters; and (4) the expansion of impervious
surfaces both within and outside of flood prone areas that cause increases in
the velocity and rate of the discharge of storm water into bodies of water.
   (C)   The discharge of urban pollutants and sedimentation into bodies of
water results in health and safety hazards and the impairment of
environmentally and economically significant aquatic wildlife habitat,
adversely affecting the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (D)   Development activities cause sedimentation pollution through untreated
and uncontrolled storm water from impervious areas, improper land disturbance,
and the loss of wetlands, streamside riparian areas, and other lands that
absorb and cleanse storm and floodwaters.
   (E)    The steeply sloping areas within the Town of Franklin and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction are particularly susceptible to erosion and
landslides, and pose particular difficulties in the construction and
maintenance of public infrastructure and the provision of public services.
Development activities in such areas are likely to result in the loss of life
and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and
governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures, and impairment of the
tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.191 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to protect and promote the public
health, safety, and general welfare by preventing the loss of life and/or
public and private economic loss due to landslides, floods, erosion, and
sedimentation pollution. It is further the purpose of this subchapter to
protect our existing environmental resources, including steep slopes, flood
plains, stream corridors, wetlands, watershed and groundwater recharge areas,
soils, forest stands, specimen trees, and other significant vegetation and
wildlife, which are of economic value to the town and its citizens and make
Franklin a desirable place to live and visit. In furtherance of this purpose,
the regulations contained herein are designed to accomplish the following:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are or may be dangerous to health,
safety, and property or that may result in damaging increases in erosion, flood
heights, or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses and infrastructure vulnerable to the movement of
earth or flooding be protected against such damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of steep slopes, natural flood plains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the
accommodation of floodgates;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that may
increase erosion or flood damage;
   (E)   Require that storm waters that may damage property, increase flood
hazards, or pollute surface waters be adequately controlled and treated.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.192 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this subchatper are as follows:
   (A)   To protect human life and health;
   (B)   To minimize the expenditure of public money for costly storm water or
flood control and stormwater management projects;
   (C)   To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   To minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
   (E)   To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e. water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, cable, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges)
that are located on steep slopes or in flood prone areas;
   (F)   To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of steep slope areas, flood prone areas, and the control of storm
water runoff;
   (G)   To minimize the impairment of, or damage to, sensitive natural areas
and bodies of water; and
   (H)   To ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a
special flood hazard area or area of known landslide potential.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.193 STEEP SLOPE AREA REQUIREMENTS (RESERVED).
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.194 SEDIMENTATION AND EROSION PREVENTION.
   In order to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation pollution of streams,
springs, flat water bodies, drainage networks, or other surface waters, the
property owner shall at all times comply with all requirements of
Chapter 153: Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance of Macon County.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.195 STORMWATER RUNOFF PROVISIONS.
   The purpose of this section is to (1) protect life and property and minimize
nuisances by limiting destructive runoff and flooding generated by impervious
surface areas and (2) to protect water quality and natural ecosystems by
filtering sediments and pollutants such as nitrogen, phosphorus, trace metals,
and hydrocarbons.
   (A)   Affected property. The requirements of this Section shall apply to the
following activities:
      (1)   Any new non-residential or mixed-use development, or any existing
non-residential or mixed-use development undergoing significant improvement, or
any existing nonresidential or mixed-use development undergoing an expansion of
impervious surface area of 25% or more.
      (2)   Any new residential development or subdivision of four or more
dwelling units, any existing multi-family residential structure of four or more
dwelling units undergoing significant improvement, and any expansion of or
additions to an existing residential structure or development that would result
in four or more dwelling units within the same parcel of land or structure or
grouping of joined structures.
      (3)   All new major subdivisions and any new phase or expansion of
existing major subdivisions.
      (4)   All new non-residential or mixed-use minor subdivisions and any new
phase or expansion of an existing non-residential or mixed-use minor
subdivision.
      (5)   Any new development project permitted by means of a special use
permit.
      (6)   New structures; significant improvements to existing non-
residential or mixed use structures; significant improvements to existing
residential structures containing four or more dwelling units; and any
expansion of impervious surface area of 25% or more within any development
except expansions to residential structures containing fewer than four dwelling
units, unless otherwise subject to these requirements.
      (7)    Any project for which stormwater management is required as a
condition of approval by the Land Use Administrator or the Town Council.
   (B)   Exempt activities. The following activities are exempt from the
stormwater management provisions of this section:
      (1)   Bona fide agricultural structures used exclusively for agricultural
purposes; and
      (2)   Except as provided elsewhere in this chapter, the placement of
small accessory buildings or structures or small amounts of other built-upon
area; provided, however, that the total additional built-upon area shall be no
greater than 400 square feet and the additional built-upon area shall not be
placed within a special flood hazard area or surface water protection area.
   (C)   Stormwater management requirements. Development activities tend to
increase the volume of stormwater runoff due to the elimination of pervious
surfaces through paving and the construction of buildings and other structures.
Stormwater runoff impacts the public health, safety, and welfare by flooding
private and public property, by discharging pollutants, such as oils and
greases, into receiving water bodies, and by making public streets and roads
unsafe. Therefore, applicants for development authorization shall not be
entitled to a land development permit until the applicant has demonstrated
compliance with this section.
      (1)   The developer of all affected property shall be required to install
a stormwater management system designed to control the peak runoff from a ten-
year, 24-hour storm in accordance with the standards contained herein.
         (a)   The post-development rate of runoff shall not exceed the pre-
development rate of runoff.
         (b)   The system shall be designed to remove 85% of the Total
Suspended Solids (TSS) from the first inch of rainfall of any rain event.
         (c)   Stormwater measures shall have a drawdown of at least 48 hours,
but not more than 120 hours.
      (2)   Stormwater measures shall be designed by an appropriately qualified
engineer, landscape architect or other appropriately qualified professional,
and shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with commonly accepted
best practices. Innovative designs that utilize “low impact” and non-structural
control and treatment measures are encouraged.
      (3)   Stormwater measures may be located off-site provided such measures
are located within a parcel of land under the same ownership as the affected
property or within a common area under the management of a property owners’
association or similar entity. When stormwater measures are located off-site,
deeds of both the affected property and the property containing the stormwater
measure shall be provided and shall clearly reference an access easement and
the right and responsibility of the owner of the affected property to access
and maintain such measure.
      (4)   In all instances stormwater measures shall be designed to
compliment a development and surrounding community and to minimize any threat
to public health. If ponds or lakes are used, such areas shall be landscaped as
amenities or hidden from view. This provision applies regardless whether the
pond or lake typically contains water or may be dry for periods of time.
   (D)   Permit requirements. The Land Use Administrator shall review all
stormwater plans required by this chapter to ensure compliance therewith. In
making this determination, the Land Use Administrator shall use the Stormwater
Best Management Practices Design Manual published by the North Carolina
Department of Environment and Natural Resources or other commonly accepted
information and engineering data.
      (1)   Stormwater management system concept plan. When required as part of
any project, a written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development
storm water management system shall be submitted along with other application
materials and shall include the following: preliminary selection and location
of proposed structural stormwater controls; low impact design elements;
location of existing and proposed conveyance systems such as grass channels,
swales, and storm drains; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits;
relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and
preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge
or culvert crossings.
      (2)   As-built plans and final approval. Upon completion of a project,
and before final development approval or a certificate of occupancy may be
granted, the applicant shall certify that the completed project has been built
in accordance with the approved stormwater management plans and designs. The
applicant shall submit actual “as built” plans for all stormwater management
facilities or practices after final construction is completed.
         (a)   The plans shall show the final design specifications for all
stormwater management facilities and practices and the field location, size,
depth, and planted vegetation of all measures, controls, and devices, as
installed. The designer of the storm water management measures and plans shall
certify, under seal, that the as-built stormwater measures, controls, and
devices are in compliance with the approved stormwater management plans and
designs and with the requirements of this chapter.
         (b)   A final inspection and approval by the Land Use Administrator is
necessary prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy, release of
improvement guarantee, or other final approval.
   (E)   Inspections.  The Land Use Administrator may, from time to time,
inspect approved storm water measures for compliance with this section and
approved plans. Inspections may include, but are not limited to, reviewing
maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges, surface water,
groundwater, and material or water in storm water measures; and evaluating the
condition of storm water measures. No person shall obstruct, hamper, or
interfere with the Land Use Administrator while carrying out his or her
official duties. If the owner or occupant of any affected property refuses to
allow such inspection, the Land Use Administrator shall proceed to obtain an
administrative search warrant pursuant to G.S. § 15-27.2 or its successor.
   (F)   Maintenance of stormwater measures.  The owner of any stormwater
measure installed pursuant to this section shall maintain and operate such
measure to preserve and continue its function in controlling stormwater quality
and quantity at the degree or amount of function for which the storm water
measure was designed. Furthermore, stormwater measures installed prior to the
enactment of this chapter as a requirement of the issuance of any permit shall
be subject to the maintenance requirements contained herein. The owner of each
stormwater measure, whether structural or non-structural in design, shall
maintain it so as not to create or permit a nuisance condition.
   (G)   Illicit discharges.  Except as provided herein, no person shall cause
or allow the discharge, emission, disposal, pouring, or pumping, whether
directly or indirectly, of any liquid, solid, gas, or other substance, other
than stormwater, into any surface water, ground water, or stormwater
conveyance. This prohibition applies to any substance deposited upon the land
in manner and amount that the substance is likely to reach a stormwater
conveyance, surface or ground water.
      (1)   The following discharges shall not be deemed illicit and shall be
permitted under the terms stated:
         (a)   Water line flushing, except any anti-freezing agent;
         (b)   Landscape irrigation;
         (c)   Diverted stream flows;
         (d)   Rising ground waters;
         (e)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 CFR
35.2005(20);
         (f)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
         (g)   Discharges from potable water sources;
         (h)   Foundation drains;
         (i)   Air conditioning condensation;
         (j)   Irrigation water;
         (k)   Springs;
         (1)   Water from crawl space pumps;
         (m)   Footing drains;
         (n)   Lawn watering;
         (o)   Individual residential car washing;
         (p)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
         (q)   Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
         (r)   Street wash water; and
         (s)   Other non-stormwater discharges for which a valid NPDES
discharge permit has been approved and issued by the State of North Carolina.
      (2)   Prohibited discharges include but are not limited to the following:
         (a)   Discharges of oil, anti-freeze, chemicals, paints, garbage,
litter;
         (b)   Raw sewage discharges or overflows;
         (c)   Discharges of wash water resulting from the hosing or cleaning
of gasoline stations, auto repair garages, or other types of automotive service
facilities;
         (d)   Discharges resulting from the cleaning, repair, or maintenance
of any type of equipment, machinery, or facility (including motor vehicles,
cement-related construction equipment, port-a-potty servicing, etc.);
         (e)   Discharges of wash water from mobile operations such as steam
cleaning, power washing, pressure washing, carpet cleaning, and mobile carwash
facilities; discharges of wash water from the cleaning or hosing of impervious
surfaces in industrial and commercial areas including parking lots, streets,
sidewalks, driveways, patios, plazas, work yards, and outdoor eating or
drinking areas;
         (f)   Discharges of runoff from material storage areas containing
chemicals, fuels, grease, oil or hazardous materials or chemicals;
         (g)   Discharges of pool or fountain water containing chlorine,
biocides or other chemicals, and discharges of pool or fountain filter backwash
water;
         (h)   Discharges of water containing sediment or construction-related
wastes; and
         (i)   Discharges of food-related wastes such as grease, oil, fish
processing water, kitchen mat wash water, trash bin wash water, pouring liquids
into dumpsters.
   (H)   Illicit connections.  Other than those exceptions listed in division
(B), above, it shall be unlawful to cause or permit any connection to a surface
water or stormwater conveyance or stormwater conveyance system that allows the
discharge of anything other than stormwater.
      (1)   Prohibited connections include, but are not limited to the
following: floor drains, wastewater from washing machines or sanitary sewers,
wash water from commercial vehicle washing or steam cleaning, and wastewater
from septic systems.
      (2)   Where such connections exist in violation of this section and said
connections were made prior to the adoption of this provision or any other
ordinance prohibiting such connections, the property owner or the person using
said connection shall remove the connection within one year following the
effective date of this chapter. Provided, however, the one-year grace period
shall not apply to connections which may result in the discharge of hazardous
materials or other discharges which pose an immediate threat to health and
safety, or are likely to result in immediate injury and harm to real or
personal property, natural resources, wildlife, or habitat.
      (3)   Upon determining that an illicit connection may result in the
discharge of hazardous materials or may pose an immediate threat to health and
safety, or is likely to result in immediate injury and harm to real or personal
property, natural resources, wildlife, or habitat or that a connection was made
in violation of any applicable regulation or ordinance, other than this section
the Land Use Administrator shall designate the time limit within which the
connection shall be removed. In setting the time limit for compliance, the Land
Use Administrator shall take these matters into consideration:
         (a)   The quantity and complexity of the work;
         (b)   The consequences of delay;
         (c)   The potential harm to the environment, to the public health, and
to public and private property; and
         (d)   The cost of remedying the damage.
   (I)   Fee-in-lieu of stormwater compliance. On-site compliance with the
requirements of this section may be impractical or impossible in certain
watersheds of the town. The owner and/or developer of affected properties may,
pursuant to the provisions set forth herein, opt to pay a fee-in-lieu of
compliance with the stormwater management requirements of this section.
      (1)   Payment may be made in the form of contribution of funds,
contribution of land, contribution of engineered stormwater control
construction work, or a combination of these, the total value of which shall be
in accordance with the stormwater fee-in-lieu schedule which shall be
established by the Land Use Administrator and periodically revised to account
for changes in construction and maintenance costs.
      (2)   Fees shall be based upon actual cost of construction of a
structural storm water measure to control and treat storm water runoff from the
total impervious surface area of the affected property.
      (3)   The  Town Council  shall adopt a map of watersheds within which a
fee-in-lieu of stormwater compliance may be permitted.
      (4)   Fee-in-lieu contributions shall be set aside in a dedicated,
watershed-specific special fund, and applied to stormwater management and other
water quality improvement projects within the same watershed as the affected
property. Purposes eligible for fee-in-lieu contributions include the
following:
         (a)   The acquisition, design, or construction of storm water control
and treatment measures.
         (b)   Stream bank, wetland, or other surface water protection and
restoration projects that enhance stormwater management goals, reduce erosion,
and enhance water quality.
         (c)   The elimination of illicit or inappropriate connections to storm
water conveyances.
         (d)   Other activities identified by the Land Use Administrator,
provided that such activities are for the sole purpose of improving water
quality.
         (e)   Matching funds for grants to fund any of the aforementioned
types of activities.
         (f)   Matching funds for participation in any water quality
improvement program funded by the Macon County Soil and Water Conservation
Service, the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources,
the USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service, or other local, regional,
state or federal agencies.
      (5)   The expenditure of stormwater contributions is limited as follows:
         (a)   To the extent practical, contributions shall be applied to
activities that will result in water quality benefits comparable to the
benefits of controlling and treating stormwater on the contributing property.
         (b)   Contributions shall not be applied to the storm water management
requirements of other affected properties, or to the same affected property to
satisfy the stormwater management requirements of future site plan approvals.
         (c)   Contributions shall not be applied to any other purpose or
activity of the town not directly related to stormwater management and water
quality improvement.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07; Am. Ord. passed 10-20-08; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.196 SURFACE WATER PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   The purpose of this section is to provide a network of protected stream
corridors thereby helping to maintain water quality, provide wildlife habitats,
filter pollutants, store floodgates, and contribute to the “green
infrastructure” of the Town of Franklin and lands within its jurisdiction.
Stream systems are comprised of each stream and its respective drainage basin.
Streams have the primary natural functions of conveying storm, ground, and
surface waters, storing floodwaters, and supporting aquatic life. Vegetated
lands adjacent to the stream channel serve to protect the stream’s ability to
fulfill its natural functions. Surface water protection areas have the primary
natural functions of protecting water quality by (1) filtering sediments and
pollutants such as nitrogen, phosphorus, trace metals, and hydrocarbons, (2)
providing intermittent storage for flood waters, (3) allowing channels to
meander naturally, and (4) providing suitable habitat for wildlife.
   (A)   Applicability. This section shall apply to all surface waters (as
defined by this chapter), and all nonencroachment areas and regulatory
floodways (as delineated upon the most recently published Flood Boundary and
Floodway Map (FBFM) and/or Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), within the planning
jurisdiction of the Town of Franklin.
   (B)   Relationship to previously approved development plans, structures, and
uses. Uses and structures approved and constructed in a protection area prior
to the enactment of this chapter may remain as nonconformities, subject to any
legal requirements attributed to that status. All development plans,
development projects, and uses permitted subsequent to the enactment of this
chapter, including expansions to previously approved and constructed uses and
structures, shall comply with the surface water protection requirements of this
chapter.
   (C)   Surface water protection area delineation. Surface water protection
area requirements apply to the regulatory floodway and non-encroachment areas,
as well as lands within 30 feet from the top of each bank of a stream or other
surface water body.
      (1)   For streams and other surface waters with defined channels,
protection area widths are measured horizontally on a line perpendicular to the
surface water, landward from the top of the bank on each side of the channel.
      (2)   “Top of bank” shall be determined by the Land Use Administrator by
considering factors such as the break in slope for a watercourse and the
presence of streamside vegetation.
      (3)   For wetlands, as defined in this chapter, protection area widths
are measured horizontally, landward from the outermost point at which wetland
conditions can be identified.
      (4)   For ponds, lakes, and other impounded surface waters, protection
areas widths are measured horizontally, landward from the ordinary high water
line. Protection areas requirements do not apply to wet ponds used as
structural stormwater control and treatment measures for stormwater.
      (5)   For other surface waters, the protection area shall be determined
by the Land Use Administrator in consideration of the purposes of this section.
      (6)   When a combination of floodway/non-encroachment area and/or surface
water types exist, the most restrictive measurement of surface water protection
area shall apply.
   (D)   Surface water protection area requirements. The following requirements
shall apply to surface water protection areas as defined herein.
      (1)   Protection areas shall be left in a naturally vegetated state,
unless reforestation of disturbed protection areas is required as part of any
site plan approval. When reforestation of a disturbed protection area is
required, it shall be done in accordance with a planting plan approved by the
Land Use Administrator.
      (2)   Concentrated runoff from ditches or other manmade conveyances shall
be diverted to diffuse flow before the runoff enters the protection area.
      (3)   Periodic corrective action to restore diffuse flow shall be taken
by the property owner as necessary to avoid the formation of erosion gullies.
      (4)   Diffuse flow of runoff shall be maintained in the protection area
by dispersing concentrated flow and reestablishing vegetation.
      (5)   Surface water protection areas shall be delineated upon any
development plan and shall be noted as protection areas within which no
disturbance or development shall be permitted.
      (6)   The following impacts are expressly forbidden in surface water
protection areas (including floodways, non-encroachment areas) and associated
water bodies:
         (a)   The placement of fill or the deposition of any natural or
manmade material or substance.
         (b)   New development, substantial improvements, new construction, new
impervious surfaces, the placement of structures or any other form of
development or encroachment, except those associated with public utilities.
         (c)   Grading, excavation, the removal of vegetation, or any
disturbance of any kind except excavation and fill required to plant any new
trees or vegetation.
         (d)   The ditching, dredging, channelization, straightening,
relocation, diking, levying, or any other alteration or modification of any
kind, to surface waters, except dredging necessary to maintain pre-existing,
human-made water impoundments such as ponds and lakes.
         (e)   The routing underground (by culvert or other means) of any
surface water, except to facilitate crossings by approved roads, streets,
driveways, greenways, sidewalks, and other transportation facilities.
         (f)   The impoundment of water bodies (this shall not prohibit the
maintenance of existing ponds, lakes, and other impoundments).
         (g)   Any other type of encroachment, disturbance, or modification to
floodways, nonencroachment areas, or other surface water protection areas or
associated surface waters.
      (7)   The following protection area impacts are permitted provided that
design and construction shall comply with applicable town standards for
stabilization of disturbed areas to minimize negative effects on the quality of
surface waters.
         (a)   Road crossings for connectivity or transportation links and
required utilities including public and private streets, driveways, and
bridges, where the town has granted site plan approval.
         (b)   Parallel water and sewer utility installation as approved by the
town.
         (c)   Approved public or common area open space, paths and trails.
Pathways should use existing and proposed utility alignments or previously
cleared areas and minimize tree cutting to the maximum extent practicable. To
the extent possible, pathways shall be “on-grade” and shall preserve existing
drainage patterns and avoid drainage structures that concentrate stormwater.
         (d)   Incidental drainage improvements/repairs for maintenance
provided that such maintenance does not result in channelization,
straightening, or modification of the natural course of a stream channel or the
deforestation of the regulatory floodway or protection areas.
         (e)   Mitigation approved by a local, state, or federal agency acting
pursuant to Sections 401 or 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act.
         (f)   Stream bank or stream channel restoration or soil stabilization
activities of the North Carolina Cooperative Extension Service, Macon County
Soil and Water Conservation Service, USDA Natural Resources Conservation
Service, Macon County, the Town of Franklin, the North Carolina Forest Service,
or a cooperating organization or entity. This exception does not include the
straightening or channelization any watercourse.
         (g)   The removal of invasive exotic plant and tree species or trees
posing a hazard to life or property.
      (8)   Uses permitted in the protection area shall be coordinated to
ensure minimal disturbance of the protection area system. For example, if it is
necessary to install utilities within the protection area and if greenway
trails are then to be built, they should follow these cleared areas instead of
necessitating additional clearing.
      (9)   The approving authority may reduce the required setbacks by up to
20% of the required distance in order to facilitate compliance with this
section. Additional setback deviations shall be considered as variances by the
Board of Adjustment in accordance with the procedures set forth in this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.197 FLOODPLAIN PROTECTION STANDARDS (RESERVED).
Refer to
Chapter 151. (Ord. passed 10-1- 07; Am. Ord. passed - - )
§ 152.198 VARYING REQUIREMENTS WHEN THERE IS AN INCREASE IN FUNCTIONALITY.
   Occasionally, development sites will contain steep slopes, surface water
areas, and/or flood plain, which, due to previous clearing or development,
diking, erosion, or other reasons, are of limited functionality. This chapter
seeks to encourage landowners and developers to find creative means to improve
these existing conditions. Accordingly, the entity with the authority to grant
development authorization pursuant to §§
152.050 -
152.062, above, may vary the requirements of this subchapter when the applicant
for development authorization demonstrates the proposed development, along with
any management practices, will result in an increase of functionality of any
regulated natural resources on the development site. Any mitigation proposed to
offset loss of a natural resource regulated herein must take place on the
development site itself or on neighboring properties pursuant to a recorded
easement authorizing such activities.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
§ 152.199 REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF THE NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION ARTICLE.
   In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter or elsewhere, the
Land Use Administrator is authorized to require restoration of any natural
resources damaged or destroyed in violation of the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. passed 10-1-07)
CHAPTER 153: RESERVED
CHAPTER 154: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Short title
   
154.02   Purpose
   
154.03   Definitions
Non-Small Wireless Facilities
   
154.10   Special use permits
   
154.11   Permit application; requirements
   
154.12   Location
   
154.13   Shared use
   
154.14   Eligible facilities requests
   
154.15   Height of telecommunications towers
   
154.16   Appearance and visibility
   
154.17   Security
   
154.18   Signage
   
154.19   Lot size and setbacks
   
154.20   Retention of expert assistance and reimbursement by applicant
   
154.21   Exceptions from a special use permit
   
154.22   Procedure
   
154.23   Findings of fact
   
154.24   Recertification of a special use permit
   
154.25   Extent and parameters of special use permit
   
154.26   Application fee
   
154.27   Performance security
   
154.28   Reservation of authority to inspect wireless telecommunications
facilities
   
154.29   Annual NIER certification
   
154.30   Liability insurance
   
154.31   Indemnification
   
154.32   Default and/or revocation
   
154.33   Removal of wireless telecommunications facilities
Small Wireless Facilities and Broadband Service Towers
   
154.40   Purpose
   
154.41   Siting of small wireless facilities and broadband service towers
   
154.42   Applicability
   
154.43   Exemptions
   
154.44   Collocation of small wireless facilities
   
154.45   Use of utility poles and town utility poles
General Regulations
   
154.50   Relief
   
154.51   Periodic regulatory review
   
154.52   Adherence to state and/or federal rules and regulations
   
154.53   Compliance with state and federal law
 
   
154.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as the Wireless Telecommunications
Facilities Siting Ordinance for the Town of Franklin.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.02 PURPOSE.
    The Telecommunications Act of 1996 affirmed the town's authority concerning
the placement, construction and modification of wireless telecommunications
facilities. The town finds that wireless telecommunications facilities may pose
significant concerns to the health, safety, public welfare, character and
environment of the town and its inhabitants. The town also recognizes that
facilitating the development of wireless service technology can be an economic
development asset to the town and of significant benefit to the town and its
residents. In order to ensure that the placement, construction or modification
of wireless telecommunications facilities is consistent with the town's land
use policies, the town is adopting a single, comprehensive, wireless
telecommunications facilities application and permit process. The intent of
this chapter is to minimize the negative impact of wireless telecommunications
facilities, establish a fair and efficient process for review and approval of
applications, assure an integrated, comprehensive review of environmental
impacts of such facilities, and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
town.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18; Am. Ord. passed 3-15-21)
§ 154.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY FACILITY OR STRUCTURE. An accessory facility or structure serving
or being used in conjunction with wireless telecommunications facilities, and
located on the same property or lot as the wireless telecommunications
facilities, including but not limited to, utility or transmission equipment
storage sheds or cabinets.
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits, receives, or transmits and
receives electromagnetic radio signals used in the provision of all types of
wireless communications services.
   APPLICANT. Any wireless service provider submitting an application for a
special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities.
   APPLICATION. All necessary and appropriate documentation that an applicant
submits in order to receive a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities. The term includes any request submitted for a
permit to collocate wireless facilities or to approve the installation,
modification, or replacement of a utility pole, town utility pole, or wireless
support structure.
   BASE STATION. A structure or equipment at a specific site authorized to
communicate with mobile stations, generally consisting of radio receivers,
antennas, coaxial cables, power supplies, and other associated electronics. The
term includes but is not limited to equipment associated with wireless
communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services,
as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as
microwave backhaul. The term also includes, but is not limited to, radio
transceivers, antennae, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration
and including distributed antenna systems and small wireless facilities.
   COLLOCATION.  The placement or installation of wireless facilities on
existing structures, including electrical transmission towers, water towers,
buildings, and other structures capable of structurally supporting the
attachment of wireless facilities in compliance with applicable codes. The term
does not include the installation of new utility poles, town utility poles, or
wireless support structures.
   COMMERCIAL IMPRACTICABILITY or COMMERCIALLY IMPRACTICABLE. The inability to
perform an act on terms that are reasonable in commerce, the cause or
occurrence of which could not have been reasonably anticipated or foreseen and
that jeopardizes the financial efficacy of the project. The inability to
achieve a satisfactory financial return on investment or profit, standing
alone, shall not deem a situation to be COMMERCIALLY IMPRACTICABLE and shall
not render an act or the terms of an agreement COMMERCIALLY IMPRACTICABLE.
   COMPLETED APPLICATION. An application that contains all information and/or
data necessary to enable an informed decision to be made with respect to an
application.
   CONCEALED WIRELESS FACILITY, WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE, OR ANTENNA. Any
telecommunications facility, wireless support structure, or antenna that is
integrated as an architectural feature of a structure or that is designed to
camouflage or conceal the presence of the telecommunications facility, wireless
support structure, or antenna so that the purpose of the telecommunications
facility, wireless support structure, or antenna is not readily apparent to a
casual observer.
   CONCEALMENT ELEMENT. Any design feature, including but not limited to
painting, shielding requirements, shrouds, and restrictions on location or
height with relation to the surrounding area that are intended to make a
telecommunications facility less visible to the casual observer. The design
elements of a concealed or stealth telecommunications facility are concealment
elements.
   ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUEST. A request for modification of an existing
wireless tower or base station that involves collocation of new transmission
equipment or replacement of transmission equipment but does not include a
substantial modification.
   EQUIPMENT COMPOUND. An area surrounding or near the base of a wireless
support structure within which a wireless facility is located.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration, or its duly designated and
authorized successor agency.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission, or its duly designated and
authorized successor agency.
   HEIGHT. The distance measured from the pre-existing grade level to the
highest point on the tower or structure, even if said highest point is an
antenna or lightning protection device.
   MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY.  A small wireless facility that is no larger in
dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width, and 12 inches in height
and that has an exterior antenna, if any, no longer than 11 inches.
   MONOPOLE. A single, self-supporting, freestanding pole-type structure built
for the sole purpose of supporting one or more antennae. For the purposes of
this chapter, a utility pole is not a monopole.
   NIER. Non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, estate, trust, partnership, joint stock
company, association of two or more persons having a joint common interest, or
any other entity.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY. See WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES or PWS or PERSONAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE or
PCS. The same meaning as defined and used in the 1996 Telecommunications Act
   QUALIFYING TOWN UTILITY POLE. A modified or replacement town utility pole
that does not exceed 50 feet above ground level and that is associated with a
new small wireless facility that does not extend more than ten feet above such
town utility pole.
   QUALIFYING SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A new small wireless facility that does
not extend more than ten feet above the utility pole, town utility pole, or
wireless support structure on which it is collocated and is located either:
      (1)   Within the town right-of-way; or
      (2)   Outside of town right-of-way on property other than single family
residential property.
   QUALIFYING UTILITY POLE. A new utility pole or modified or replacement
utility pole that does not exceed 50 feet above ground level and that is
associated with a new small wifeless facility that does not extend more than
ten feet above such utility pole.
   SEARCH RING. The area in which a wireless support facility or wireless
facility must be located in order to meet service objectives of the wireless
service provider using the wireless facility or wireless support structure.
   SHROUD. A box or other container that contains, and is designed to
camouflage or conceal the presence of, a telecommunications facility, antenna,
or accessory equipment.
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY. A wireless facility that meets both of the
following qualifications:
      (1)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six
cubic fee in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements,
the antenna and all of its exposed elements, if enclosed, could fit within an
enclosure of no more than six cubic feet.
      (2)   All other wireless equipment associated with the facility has a
cumulative volume of no more than 28 cubic feet. Pursuant to applicable law,
the following types of ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation
of equipment volume: electric meters, concealment elements, telecommunications
demarcation boxes, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer
switches, vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services,
or other support structures.
   SPECIAL USE PERMIT. The official document or permit by which an applicant is
allowed to construct and use wireless telecommunications facilities as granted
or issued by the town.
   STEALTH or STEALTH TECHNOLOGY. Minimal adverse aesthetic and visual impacts
on the land, property, buildings, and other facilities adjacent to,
surrounding, and in generally the same area as the requested location of such
wireless telecommunications facilities, which shall mean using the least
visually and physically intrusive facility that is not technologically or
commercially impracticable under the facts and circumstances.
   STATE.  The State of North Carolina.
   SUBSTANTIAL MODIFICATION.
      (1)   The mounting of a proposed wireless facility on a wireless support
structure that substantially changes the physical dimensions of the support
structure. A mounting is presumed to be a substantial modification if it meets
any one or more of the criteria listed below:
         (a)   Increasing the existing vertical height of the structure by the
greater of:
            1.   More than 10%; or
            2.   The height of one additional antenna array with separation
from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed 20 feet.
         (b)   Except where necessary to shelter the antenna from inclement
weather or to connect the antenna to the tower via cable, adding an
appurtenance to the body of a wireless support structure that protrudes
horizontally from the edge of the wireless support structure the greater of:
            1.   More than 20 feet; or
            2.   More than the width of the wireless support structure at the
level of the appurtenance.
         (c)   Increasing the square footage of the existing equipment compound
by more than 2,500 square feet.
      (2)   The addition, removal or change of any of the physical and visually
discernible components or aspects of a wireless facility shall be considered a
substantial modification, including without limitation addition, removal or
change in equipment shelters, landscaping, fencing, utility feeds, changing the
color, materials, or stealth technology of any visually discernible components,
vehicular access, and parking.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The transmission and/or reception of audio, video, data,
and other information by wire, radio frequency, light, and other electronic or
electromagnetic systems.
   TELECOMMUNICATION SITE. See WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURE. A structure used in the provision of services
described in the definition of WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   TEMPORARY. In relation to all aspects and components of this chapter,
something intended to, or that does, exist for fewer than 90 days,
   TOWN. The Town of Franklin, North Carolina.
   TOWN COUNCIL. The Town Council of the Town of Franklin.
   TOWN RIGHT-OF-WAY. A right-of-way owned, leased, or operated by the town,
including any public street or alley that is not a part of the atate highway
system.
   TOWN UTILITY POLE. A pole owned by the town in the town right-of-way that
provides lighting, traffic control, or a similar function.
   UTILITY POLE.  A structure that is designed for and used to carry lines,
cables, wires, lighting facilities, or small wireless facilities for telephone,
cable television, electricity, lighting, or wireless services.
   UDO. The Unified Development Ordinance of the Town of Franklin, codified as
Chapter 152 of this Code, as amended.
   WIRELESS BROADBAND SERVICE TOWER. A wireless facility, no more than 25 feet
in height, as measured from the base of the tower and not including any
lighting protection rods extending above the structure and attached equipment,
and which wireless facility shall be used exclusively for providing broadband
internet services.
   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES, TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWER, TOWER,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SITE and PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITY. A structure, facility
or location designed, or intended to be used as, or used to support, antennas
or other transmitting or receiving devices. This includes without limit, towers
of all types and kinds and structures that employ camouflage technology,
including, but not limited to, structures such as a multi-story building,
church steeple, silo, water tower, sign or other structures that can be used to
mitigate the visual impact of an antenna or the functional equivalent of such,
including all related facilities such as cabling, equipment shelters and other
structures associated with the site. It is a structure and facility intended
for transmitting and/or receiving radio, television, cellular, paging, 911,
personal telecommunications services, commercial satellite services, microwave
services and services not licensed by the FCC, but not expressly exempt from
the town's siting, building and permitting authority, excluding those used
exclusively for the town's fire, police or exclusively for private,
noncommercial radio and television reception and private citizen's bands,
amateur radio and other similar non-commercial telecommunications where the
height of the facility is below the height limits set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18; Am. Ord. 2021-008, passed 3-7-22)
NON-SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
§ 154.10 SPECIAL USE PERMITS.
   In order to ensure that the placement, construction, and modification of
wireless telecommunications facilities protects the town's health, safety,
public welfare, environmental features, the nature and character of the
community and neighborhood and other aspects of the quality of life
specifically listed elsewhere in this chapter, the town hereby adopts an
overall policy with respect to a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities for the express purpose of achieving the
following goals:
   (A)   Implementing an application process for person(s) seeking a special
use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities;
   (B)   Establishing a policy for examining an application for and issuing a
special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities that is both fair
and consistent;
   (C)   Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the sharing and/or
collocation of wireless telecommunications facilities among service providers;
   (D)   Promoting and encouraging, wherever possible, the placement, height
and quantity of wireless telecommunications facilities in such a manner,
including but not limited to the use of stealth technology, to minimize adverse
aesthetic and visual impacts on the land, property, buildings, and other
facilities adjacent to, surrounding, and in generally the same area as the
requested location of such wireless telecommunications facilities, which shall
mean using the least visually and physically intrusive facility that is not
technologically or commercially impracticable under the facts and
circumstances.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.11 PERMIT APPLICATION; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)     All applicants for a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities or any modification of such facility shall comply
with the requirements set forth in this section. The Town Zoning Board of
Adjustment (the “Board of Adjustment”) is the officially designated agency or
body of the town to whom applications for a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities must be made, and that is authorized to review,
analyze, evaluate and make decisions with respect to granting or not granting,
recertifying or not recertifying, or revoking special use permits for wireless
telecommunications facilities. The Town Council may at its discretion delegate
or designate other official agencies of the town to accept, review, analyze,
evaluate and make recommendations to the Board of Adjustment with respect to
the granting or not granting, recertifying or not recertifying or revoking
special use permits for wireless telecommunications facilities.
   (B)   An application for a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities shall be signed on behalf of the applicant by the
person preparing the same and with knowledge of the contents and
representations made therein and attesting to the truth and completeness of the
information. The landowner, if different than the applicant, shall also sign
the application. At the discretion of the town, any false or misleading
statement in the application may subject the applicant to denial of the
application without further consideration or opportunity for correction.
   (C)   Applications not meeting the requirements stated herein or which are
otherwise incomplete, may be rejected by the town. The town's Land Use
Administrator shall have the same discretion to determine whether special use
applications are incomplete under this section as in §
152.053 of this Code. The Land Use Administrator's determination that an
application is incomplete may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment, in the
same manner as in §
152.075 of this Code.
   (D)   The applicant shall include a statement in writing:
      (1)   That the applicant's proposed wireless telecommunications
facilities shall be maintained in a safe manner, and in compliance with all
conditions of the special use permit, without exception, unless specifically
granted relief by the town in writing, as well as all applicable and
permissible local codes, ordinances, and regulations, including any and all
applicable town, state and federal laws, rules and regulations;
      (2)   That the construction of the wireless telecommunications facilities
are legally permissible, including, but not limited to the fact that the
applicant is authorized to do business in the state.
   (E)   No wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed or
constructed until the application is reviewed and approved by the town, and the
special use permit has been issued.
   (F)   All applications for the construction or installation of new wireless
telecommunications facilities shall contain the information hereinafter set
forth. The application shall be signed by an authorized individual on behalf of
the applicant. Where a certification is called for, such certification shall
bear the signature and seal of a professional engineer licensed in the state.
The application shall include the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and phone number of the person preparing the
report;
      (2)   The name, address, and phone number of the property owner,
operator, and applicant, and to include the legal form of the applicant;
      (3)   The postal address and tax map parcel number of the property;
      (4)   The zoning district or designation in which the property is
situated;
      (5)   Size of the property stated both in square feet and lot line
dimensions, and a diagram showing the location of all lot lines;
      (6)   The location of the nearest residential structure;
      (7)   The location, size and height of all structures on the property
which is the subject of the application;
      (8)   The location, size and height of all proposed and existing antennae
and all appurtenant structures;
      (9)   The type, locations and dimensions of all proposed and existing
landscaping, and fencing;
      (10)   The number, type and design of the tower(s) and antenna(s)
proposed and the basis for the calculations of the tower's capacity to
accommodate multiple users;
      (11)   The make, model and manufacturer of the tower and antenna(s);
      (12)   A description of the proposed tower and antenna(s) and all related
fixtures, structures, appurtenances and apparatus, including height above pre-
existing grade, materials, color and lighting;
      (13)   The frequency, modulation and class of service of radio or other
transmitting equipment;
      (14)   The actual intended transmission and the maximum effective
radiated power of the antenna(s);
      (15)   Direction of maximum lobes and associated radiation of the antenna
(s);
      (16)   Certification that the NIER levels at the proposed site are within
the threshold levels adopted by the FCC;
      (17)   Certification that the proposed antenna(s) will not cause
interference with other telecommunications devices;
      (18)   A copy of the FCC license applicable for the intended use of the
wireless telecommunications facilities;
      (19)   Certification that a topographic and geomorphologic study and
analysis has been conducted, and that taking into account the subsurface and
substrata, and the proposed drainage plan, that the site is adequate to assure
the stability of the proposed wireless telecommunications facilities on the
proposed site.
      (20)   In the case of an eligible facilities request, a statement that
the applicant considers the request to be eligible as defined herein, with
specific references to the plans and specifications that tend to support the
statement.
   (G)   In the case of a new tower, the applicant shall be required to submit
a written report demonstrating its meaningful efforts to secure shared use of
existing tower(s) or the use of alternative buildings or other structures
within the town. Copies of written requests and responses for shared use shall
be provided to the town in the application, along with any letters of rejection
stating the reason for rejection.
   (H)   The applicant shall certify that the telecommunication facility,
foundation and attachments are designed and will be constructed to meet all
local, county, state and federal structural requirements for loads, including
wind and ice loads.
   (I)   The applicant shall certify that the wireless telecommunications
facilities will be effectively grounded and bonded so as to protect persons and
property and installed with appropriate surge protectors.
   (J)   An applicant may be required to submit an environmental assessment
analysis and a visual addendum. Based on the results of the analysis, including
the visual addendum, the town may require submission of a more detailed visual
analysis. The scope of the required environmental and visual assessment will be
reviewed at the pre-application meeting.
   (K)   The applicant shall furnish a visual impact assessment, which shall
include:
      (1)   A "Zone of Visibility Map" which shall be provided in order to
determine locations from which the tower may be seen;
      (2)   Pictorial representations of "before and after" views from key
viewpoints both inside and outside of the town as may be appropriate, including
but not limited to state highways and other major roads; state and local parks;
other public lands; historic districts; preserves and historic sites normally
open to the public; and from any other location where the site is visible to a
large number of visitors, travelers or residents. Guidance will be provided
concerning the appropriate key sites at a pre-application meeting;
      (3)   An assessment of the visual impact of the tower base, guy wires and
accessory buildings from abutting and adjacent properties and streets as
relates to the need or appropriateness of screening.
   (L)   The applicant shall demonstrate and provide in writing and/or by
drawing how it shall effectively screen from view the base and all related
facilities and structures of the proposed wireless telecommunications
facilities.
   (M)   Any and all representations made by the applicant to the town on the
record during the application process, whether written or verbal, shall be
deemed a part of the application and may be relied upon in good faith by the
town.
   (N)   All utilities at a wireless telecommunications facilities site shall
be installed underground and in compliance with all laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations of the town, including specifically, but not limited to, the
National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code where
appropriate.
   (O)   All wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a
demonstration that the facility be sited so as to be the least visually
intrusive reasonably possible and thereby have the least adverse visual effect
on the environment and its character, on existing vegetation, and on the
residences in the area of the wireless telecommunications facility.
   (P)   Both the wireless telecommunications facility and any and all
accessory or associated facilities shall maximize the use of building
materials, colors and textures designed to blend with the structure to which it
may be affixed and/or to harmonize with the natural surroundings, this shall
include the utilization of stealth or concealment technology as may required by
the town.
   (Q)   At a telecommunications site, an access road, turn-around space and
parking shall be provided to assure adequate emergency and service access.
Maximum use of existing roads, whether public or private, shall be made to the
extent practicable. Road construction shall at all times minimize ground
disturbance and the cutting of vegetation. Road grades shall closely follow
natural contours to assure minimal visual disturbance and reduce soil erosion.
   (R)    A person who holds a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities shall construct, operate, maintain, repair,
provide for removal of, modify or restore the permitted wireless
telecommunications facilities in strict compliance with all current applicable
technical, safety and safety-related codes adopted by the town, county, state,
or United States, including but not limited to the most recent editions of the
National Electrical Safety Code and the National Electrical Code, as well as
accepted and responsible workmanlike industry practices and recommended
practices of the National Association of Tower Erectors. The codes referred to
are codes that include, but are not limited to, construction, building,
electrical, fire, safety, health, and land use codes. In the event of a
conflict between or among any of the preceding the more stringent shall apply.
   (S)   A holder of a special use permit granted under this chapter shall
obtain, at its own expense, all permits and licenses required by applicable
law, rule, regulation or code, and must maintain the same, in full force and
effect, for as long as required by the town or other governmental entity or
agency having jurisdiction over the applicant.
   (T)   An applicant shall submit to the town the number of completed
applications determined to be needed at the pre-application meeting. Written
notification of the application shall be provided to the legislative body of
all adjacent municipalities and to the Town Administrator.
   (U)   The applicant shall examine the feasibility of designing a proposed
tower to accommodate future demand for at least five additional commercial
applications, for example, future collocations. The tower shall be structurally
designed to accommodate at least five additional antenna arrays equal to those
of the applicant, and located as close to the applicant's antenna as possible
without causing interference. This requirement may be waived, provided that the
applicant, in writing, demonstrates that the provisions of future shared usage
of the tower is not technologically feasible, is commercially impracticable or
creates an unnecessary and unreasonable burden, based upon:
      (1)   The foreseeable number of FCC licenses available for the area;
      (2)   The kind of wireless telecommunications facilities site and
structure proposed;
      (3)   The number of existing and potential licenses without wireless
telecommunications facilities spaces/sites;
      (4)   Available space on existing and approved towers.
   (V)   (1)   The owner of the proposed new tower, and his or her successors
in interest, shall negotiate in good faith for the shared use of the proposed
tower by other wireless service providers in the future, and shall:
         (a)   Respond within 60 days to a request for information from a
potential shared use applicant;
         (b)   Negotiate in good faith concerning future requests for shared
use of the new tower by other telecommunications providers;
         (c)   Allow shared use of the new tower if another telecommunications
provider agrees in writing to pay reasonable charges. The charges may include,
but are not limited to, a pro rata share of the cost of site selection,
planning, project administration, land costs, site design, construction and
maintenance financing, return on equity, less depreciation, and all of the
costs of adapting the tower or equipment to accommodate a shared user without
causing electromagnetic interference.
      (2)   Failure to abide by the conditions outlined above may be grounds
for revocation of the special use permit for the tower.
   (W)   There shall be a pre-application meeting. The purpose of the pre-
application meeting will be to address issues which will help to expedite the
review and permitting process. A pre-application meeting shall also include a
site visit if there has not been a prior site visit for the requested site.
   (X)   The holder of a special use permit shall notify the town of any
intended modification of a wireless telecommunication facility and shall apply
to the town to modify, relocate or rebuild a wireless telecommunications
facility.
   (Y)   In order to better inform the public, in the case of a new
telecommunication tower, the applicant shall, prior to the public hearing on
the application, hold a balloon test. The applicant shall arrange to fly, or
raise upon a temporary mast, a minimum of a three foot in diameter brightly
colored balloon at the maximum height of the proposed new tower. The dates,
(including a second date, in case of poor visibility on the initial date) times
and location of this balloon test shall be advertised by the applicant seven
and 14 days in advance of the first test date in a newspaper with a general
circulation in the town. The applicant shall inform the town, in writing, of
the dates and times of the test, at least 14 days in advance. The balloon shall
be flown for at least four consecutive hours sometime between 7:00 a.m. and 4:
00 p.m. on the dates chosen. The primary date shall be on a weekend, but in
case of poor weather on the initial date, the secondary date may be on a
weekday,
   (Z)    The applicant will provide a written copy of an analysis, completed
by a qualified individual or organization, to determine if the tower or
existing structure intended to support wireless facilities requires lighting
under Federal Aviation Administration Regulation Part 77. This requirement
shall be for any new tower or for an existing structure or building where the
application increases the height of the structure or building. If this analysis
determines that the FAA must be contacted, then all filings with the FAA, all
responses from the FAA and any related correspondence shall be provided in a
timely manner.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18; Am. Ord. passed 3-15-21)
§ 154.12 LOCATION.
   (A)   Applicants for wireless telecommunications facilities shall locate,
site and erect said wireless telecommunications facilities in accordance with
the following priorities, (1) being the highest priority and (5) being the
lowest priority:
      (1)   On existing towers or other structures without increasing the
height of the tower or structure;
      (2)   On town-owned properties or facilities;
      (3)   On properties in areas zoned for industrial use;
      (4)   On properties in areas zoned for commercial use;
      (5)   On properties in areas zoned for residential use.
   (B)   If the proposed site is not proposed for the highest priority listed
above, then a detailed explanation must be provided as to why a site of a
higher priority was not selected. The person seeking such an exception must
satisfactorily demonstrate the reason or reasons why such a permit should be
granted for the proposed site, and the hardship that would be incurred by the
applicant if the permit were not granted for the proposed site.
   (C)   An applicant may not by-pass sites of higher priority by stating the
site proposed is the only site leased or selected. An application shall address
collocation as an option. If such option is not proposed, the applicant must
explain to the reasonable satisfaction of the town why collocation is
commercially or otherwise impracticable. Agreements between providers limiting
or prohibiting collocation shall not be a valid basis for any claim of
commercial impracticability or hardship.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the above, the town may approve any site located
within an area in the above list of priorities, provided that the town finds
that the proposed site is in the best interest of the health, safety and
welfare of the town and its inhabitants and will not have a deleterious effect
on the nature and character of the community and neighborhood.
   (E)   The applicant shall submit a written report demonstrating the
applicant's review of the above locations in order of priority, demonstrating
the technological reason for the site selection. If appropriate, based on
selecting a site of lower priority, a detailed written explanation as to why
sites of a higher priority were not selected shall be included with the
application.
   (F)   Notwithstanding that a potential site may be situated in an area of
highest priority or highest available priority, the town may disapprove an
application for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Conflict with safety and safety-related codes and requirements;
      (2)   Conflict with the historic nature or character of a neighborhood or
historical district;
      (3)   The use or construction of wireless telecommunications facilities
which is contrary to an already stated purpose of a specific zoning or land use
designation;
      (4)   The placement and location of wireless telecommunications
facilities which would create an unacceptable risk, or the reasonable
probability of such, to residents, the public, employees and agents of the
town, or employees of the service provider or other service providers;
      (5)   Conflicts with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.13 SHARED USE.
   (A) Locating on existing towers or other structures without increasing the
height shall be preferred by the town, as opposed to the construction of a new
tower. The applicant shall submit a comprehensive report inventorying existing
towers and other suitable structures within the search ring of any proposed new
tower, unless the applicant can show that some other distance is more
reasonable and demonstrate conclusively why an existing tower or other suitable
structure cannot be used.
   (B)   An applicant intending to locate on an existing tower or other
suitable structure shall be required to document the intent of the existing
owner to permit its use by the applicant.
   (C)   Such shared use shall consist only of the minimum antenna array
technologically required to provide service primarily and essentially within
the town, to the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.14 ELIGIBLE FACILITIES REQUESTS.
   (A)   In the case of an application for an eligible facilities request, the
town's Land Use Administrator shall review the preliminary application and
determine whether the request is eligible. The Land Use Administrator may
require from the applicant such other information, pursuant to this chapter, as
is needed to make this determination; alternatively, if the Land Use
Administrator is given sufficient proof that the request is eligible, he or she
may relax such requirements of a completed application described in §
154.11 as he or she shall deem unnecessary, If the Land Use Administrator
determines that the application constitutes an eligible facilities request, he
or she shall certify such eligibility to the Town Council, and the Board shall
approve the special use permit, pursuant to 47 U.S.C. § 1455(a), and no hearing
shall be required. Provided further, the Town Council may delegate to the Land
Use Administrator the authority to approve eligible facilities requests on its
behalf without further process.
   (B)   If the Land Use Administrator determines, after reviewing the
application pursuant to division (A) of this section, that there is substantial
evidence that the application constitutes a substantial modification, then a
hearing shall be required pursuant to this chapter. At the hearing, the Land
Use Administrator shall first present the evidence of a substantial
modification, which the applicant or any other interested party may cross
examine. The applicant and any other interested party shall present evidence of
an eligible facilities request, which may also be cross examined.  The Board of
Adjustment shall make findings of fact as to the question, and shall decide
whether:
      (1)   The application is for an eligible facilities request, in which
case it shall approve the special use permit without further hearing; or
      (2)   That the application is for a substantial modification, in which
case it shall conduct the hearing pursuant to §§
154.22 and
154.23.
   (C)   The town shall issue a written decision approving an eligible
facilities request application within 45 days of such application being deemed
complete. For a collocation application that is not an eligible facilities
request, the town shall issue its written decision to approve or deny the
application within 45 days of the application being deemed complete.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18; Am. Ord. passed 3-15-21)
§ 154.15 HEIGHT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS TOWERS.
   (A)   The applicant shall submit documentation justifying the total height
of any tower, facility and/or antenna and the basis therefor. Such
documentation will be analyzed in the context of the justification of the
height needed to provide service primarily and essentially within the town, to
the extent practicable, unless good cause is shown.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A), the maximum permitted
height of a new tower shall be 140 feet, based on an ambient tree height of 80
feet and accommodating six co-located antenna arrays requiring six feet of
vertical space each.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A), no tower constructed
after the effective date of this chapter, including allowing for all
attachments, shall exceed that height which shall permit operation without
required artificial lighting of any kind in accordance with municipal, county,
state, and/or any federal statute, law, local law, town ordinance, code, rule
or regulation.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.16 APPEARANCE AND VISIBILITY.
   (A)   Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be artificially
lighted or marked, except as required by law.
   (B)   Towers shall be galvanized or, if deemed necessary, painted with a
rust-preventive paint of an appropriate color to harmonize with the
surroundings and shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter.
   (C)   If lighting is required, applicant shall provide a detailed plan for
sufficient lighting of as unobtrusive and inoffensive an effect as is
permissible under state and federal regulations, but in any event shall be
shielded from view from the ground as may be permitted by controlling law,
rules and regulations.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.17 SECURITY.
   All wireless telecommunications facilities and antennas shall be located,
fenced or otherwise secured in a manner that prevents unauthorized access.
Specifically:
   (A)   All antennas, towers and other supporting structures, including guy
wires, shall be made inaccessible to individuals and constructed or shielded in
such a manner that they cannot be climbed or collided with; and
   (B)   Transmitters and telecommunications control points shall be installed
such a manner that they are readily accessible only to persons authorized to
operate or service them.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.18 SIGNAGE.
   Wireless telecommunications facilities shall contain a sign no larger than
four square feet in order to provide adequate notification to persons in the
immediate area of the presence of an antenna that has transmission capabilities
and shall contain the name(s) of the owner(s) and operator(s) of the antenna(s)
as well as emergency phone number(s). The sign shall be on the equipment
shelter or cabinet of the applicant and be visible from the access point of the
site and must identify the equipment owner of the shelter or cabinet. The sign
shall not be lighted, unless lighting is required by applicable law, rule or
regulation. No other signage, including advertising, shall be permitted.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.19 LOT SIZE AND SETBACKS.
   All proposed towers and any other proposed wireless telecommunications
facility structures shall be set back from abutting parcels, recorded rights-
of-way and road and street lines by the greater of the following distances: A
distance equal to the height of the proposed tower or wireless
telecommunications facility structure plus 10% of the height of the tower or
structure, or the existing setback requirement of the underlying zoning
district, whichever is greater. Any accessory structure shall be located so as
to comply with the applicable minimum setback requirements for the property on
which it is situated.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.20 RETENTION OF EXPERT ASSISTANCE AND REIMBURSEMENT BY APPLICANT.
   (A)   The town may hire any consultant and/or expert necessary to assist the
town in reviewing and evaluating the application, including the construction
and modification of the site, once permitted, and any requests for
recertification.
   (B)   Fees paid to the consultant shall be derived from the application fees
set out in §
154.26 below, and shall be in an amount agreed upon by the town and the
consultant. The town may, at its sole expense, employ expert assistance for
consultations in excess of the fees paid by the applicant.
   (C)   Fees imposed upon applicants pursuant to this chapter may not be used:
      (1)   For travel time or expenses, meals, or overnight accommodations
incurred in the review of an application by a consultant or other third party;
or
      (2)   Reimbursements for a consultant or other third party based on a
contingent fee basis or a results-based arrangement.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.21 EXCEPTIONS FROM A SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   No person shall be permitted to site, place, build, construct, modify
or prepare any site for the placement or use of wireless telecommunications
facilities as of the effective date of this chapter without having first
obtained a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this section, no special use permit
shall be required for those non-commercial exceptions noted in the definition
of wireless telecommunications facilities.
   (B)   All wireless telecommunications facilities existing on or before the
effective date of this chapter shall be allowed to continue as they presently
exist, provided however, that any visible modification of an existing wireless
telecommunications facility must comply with this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.22 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Except as specified in division (B) of this section, all special use
applications under this chapter shall be reviewed and considered pursuant to
the same procedures set forth in §
152.053 of this Code.
   (B)   The procedures of §
152.053 of this Code will vary for special use applications under this section
as follows:
      (1)   Applicants will supply a preliminary development plan as required
by §
152.053(H); in addition to the contents specified in §
152.053(H)(3)(a), the preliminary development plan required under this chapter
shall show that the requirements of §§
154.17 through
154.19 have been or will be complied with.
      (2)   Instead of the findings of fact specified in §
152.053(M)(l)(a) through (e), the Board of Adjustment must make the findings of
fact set out in §
154.23 before approving a special use application required by this chapter.
      (3)   The provisions of §
152.053(O) shall not apply to applications required by this chapter.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18; Am. Ord. passed 3-15-21)
§ 154.23 FINDINGS OF FACT.
    No special use permit under this chapter shall be approved by the Board of
Adjustment unless each of the following findings is made.
   (A)   The use or development is located, designed, and proposed to be
operated so as to maintain or promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
   (B)   The special use application and supporting documentation attached
thereto meet the requirements of the chapter, as supported by the
recommendation of any consultant or expert retained by the town in accordance
with §
154.20.
   (C)   The use or development complies with all required regulations and
standards of this chapter or with relief therefrom, if any, granted pursuant to
§
154.40, and with all other applicable regulations.
   (D)   The use or development is located, designed, and proposed to be
operated so as to be compatible with the particular neighborhood in which it is
to be located.
   (E)   The use or development conforms with the general plans for the
physical development of the town as embodied in the Unified Development
Ordinance, the Principles of Growth, the Thoroughfare Plan, and any other duly
adopted plans of the town.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18; Am. Ord. passed 3-15-21)
§ 154.24 RECERTIFICATION OF A SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Between 12 months and six months prior to the five-year anniversary
date after the effective date of the special use permit and all subsequent five
year anniversaries of the effective date of the original special use permit for
wireless telecommunications facilities, the holder of a special use permit for
such wireless telecommunication facilities shall submit a signed written
request to the town for recertification. In the written request for
recertification, the holder of such special use permit shall note the
following:
      (1)   The name of the holder of the special use permit for the wireless
telecommunications facilities;
      (2)   If applicable, the number or title of the special use permit;
      (3)   The date of the original granting of the special use permit;
      (4)   Whether the wireless telecommunications facilities have been moved,
relocated, rebuilt, or otherwise visibly modified since the issuance of the
special use permit and if so, in what manner;
      (5)   If the wireless telecommunications facilities have been moved, re-
located, rebuilt, or otherwise visibly modified, then whether the town approved
such action, and under what terms and conditions, and whether those terms and
conditions were complied with;
      (6)   That the wireless telecommunications facilities are in compliance
with the special use permit and compliance with all applicable codes, laws,
rules and regulations;
      (7)   The date of the last inspection of the tower or wireless
telecommunications facilities;
      (8)   Recertification that the tower and attachments both are designed
and constructed and continue to meet all local, town, state and federal
structural requirements for loads, including wind and ice loads. Such
recertification shall be by a professional engineer licensed in the state, the
cost of which shall be borne by the applicant.
   (B)   If, after such review, the town determines that the permitted wireless
telecommunications facilities are in compliance with the special use permit and
all applicable statutes, laws, local laws, ordinances, codes, rules and
regulations, then the town may issue a recertification of the special use
permit for the wireless telecommunications facilities, which may include any
new provisions or conditions that are mutually agreed upon, or that are
required by applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, codes, rules or regulations.
If, after such review it is determined that the permitted wireless
telecommunications facilities are not in compliance with the special use permit
and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, codes, rules and regulations,
then the town may refuse to issue a recertification special use permit for the
wireless telecommunications facilities, and in such event, such wireless
telecommunications facilities shall not be used after the date that the
applicant receives written notice of the decision by the town until such time
as the facility is brought into compliance. Any decision requiring the
cessation of use of the facility or imposing a penalty shall be in writing and
supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record and shall be
promptly provided to the owner of the facility.
   (C) If the applicant has submitted all of the information requested and
required by this chapter, and if the review is not completed, as noted in
division (B), prior to the five-year anniversary date of the special use
permit, or subsequent five-year anniversaries, then the applicant for the
permitted wireless telecommunications facilities shall receive an extension of
the special use permit for up to six months, in order for the completion of the
review.
   (D)   If the holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities does not submit a request for recertification of such special use
permit within the time frame noted in division (A), then such special use
permit and any authorizations granted thereunder shall cease to exist on the
date of the fifth anniversary of the original granting of the special use
permit, or subsequent five-year anniversaries, unless the holder of the special
use permit adequately demonstrates that extenuating circumstances prevented a
timely recertification request. If the town agrees that there were legitimately
extenuating circumstances, then the holder of the special use permit may submit
a late recertification request or application for a new special use permit.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.25 EXTENT AND PARAMETERS OF SPECIAL USE PERMIT.
   The extent and parameters of a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities shall be as follows:
   (A)   Such special use permit shall be non-exclusive;
   (B)   Such special use permit shall not be assigned, transferred or conveyed
without the express prior written notification to the town;
   (C)   Such special use permit may, following a hearing upon due prior notice
to the applicant, be revoked, canceled, or terminated for a violation of the
conditions and provisions of the special use permit, or for a material
violation of this chapter after prior written notice to the holder of the
special use permit.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.26 APPLICATION FEE.
   (A)   At the time that a person submits an application for a special use
permit for a new tower or a substantial modification of an existing facility,
such person shall pay a non-refundable application fee of $5,000 to the town.
If the application is for a special use permit for an eligible facilities
request, the nonrefundable fee shall be $1,000. Fees for expert consultations,
if any are desired by the town, shall be derived from the application fee.
   (B)   No application fee is required in order to recertify a special use
permit for wireless telecommunications facilities, unless there has been a
visible modification of the wireless telecommunications facility since the date
of the issuance of the existing special use permit for which the conditions of
the special use permit have not previously been modified. In the case of any
modification, the fees provided in division (A) shall apply.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.27 PERFORMANCE SECURITY.
   The applicant and the owner of record of any proposed wireless
telecommunications facilities property site shall, at its cost and expense, be
jointly required to execute and file with the town a bond, or other form of
security acceptable to the town as to type of security and the form and manner
of execution, in an amount of at least $75,000 and with such sureties as are
deemed sufficient by the town to assure the faithful performance of the terms
and conditions of this chapter and conditions of any special use permit issued
pursuant to this chapter. For collocations that do not increase the height of
the structure attached to, the bond or other security shall be $25,000. The
full amount of the bond or security shall remain in full force and effect
throughout the term of the special use permit and/or until any necessary site
restoration is completed to restore the site to a condition comparable to that
which existed prior to the issuance of the original special use permit.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.28 RESERVATION OF AUTHORITY TO INSPECT WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS
FACILITIES.
   In order to verify that the holder of a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities and any and all lessees, renters, and/or
licensees of wireless telecommunications facilities, place and construct such
facilities, including towers and antennas, in accordance with all applicable
technical, safety, fire, building, and zoning codes, laws, ordinances and
regulations and other applicable requirements, the town may inspect all facets
of said permit holder's, renter's, lessee's or licensee's placement,
construction, modification and maintenance of such facilities, including, but
not limited to, towers, antennas and buildings or other structures constructed
or located on the permitted site.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.29 ANNUAL NIER CERTIFICATION.
   The holder of the special use permit shall, annually, certify to the town
that NIER levels at the site are within the threshold levels adopted by the
FCC.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.30 LIABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   A holder of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications
facilities shall secure and at all times maintain public liability insurance
for personal injuries, death and property damage, and umbrella insurance
coverage, for the duration of the special use permit in amounts as set forth
below:
      (1)   Commercial general liability covering personal injuries, death and
property damage: $1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000 aggregate;
      (2)   Automobile coverage: $1,000,000 per occurrence/$2,000,000
aggregate;
      (3)   Workers compensation and disability: statutory amounts.
   (B)   The commercial general liability insurance policy shall specifically
include the town and its officers, boards, employees, committee members,
attorneys, agents and consultants as additional named insureds.
   (C)   The insurance policies shall be issued by an agent or representative
of an insurance company licensed to do business in the state and with a Best's
rating of at least "A."
   (D)   The insurance policies shall contain an endorsement obligating the
insurance company to furnish the town with at least 30 days prior written
notice in advance of the cancellation of the insurance.
   (E)   Renewal or replacement policies or certificates shall be delivered to
the town at least 15 days before the expiration of the insurance that such
policies are to renew or replace.
   (F)   Before construction of a permitted wireless telecommunications
facilities is initiated, but in no case later than 15 days after the grant of
the special use permit, the holder of the special use permit shall deliver to
the town a copy of each of the policies or certificates representing the
insurance in the required amounts.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.31 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   Any application for wireless telecommunication facilities that is
proposed for town property, pursuant to this chapter, shall contain a provision
with respect to indemnification. Such provision shall require the applicant, to
the extent permitted by the law, to at all times defend, indemnify, protect,
save, hold harmless, and exempt the town, and its officers, boards, employees,
committee members, attorneys, agents, and consultants from any and all
penalties, damages, costs, or charges arising out of any and all claims, suits,
demands, causes of action, or award of damages, whether compensatory or
punitive, or expenses arising therefrom, either at law or in equity, which
might arise out of, or are caused by, the placement, construction, erection,
modification, location, products performance, use, operation, maintenance,
repair, installation, replacement, removal, or restoration of said facility,
excepting, however, any portion of such claims, suits, demands, causes of
action or award of damages as may be attributable to the negligent or
intentional acts or omissions of the town, or its servants or agents. With
respect to the penalties, damages or charges referenced herein, reasonable
attorneys' fees, consultants' fees, and expert witness fees are included in
those costs that are recoverable by the town.
   (B)    Notwithstanding the requirements noted in division (A), an
indemnification provision will not be required in those instances where the
town itself applies for and secures a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.32 DEFAULT AND/OR REVOCATION.
   (A)   If wireless telecommunications facilities are repaired, rebuilt,
placed, moved, relocated, modified or maintained in a way that is inconsistent
or not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or of the special use
permit, then the town shall notify the holder of the special use permit in
writing of such violation. Such notice shall specify the nature of the
violation or non-compliance and that the violations must be corrected within
seven days of the date of the postmark of the notice, or of the date of
personal service of the notice, whichever is earlier. Notwithstanding anything
to the contrary in this division or any other section of this chapter, if the
violation causes, creates or presents an imminent danger or threat to the
health or safety of lives or property, the town may, at its sole discretion,
order the violation remedied within 24 hours.
   (B)   If within the period set forth in division (A) above the wireless
telecommunications facilities are not brought into compliance with the
provisions of this chapter, or of the special use permit, or substantial steps
are not taken in order to bring the affected wireless telecommunications
facilities into compliance, then the town may revoke such special use permit
for wireless telecommunications facilities, and shall notify the holder of the
special use permit within 48 hours of such action.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.33 REMOVAL OF WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Under the following circumstances, the town may determine that the
health, safety, and welfare interests of the town warrant and require the
removal of wireless telecommunications facilities.
      (1)    Wireless telecommunications facilities with a permit that have
been abandoned (not used as wireless telecommunications facilities) for a
period exceeding 90 consecutive days or a total of 180 days in any 365-day
period, except for periods caused by force majeure or acts of God, in which
case, repair or removal shall commence within 90 days;
      (2)   Permitted wireless telecommunications facilities fall into such a
state of disrepair that it creates a health or safety hazard;
      (3)   Wireless telecommunications facilities have been located,
constructed, or modified without first obtaining, or in a manner not authorized
by, the required special use permit, or any other necessary authorization.
   (B)   If the town makes such a determination as noted in division (A), then
the town shall notify the holder of the special use permit for the wireless
telecommunications facilities within 48 hours that said wireless
telecommunications facilities are to be removed, the town may approve an
interim temporary use agreement/permit, such as to enable the sale of the
wireless telecommunications facilities.
   (C)   The holder of the special use permit, or its successors or assigns,
shall dismantle and remove such wireless telecommunications facilities, and all
associated structures and facilities, from the site and restore the site to as
close to its original condition as is possible, such restoration being limited
only by physical or commercial impracticability, within 90 days of receipt of
written notice from the town. However, if the owner of the property upon which
the wireless telecommunications facilities are located wishes to retain any
access roadway to the wireless telecommunications facilities, the owner may do
so with the approval of the town.
   (D)   If wireless telecommunications facilities are not removed or
substantial progress has not been made to remove the wireless
telecommunications facilities within 90 days after the permit holder has
received notice, then the town may order officials or representatives of the
town to remove the wireless telecommunications facilities at the sole expense
of the owner or special use permit holder.
   (E)   If the town removes, or causes to be removed, wireless
telecommunications facilities, and the owner of the wireless telecommunications
facilities does not claim and remove it from the site to a lawful location
within ten days, then the town may take steps to declare the wireless
telecommunications facilities abandoned, and sell them and their components.
   (F)   Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, the town may
approve a temporary use permit/agreement for the wireless telecommunications
facilities, for no more than 90 days, during which time a suitable plan for
removal, conversion, or re-location of the affected wireless telecommunications
facilities shall be developed by the holder of the special use permit, subject
to the approval of the town, and an agreement to such plan shall be executed by
the holder of the special use permit and the town. If such a plan is not
developed, approved and executed within the 90- day time period, then the town
may take possession of and dispose of the affected wireless telecommunications
facilities in the manner provided in this section.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES AND BROADBAND SERVICE TOWERS
§ 154.40 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purposes of this subchapter are to:
      (1)   Minimize the impacts of small wireless facilities and broadband
service towers on surrounding areas by establishing standards for location,
structural integrity, and compatibility;
      (2)   Encourage the location of small wireless facilities and broadband
service towers on existing structures, thereby minimizing new visual,
aesthetic, and public safety impacts, and to reduce the need for additional
antenna-supporting structures;
      (3)   Encourage coordination between suppliers of small wireless
facilities and broadband service towers in the town and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction;
      (4)   Accommodate the growing demand for wireless and broadband internet
services and the resulting need for small wireless facilities and broadband
service towers;
      (5)   Regulate in accordance with all applicable federal and state laws;
      (6)   Establish review procedures that ensure that applications for small
wireless facilities and broadband service towers are reviewed and acted upon
with a reasonable period of time or any specific period of time required by
law;
      (7)   Protect the unique aesthetics of the town while allowing its
citizens and businesses to access the benefits of wireless communications and
broadband internet services; and
      (8)   Encourage the use of existing buildings and structures as locations
for small wireless facilities infrastructure and broadband service towers as a
method to minimize the aesthetic impact of related infrastructure.
   (B)   It is not the purpose or intent of this subchapter to prohibit or have
the effect of prohibiting wireless communications or broadband internet
services; unreasonably discriminating among providers of functionally
equivalent wireless communications services; regulate the placement,
construction, or modification of wireless communications or broadband internet
facilities on the basis of environmental effects of radio frequency emissions
where it is demonstrated that the small wireless facility or broadband service
tower does or will comply with applicable FCC regulations; or to prohibit or
effectively prohibit collocations or modifications that the town must approve
under state or federal law. The provisions of this subchapter are in addition
to, and do not replace, any obligations an applicant may have under any
franchises, licenses, encroachments, or other permits issued by the town.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18; Am. Ord. 2021-008, passed 3-7-22)
§ 154.41 SITING OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES AND BROADBAND SERVICE TOWERS.
   (A)   In order the protect the aesthetics of the town, to minimize new
visual and public safety impacts, and to reduce the need for additional
antenna-supporting structures, the town prefers that small wireless facilities
be located outside the public right-of-way, collocated on existing utility
poles or wireless support structures, concealed, and have accessory equipment
mounted on the utility pole or wireless support structure. These preferences
are intended as guidance for development of an application for small wireless
facilities.
   (B)   Wireless broadband service towers shall be permitted in the following
zoning districts: C-2 Secondary Commercial, C-3 Highway Commercial, and I-
1 Industrial. In addition to any other applicable requirements of the zoning
classification in which the wireless broadband service tower will be located,
the following requirements shall apply:
      (1)   Public safety. In order to protect public safety:
         (a)   Wireless broadband service towers shall not cause signal or
frequency interference with public safety facilities or traffic control devices
and shall not physically interfere with other attachments that may be located
on the existing pole or structure.
         (b)   A structural engineering report prepared by an engineer licensed
by the state, certifying that the host structure is structurally and
mechanically capable of supporting the proposed wireless broadband service
towers, shall be supplied by the applicant.
         (c)   No portion of a wireless broadband service tower or associated
equipment may be placed in the public right-of-way.
         (d)   An abandoned wireless broadband service tower shall be removed
within 180 days of abandonment.
      (2)   Objective design standards.
         (a)   No advertising signs or logos are permitted on wireless
broadband service towers or facilities.
         (b)   Wireless broadband service towers shall be blended with the
natural surroundings as much as possible. Colors and materials shall be used
that are compatible with the surrounding area, except when otherwise required
by applicable federal or state regulations. Wireless broadband service towers
shall be located, designed, and/or screened to blend in with the existing
natural or built surroundings to deduce the visual impacts as much as possible,
and to be compatible with neighboring land uses and the character of the
community.
      (3)   Stealth and concealment. To the extent technically feasible, all
wireless broadband service towers shall be stealth facilities. Antenna and
accessory equipment must be shrouded or otherwise concealed. The Town Planner
may relax this requirement if, in the Town Planner's discretion, stealth and
concealment are not practicable.
      (4)   Screening, landscaping, and spacing requirements for ground
equipment. Ground equipment shall be screened, to the extent possible, with
evergreen plantings or other acceptable alternatives approved by the Land Use
Administrator.
      (5)   Historic preservation. Wireless broadband service towers located in
designated historic districts or on property designated as a landmark pursuant
to applicable law shall be required to obtain a certificate of appropriateness,
if such certificate is required by the UDO or other applicable regulation.
      (6)   Applicable codes. Wireless broadband service towers must meet all
applicable codes.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18; Am. Ord. 2021-008, passed 3-7-22)
§ 154.42 APPLICABILITY.
   The standards established in this subchapter shall apply only to qualifying
small wireless facilities, qualifying utility poles, and qualifying town
utility poles, and to broadband service towers. Nothing in this chapter shall
be interpreted to excuse compliance with, or to be in lieu of, any other
requirement of state or local law, except as specifically provided herein.
Without limitation, the provisions of this subchapter do not permit placement
of small wireless facilities or broadband service towers on privately owned
utility poles or wireless support structures, or on private property, without
the consent of the property owner, including all owners of interests in such
property.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18; Am. Ord. 2021-008, passed 3-7-22)
§ 154.43 EXEMPTIONS.
   Unless expressly set forth herein, the following categories of small
wireless facilities are exempt from the requirements of this subchapter,
provided that they meet the location and design requirements set forth below:
   (A)   Any telecommunications facility that is owned and operated by an
amateur radio operator licensed by the FCC and that measures less than 65 feet
in height when measured from ground level.
   (B)   Over-the-air reception devices pursuant to 47 CFR § 1.4000, provided
that it satisfies applicable requirements of the UDO.
   (C)   Eligible facilities requests.
   (D)   Routine maintenance of small wireless facilities and broadband service
towers; the replacement of small wireless facilities or broadband service
towers with small wireless facilities or broadband service towers that are the
same size or smaller; or installation, placement, maintenance, or replacement
of micro wireless facilities that are suspended on cables strung between
existing utility poles or city utility poles in compliance with all applicable
laws or regulations by or for a communications services provider authorized to
occupy town rights-of-way and which is remitting taxes pursuant to G.S. § 105-
164.4(a), (4c) or (a)(6).
   (E)   A temporary small wireless facility, upon the declaration of a state
of emergency by federal, state, or local government, and a written
determination of public necessity by the town; provided that such facility must
comply with applicable federal and state requirements, and must be removed at
the conclusion of the emergency.
   (F)   Public safety facilities or installations required for public safety
on public or private property, including transmitters, repeaters, and remote
cameras, provided that such facilities are designed to match the supporting
structure.
   (G)   A small wireless facility located in an interior structure or upon the
site of any stadium or athletic facility, provided that the small wireless
facility complies with all applicable codes.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18; Am. Ord. 2021-008, passed 3-7-22)
§ 154.44 COLLOCATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES.
   (A)   Collocation of small wireless facilities on land that is zoned for
single-family development or that is used for single-family residential
purposes, and any small wireless facility that extends more than ten feet above
the utility pole, town utility pole, or wireless support structure on which it
is collocated, are subject to applicable requirements of the UDO. Nevertheless,
replacement of an existing streetlight for which the town is financially
responsible with a streetlight capable of including a collocated, concealed
small wireless facility is permitted on land zoned for single-family
development or used for single-family purposes, pursuant to §
154.45.
   (B)   Collocation of qualifying small wireless facilities in town right-of-
way or outside of town right-of-way on property that is in a non-residential
zoning district and that is not used for single-family residential purposes is
subject to the following requirements:
      (1)    Application. Applicants must complete an application as specified
in form and content by the town.
      (2)   Height. Each new small wireless facility shall not extend more than
ten feet above the utility pole, town utility pole, or wireless support
structure on which it is collocated.
      (3)   Public safety. In order to protect public safety:
         (a)   Small wireless facilities shall not cause signal or frequency
interference with public safety facilities or traffic control devices and shall
not physically interfere with other attachments that may be located on the
existing pole or structure;
          (b)   A structural engineering report prepared by an engineer
licensed by the State of North Carolina shall be supplied by the applicant,
certifying that the host structure is structurally and mechanically capable of
supporting the proposed additional antenna or configuration of antennae and
other equipment, extensions, and appurtenances associated with the
installation;
         (c)   A traffic and pedestrian management plan must be submitted for
any installation requiring any portion of such installation to be located
within the public right-of-way.
         (d)   No portion of a small wireless facility may be placed in the
public right-of-way:
            1.   In a manner that obstructs pedestrians or vehicular or bicycle
access, obstructs sight lines or visibility for traffic, traffic signage or
signals, or interferes with access by persons with disabilities; and an
applicant may be required to place equipment in vaults in order to avoid
obstructions or interference; or
            2.   That involves placement of pole-mounted equipment (other than
cabling), the lowest point of which is lower than eight feet above ground
level.
         (e)   An abandoned small wireless facility shall be removed within 180
days of abandonment.
      (4)   Objective design standards.
         (a)   No advertising signs or logos are permitted on small wireless
facilities.
         (b)   Small wireless facilities shall be blended with the natural
surroundings as much as possible. Colors and materials shall be used that are
compatible with the surrounding area, except when otherwise required by
applicable federal or state regulations. Small wireless facilities shall be
located, designed, and/or screened to blend in with the existing natural or
built surroundings to deduce the visual impacts as much as possible, and to be
compatible with neighboring land uses and the character of the community.
      (5)   Stealth and concealment. All small wireless facilities shall be
stealth facilities. Antenna and accessory equipment must be shrouded or
otherwise concealed.
      (6)   Screening, landscaping, and spacing requirements for ground
equipment. Ground equipment shall be screened, to the extent possible, with
evergreen plantings or other acceptable alternatives approved by the Land Use
Administrator.
      (7)   Historic preservation. Small wireless facilities located in
designated historic districts or on property designated as a landmark pursuant
to applicable law shall be required to obtain a certificate of appropriateness,
if such certificate is required by the UDO or other applicable regulation.
      (8)   Applicable codes. Small wireless facilities must meet all
applicable codes.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18; Am. Ord. 2021-008, passed 3-7-22)
§ 154.45 USE OF UTILITY POLES AND TOWN UTILITY POLES.
   The placement of new utility poles is prohibited by the town's
undergrounding requirements in the UDO unless permitted by applicable sections.
Modification or replacement of qualifying utility poles and qualifying town
utility poles existing as of April 2, 2018 is not prohibited; however, the
maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of qualifying utility
poles and qualifying town utility poles associated with small wireless
facilities are subject to the following requirements.
   (A)   Application. Applicants must complete an application as specified in
form and content by the town.
   (B)   Height. Each modified or replacement utility pole or city utility pole
shall not exceed:
      (1)   Forty feet above ground level on property zoned for or used as a
single-family residential property, or in the right-of-way adjacent to such
property where existing utilities are installed underground, unless a variance
is granted pursuant to §
152.076 of the UDO; or
      (2)   Fifty feet above ground level on all other property. Each new small
wireless facility shall not extend more than ten feet above the associated
utility pole, town utility pole, or wireless support structure on which it is
collocated.
   (C)   Small wireless facilities. All requirements set forth in this
subchapter and applicable to small wireless facilities shall apply to such
facilities located on a utility pole, town utility pole, or wireless support
structure.
   (D)   Public safety. In order to protect public safety:
      (1)   No replacement utility poles or town utility poles associated with
a small wireless facility are permitted in the clear zone as defined in the
town Standard Specifications and Details Manual unless such replacement pole is
breakaway rated.
      (2)   No portion of a utility pole or town utility pole associated with a
small wireless facility may be placed in the public right-of-way:
         (a)   In a manner that obstructs pedestrians or vehicular or bicycle
access, obstructs sight lines or visibility for traffic, traffic signage or
signals, or interferes with access by persons with disabilities; and an
applicant may be required to place equipment in vaults in order to avoid
obstructions or interference; or
         (b)   That involves placement of pole-mounted equipment (other than
cabling), the lowest point of which is lower than eight feet above ground
level.
   (E)   Objective design standards. Utility poles or town utility poles
associated with a small wireless facility shall be blended with the natural
surroundings as much as possible. Colors and materials shall be used that are
compatible with the surrounding area, except when otherwise required by
applicable federal or state regulations. Utility poles or town utility poles
associated with a small wireless facility shall be located, designed, and/or
screened to blend in with the existing natural or built surroundings to reduce
visual impacts as much as possible, and to be compatible with neighboring land
uses and the character of the community.
   (F)   Stealth and concealment. All antenna and accessory equipment must be
shrouded or otherwise concealed.
   (G)   Historic preservation. Small wireless facilities located in designated
historic districts or on property designated as a landmark pursuant to
applicable law shall be required to obtain a certificate of appropriateness, if
such certificate is required by the UDO or other applicable regulation.
   (H)   Applicable codes. Utility poles and town utility poles associated with
a small wireless facility must meet applicable codes.
   (I)   Standard conditions.
      (1)   Applicant must obtain all other required permits, authorizations,
approvals, agreements, and declarations that may be required for installation,
modification, and/or operation of the proposed facility under federal, state,
or local law, rules, or regulations, including but not limited to encroachment
agreements and FCC approvals. An approval issued under this subsection is not
in lieu of any other permit required under the UDO or Town Code of Ordinances,
nor is it a franchise, license, or other authorization to occupy the public
right-of-way, or a license, lease, or agreement authorizing occupancy of any
public or private property. It does not create a vested right in occupying any
particular location, and an applicant may be required to move and remove
facilities at its expense consistent with other provisions of applicable law.
An approval issued in error, based on incomplete or false information submitted
by an applicant or that conflicts with the provisions of the UDO, is not valid.
No person may maintain a small wireless facility in place unless required state
or federal authorization remain in force.
      (2)   All small wireless facilities and related equipment, including but
not limited to fences, cabinets, poles, and landscaping, shall be maintained in
good working condition over the life of that use. This shall include keeping
the structures maintained to the visual standards established at the time of
approval. The small wireless facility shall remain free from trash, debris,
litter, graffiti, and other forms of vandalism. Any damage shall be repaired as
soon as practicable, and in no instance more than 30 calendar days from the
date of notification by the town. In public rights-of-way, damaged or
deteriorated components must be corrected within five business days of
notification.
      (3)   The property owner or applicant shall submit a certification letter
from a North Carolina certified land surveyor or licensed engineer which
verifies that structure height complies with the approved development plan.
      (4)   The applicant or owner shall maintain onsite at the facility
contact information for all parties responsible for maintenance of the
facility.
      (5)   Small wireless facilities, whether operating alone or in
conjunction with other facilities, shall not generate radio frequency emissions
in excess of the standards established by the FCC.
      (6)   After written notice to the applicant and/or owner, the town may
require the relocation, at the applicant/owner's expense, of any small wireless
facility, and the associated utility pole, town utility pole, or wireless
support structure on which it is collocated, located in the public right-of-
way, as necessary for maintenance or reconfiguration of the right-of-way or for
other public projects, or take any other action or combination of actions
necessary to protect the health and welfare of the town.
      (7)   Collocation or modification of small wireless facilities on an
existing nonconforming wireless support structure or base station shall not be
construed as an expansion, enlargement, or increase in intensity of a non-
conforming structure and/or use, provided that the collocation or modification
constitute an eligible facilities request.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 154.50 RELIEF.
   Any applicant desiring relief, waiver or exemption from any aspect or
requirement of this chapter may request such at the pre-application meeting,
provided that the relief or exemption is contained in the original application
for either a special use permit, or in the case of an existing or previously
granted special use permit a request for modification of its tower and/or
facilities. Such relief may be temporary or permanent, partial or complete.
However, the burden of proving the need for the requested relief, waiver or
exemption is solely on the applicant to prove. The applicant shall bear all
costs of the town in considering the request and the relief, waiver or
exemption. No such relief or exemption shall be approved unless the applicant
demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that, if granted the relief,
waiver or exemption will have no significant affect on the health, safety and
welfare of the town, its residents and other service providers.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.51 PERIODIC REGULATORY REVIEW.
   (A)   The town may at any time conduct a review and examination of this
entire chapter.
   (B)   If after such a periodic review and examination of this chapter, the
town determines that one or more provisions of this chapter should be amended,
repealed, revised, clarified, or deleted, then the town may take whatever
measures are necessary in accordance with applicable law in order to accomplish
the same. It is noted that where warranted, and in the best interests of the
town, the town may repeal this entire chapter at any time.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of divisions (A) and (B), the town may
at any time, and in any manner (to the extent permitted by federal, state, or
local law), amend, add, repeal, and/or delete one or more provisions of this
chapter.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.52 ADHERENCE TO STATE AND/OR FEDERAL RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   To the extent that the holder of a special use permit for wireless
telecommunications facilities has not received relief, or is otherwise exempt,
from appropriate state and/or federal agency rules or regulations, then the
holder of such a special use permit shall adhere to, and comply with, all
applicable rules, regulations, standards, and provisions of any state or
federal agency, including, but not limited to, the FAA and the FCC.
Specifically included in this requirement are any rules and regulations
regarding height, lighting, security, electrical and RF emission standards.
   (B)   To the extent that applicable rules, regulations, standards, and
provisions of any state or federal agency, including but not limited to, the
FAA and the FCC, and specifically including any rules and regulations regarding
height, lighting, and security are changed and/or are modified during the
duration of a special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities,
then the holder of such a special use permit shall conform the permitted
wireless telecommunications facilities to the applicable changed and/or
modified rule, regulation, standard, or provision within a maximum of 24 months
of the effective date of the applicable changed and/or modified rule,
regulation, standard, or provision, or sooner as may be required by the issuing
entity.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
§ 154.53 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAW.
    This chapter shall be administered in accordance with applicable law,
including but not limited to the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, the
Federal Communications Act (47 U.S.C. § 332) as amended, section 6409 of the
Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012 (47 U.S.C. § 1455(a)), in
accordance with rules promulgated by the Federal Communications Commission, and
generally with G.S. Ch. 160D, Art. 9, Part 3. If any portion of this chapter
currently is in conflict with existing law, or due to amendment comes into
conflict with existing law, it shall be interpreted and enforced so as to
conform with such federal or state law as necessary.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18; Am. Ord. passed 3-15-21)
§ 154.99 PENALTY.
   (A) In the event of a violation of this chapter or any special use permit
issued pursuant to this chapter, the town may impose and collect, and the
holder of the special use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities
shall pay to the town, fines or penalties as set forth below.
   (B)   A violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be an offense,
punishable by a fine not exceeding $350 per day per occurrence or imprisonment
for a period not to exceed six months, or both for conviction of a first
offense; for conviction of a second offense both of which were committed within
a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $350 nor more than
$700 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both; and, upon
conviction for a third or subsequent offense all of which were committed within
a period of five years, punishable by a fine not less than $700 nor more than
$1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or both. However,
for the purpose of conferring jurisdiction upon courts and judicial officers
generally, violations of this article or of such ordinance or regulation shall
be deemed misdemeanors and for such purpose only all provisions of law relating
to misdemeanors shall apply to such violations. Each week's continued violation
shall constitute a separate additional violation.
   (C)   Notwithstanding anything in this chapter, the holder of the special
use permit for wireless telecommunications facilities may not use the payment
of fines, liquidated damages or other penalties, to evade or avoid compliance
with this chapter or any section of this chapter. An attempt to do so shall
subject the holder of the special use permit to termination and revocation of
the special use permit. The town may also seek injunctive relief to prevent the
continued violation of this chapter, without limiting other remedies available
to the town.
(Ord. 2018-002, passed 4-2-18)
CHAPTER 155: SIGN REGULATIONS
Section
   
155.01   Purpose and scope
   
155.02   Definitions
   
155.03   Area of sign defined
   
155.04   Method of attachment defined
   
155.05   Height of free-standing, detached signs defined
   
155.06   Value of signs defined
   
155.07   Permits required
   
155.08   Signs exempt from regulation
   
155.09   Signs exempt from permit requirements
   
155.10   Signs prohibited
   
155.11   On-premises signs
   
155.12   Off-premises signs
   
155.13   Sign maintenance
   
155.14   Non-commercial messages
   
155.15   Permits, fees, non-conforming signs, and enforcement
   
155.16   Special events banners
§ 155.01 PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   Purpose of sign regulations. The purpose of this chapter is to provide
sign standards and restrictions which allow for the legitimate needs for
identification of residential, office, commercial, industrial and other
activities while at the same time promoting signs which do not unduly detract
from the overall aesthetics of the community; which reduce intrusions and
protect property values which provide for improved public safety by minimizing
undue distraction of the motoring public; which provide standards for the
erection and maintenance of signs; which provide for the protection and
enhancement of the tourist industry by promoting a more harmonious and pleasing
community image; which provide equitability for the nature and scale of the
activities to be identified; and which generally enhance and strengthen the
economic stability of the Town of Franklin.
   (B)   Scope. the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the erection and
maintenance of all signs and sign structures within the jurisdiction of the
town and its adopted extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) and it shall be
unlawful following the effective date of this chapter to erect, maintain or
alter any sign or sign structure except in conformance with the provisions of
th is chapter and application sections of the Unified Development Ordinance
(UDO).
(Ord. passed 3-1-10)
§ 155.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED SIGN. A sign erected in conjunction with a particular use, which
use has been discontinued for a period of 180 days or more, or a temporary sign
for an event which has occurred.
   BANNER. Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is mounted
to a pole or a building by a frame or ties at one or more edges, not exceeding
36 square feet. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag
of any institution or business shall not be considered banners.
   BANNER, SPECIAL EVENTS. A sign of lightweight, windproof material that is
mounted to poles or buildings by ties or other means on both sides of a street
within the town such that the sign crosses over the said street, not exceeding
240 square feet in area.
   CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign on which message copy is changed manually or
electronically in the field, through the utilization of attachable letters,
numbers, symbols and other similar characters or changeable pictorial panels.
Time and temperature signs are not included in this definition.
   COMMERCIAL MESSAGE. Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that,
directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business,
product, service, or other commercial activity.
   COMMUNITY FESTIVAL SIGN. Signs that are placed to commemorate and/or attract
attention to a community festival officially recognized by the Council members.
   CONSTRUCTION SIGN. A temporary sign whose message is limited to
identification of architects, engineers, contractors, and other individuals or
firms involved with construction on a specific site, the name of the building,
the intended purpose of the building, and the expected completion date.
   DIRECTIONAL SIGN, ON OR OFF-PREMISES. Any sign only indicating the location
of or providing directions to a business, development, or other activity.
   ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN (ECMS). Any sign with a message, text, or
photo made wholly or partially of lights, including but not limited to, light
emitting diodes (LED), incandescent lights, or exposed light bulbs.
   EXEMPT SIGN. Any signs that are specifically listed as exempt for this
chapter. The listed EXEMPT SIGNS are not regulated by the terms of this
chapter.
   FLAG. Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns
or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other
entity.
   FLASHING SIGN. A sign that incorporates flashing or blinking lights, or
other lighting that is not constant in intensity or that exhibits sudden or
marked changes in lighting effects, or a sign with moving parts, or parts which
simulate movement, including signs or lights on signs reflecting or emitting a
glaring or distracting light that could impair or distract driver vision.
   GOVERNMENTAL SIGN. Any sign erected by or on the order of an authorized
public official in the performance of his or her office or duty including, but
not limited to, traffic control signs, street name signs, warning and
directions signs, public notice, or signs of a similar nature.
   HOME OCCUPATION SIGN. A sign used in association with a permitted home
occupation conducted in the dwelling unit occupied by the operator of the
business.
   ILLEGAL SIGN. Any sign erected or maintained in violation of this chapter or
erected, altered, moved, repaired, maintained, or replaced in violation of this
chapter.
   INCIDENTAL SIGN. A single or double-faced, announcement sign containing
information relative to emergencies, store hours, credit cards honored,
directional arrows, entrance, exit, and other similar accessory information. No
sign with an advertising message legible from a position off the property on
which the sign is located shall be considered incidental.
   MULTIPLE TENANT DEVELOPMENT. A development in which there exists a number of
individual and/or separate activities, in which there are appurtenant-shared
facilities such as parking.
   NONCOMMERCIAL MESSAGE. Any message protected by the First Amendment that
does not direct attention to a business operated for profit, or to a commodity
or service for sale.
   NONCONFORMING SIGN. A sign legally erected and in existence prior to the
date of adoption of this chapter or an amendment to the chapter, that does not
meet the standards imposed by this chapter. An ILLEGAL SIGN is not a
nonconforming sign.
   OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN. A sign identifying, advertising or directing
the public to a business, merchandise, service, institution, residential area,
entertainment, or activity which is located, sold, rented, based, produced,
manufactured, furnished or taking place at a location other than the property
on which the sign is located. This term is sometimes interchanged with the
terms “outdoor” (which as defined in G.S. § 160D-912 includes any off-premises
outdoor advertising visible form the main-traveled way of any road) advertising
or billboards.
   ON-PREMISES ADVERTISING SIGN. A sign identifying or advertising a business,
person, activity, goods, products, or services located on the premises where
the sign is installed and maintained.
   PENNANT. Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not
containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string,
usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
   POLITICAL SIGN. A sign erected for the purpose of advertising a candidate or
stating a position regarding an issue upon which the voters of the town may
vote.
   PORTABLE SIGN. A sign generally constructed to be easily movable without a
permanent attachment to the ground and which may or may not be equipped with
wheels, including, but not limited to A or T frames, menu and sandwich board
signs, balloons or other inflatable devices designed to attract attention or
used as signs. Such signs may be designed for changeable messages. Signs
painted on or attached to operational vehicles used in the normal day-to-day
operations of the business, and signs defined as temporary signs are not
included in this definition.
   REAL ESTATE SIGN. A sign erected by the owner, or his or her agent,
advertising real property upon which the sign is located for rent, for lease,
or for sale.
   ROOF SIGN. A sign erected over or on and wholly supported by or partially
dependent upon the roof of any building for support, or attached to the roof in
any way and which extends in any part above the roofline of the building.
   SETBACK. The shortest horizontal distance between the edge of the pavement
or traveled surface and the closest point of a sign or its supporting member.
   SIGN. Any form of publicity or advertising which is designed to be visible
from any public way, directing attention to an individual business, commodity,
service, activity or product by means of words, lettering, numerals, trade
names, or trademarks, or other pictorial matter designed to convey such
information.
   SIGN STRUCTURE. A supporting structure erected or intended for the purpose
of identification, with or without a sign thereon, situated upon or attached to
the premises upon which any sign may be fastened, affixed, displayed or
applied, provided however, said definition shall not include a building or
fence.
   TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign, whether attached to a principle structure or free
standing, which is intended to be displayed for a limited time for a specific
event. This definition does not include portable signs. If a sign display area
is permanent but the copy displayed is subject to periodic changes, that sign
shall not be regarded as temporary.
(Ord. passed 3-1-10; Am. Ord. passed 6-1-15; Am. Ord. passed 4-19-21)
§ 155.03 AREA OF SIGN DEFINED.
   The area of a sign shall be considered to be that of the smallest figure
which encompasses all lettering, wording, design or symbols, but which shall
have a continuous perimeter of not more than eight straight lines, together
with any background difference on which the sign is located if such background
is designed as an integral part of and related to the sign. Any cutouts or
extensions shall be included in the area of the sign, but supports and bracing
which are not intended as part of the message shall be excluded. In the case of
a double-faced sign, where the faces are part of the same sign structure and
not more than 36 inches apart, the area of the sign shall be considered to
include all faces visible from any one point. The area of a wall or window sign
consisting of individual letters or symbols attached to or painted on a
surface, building, wall or window shall be considered to be that of the
smallest rectangle which encompasses all of the letters or symbols.
(Ord. passed 3-1-10)
§ 155.04 METHOD OF ATTACHMENT DEFINED.
   (A)   Attached sign. Any sign attached to, applied on, or supported by any
part of a building (such as a wall, window, canopy, awning, marquee or on the
slope of a roof but not extending above the roof line) which encloses or covers
useable space.
   (B)   Free-standing detached signs. Signs supported by a structure placed in
the ground and which are wholly independent of any building or object other
than the sign structure for support.
(Ord. passed 3-1-10)
§ 155.05 HEIGHT OF FREE-STANDING, DETACHED SIGNS DEFINED.
   The height of a free-standing detached sign shall not exceed the maximum
height set forth in this chapter. The height of a free-standing detached sign
shall be measured as the vertical distance from the uppermost point of the sign
or sign structure, whichever is higher, and the base of the sign at grade.
However, when the base of a sign at grade is located below the adjacent street
grade, the height of the sign shall be measured from the uppermost point of the
sign or sign structure to the street grade.
(Ord. passed 3-1-10)
§ 155.06 VALUE OF SIGNS DEFINED.
    The value of an existing sign shall be the value for tax purposes of any
sign so listed. If the tax value is not available, the value shall mean the
original cost of the sign. In the absence of information as to the original
cost submitted by the sign owner, the Land Use Administrator shall estimate the
original cost based upon the best information reasonably available. Provided,
however that this section shall be applied to outdoor advertising required to
be removed pursuant to this chapter as required by G.S. §§ 160D-912 and 136-
131.1.
(Ord. passed 3-1-10; Am. Ord. passed 4-19-21)
§ 155.07 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   All signs hereafter erected, placed, posted, attached, painted or otherwise
made visible from an adjacent property or right-of-way require a sign permit in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise prohibited,
exempted or not requiring a permit by this chapter. Any sign that requires a
permit, which is displayed without the requisite permit, shall be in violation
of this chapter and shall be considered an illegal sign.
(Ord. passed 3-1-10)
§ 155.08 SIGNS EXEMPT FROM REGULATION.
   The following signs are exempt from the regulations of this chapter, except
where such signs would be prohibited under §
155.10.
   (A)   Signs not visible from beyond the boundaries of the property on which
they are located.
   (B)   Signs of a governmental body, including traffic warning or regulatory
signs and devices. These signs shall also include other governmental signs
including building identification, directional, information, and welcome signs.
   (C)   Trade names and graphics which are located on gas pumps, newspaper,
and soft drink and similar vending devices.
   (D)   Flags or insignia of any governmental, non-profit, or business
organization.
   (E)   Seasonal/holiday signs and decorations associated with a national or
religious holiday.
   (F)   Warning of danger signs posted by utility or construction companies.
   (G)   Signs painted on or attached to licensed operational vehicles used in
the normal day-to-day operations of the business indicating the name of the
business, unless the primary use of the vehicle is for the display of signs.
   (H)   Signs required by law, statute, or ordinance.
   (I)   No trespassing, no loitering and similar private warning signs.
   (J)   Incidental signs.
   (K)    Special event signs and special event directional signs related to
events sponsored by non-profit organizations. Signs must be removed within
three days of the end of the event.
   (L)   Political signs. Signs must be removed within three days after the
election.
      (1)   Compliant political signs. Signs are allowed 30 days prior to one
stop early voting and must be removed ten days after primary or general
election days.
   (M)   Construction site identification signs.
   (N)   Signs painted on or displayed in windows.
(Ord. passed 3-1-10; Am. Ord. passed 4-19-21; Am. Ord. 2023-002, passed 3-6-23)
§ 155.09 SIGNS EXEMPT FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   The following on premises signs shall not require a permit and shall not be
counted as part of the allowable sign area. However, such signs shall conform
to the requirements set forth below, as well as other applicable requirements
of this chapter.
   (A)   Private information signs. Signs containing information to direct
pedestrian or vehicular traffic or informing the public of private regulations
shall be located on the premises for which directions or information are
indicated. Such signs shall not exceed three square feet per face, two faces
per sign, and shall not exceed three feet in height if freestanding or six feet
in height if attached to the principal or an accessory structure. These signs
may be directly or internally (indirectly) illuminated with lighting limited to
the sign face. Lighting that casts shadows away from the sign shall not be
permitted. Restaurants will be allowed one sandwich or attached type, menu sign
not to exceed four square feet.
   (B)   Copy changes and maintenance. No permit is required for copy changes
made to a changeable copy sign, menu board or marquee sign. No permit is
required for maintenance carried out in accordance with the provisions in §
155.13 and where no structural changes are made. No permit is required for copy
changes to an existing sign, made where the size, shape, or height of the sign
is not altered, made more non-conforming, or otherwise modified provided,
however, outdoor advertising devices may be repaired or reconstructed as
permitted by G.S. § 136-131.2.
   (C)   Residential identification signs. Signs which provide the name and/or
address of an individual residence, either attached or free-standing,
indirectly or non-illuminated, provided no sign shall exceed two square feet in
size per sign face.
   (D)   In any residential district. One real estate sign, not exceeding four
square feet per sign face area shall be permitted per street frontage. Real
estate signs for property over three acres shall comply with the standards for
business, commercial or industrial real estate signs.
   (E)   In any business, commercial or industrial district, a real estate sign
shall be permitted on the premises for sale, rent or lease. Such sign shall be
non-illuminated, not exceed 32 square feet in area per sign face and if free-
standing, shall not exceed eight feet in height.
   (F)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs do not require a permit; provided,
such signs shall be located on the premises where the event occurs and shall be
erected or placed not to exceed 30-days prior to the event, and shall be
removed after the event concludes. Signs may not be temporarily posted and
removed for the purpose of evading enforcement under this section. Total square
footage of such signs shall not exceed 50% of the allowed sign area for the
property as indicated in §
155.11.
   (G)   Off-premises directional signs. Such signs shall not exceed two square
feet in area and shall not be illuminated. Such signs shall not be placed in
the public right-of-way and will consist of only the company name and a
directional arrow. Permission must be obtained from the property owner before
placement.
(Ord. passed 3-1-10; Am. Ord. passed 4-19-21; Am. Ord. 2023-002, passed 3-6-23)
§ 155.10 SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   The following are prohibited within the jurisdiction of this chapter:
   (A)   Any non-governmental sign that resembles a public safety warning or
traffic sign;
   (B)   Signs, whether temporary or permanent, within any public street or
highway right-of-way or placed upon a utility pole, and unauthorized signs are
forfeited to the public and are subject to confiscation, with the exception of:
      (1)   Governmental signage, including signs to identify public property
convey public information, direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicle traffic;
      (2)   Informational signs of a public utility regarding its poles, lines,
pipes, or facilities;
      (3)   Awning, projecting, and suspended signs over a public right of way
so long as they do not interfere with function of the right of way and the
comply with this chapter and the Unified Development Ordinance, as applicable;
and
      (4)   Signs for community festivals or events permitted by the Town of
Franklin;
   (C)   Flashing signs;
   (D)   Roof signs;
   (E)   Any sign or sign structure which does not conform to the building
codes or creates in any way an unsafe distraction for motor vehicle operators.
(See Flashing Signs definition), or obstructs the view of motor vehicle
operators entering a public roadway;
   (F)   Abandoned signs, where the business or activity which the sign refers
has ceased to operate or function or use the sign for 180 or more days;
   (G)   New off-premises advertising signs following the adoption of this
chapter;
   (H)   Portable signs, except as provided for in §
155.09(A) and §
155.11(B)(1) and (2);
   (I)   Signs on fences except public-owned ball field advertising/sponsorship
fence signs, and except delivery directional signage in an I-1 zoning district;
   (J)   No political sign shall be closer than three feet from the edge of the
pavement of the road;
   (K)   No sign shall obscure motorist visibility at an intersection;
   (L)   No political sign shall be higher than 42 inches above the edge of the
pavement of the road when in right of way;
   (M)   No political sign shall be larger than 864 square inches or six square
feet when in road right of way; and
   (N)   No political sign shall be permitted in the right of way of a fully
controlled access highway.
(Ord. passed 3-1-10; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-11; Am. Ord. 2023-002, passed 3-6-23)
§ 155.11 ON-PREMISES SIGNS.
   The following on-premises signs are regulated by this chapter and require a
permit.
   (A)   Residential district.
      (1)   Residential developments (subdivisions, one family dwellings and
multiple family dwellings) and all permitted non-residential in the NMU and
MICR zones shall be allowed one attached sign not to exceed 12 square feet in
area and one freestanding sign per street frontage not to exceed 32 square feet
in area and six feet in height. A freestanding sign shall have a setback of no
less than eight feet from the street right-of-way or ten feet from the traveled
portion of a street where the right-of-way does not exist or cannot be
determined. Such signs may be illuminated. Provided, however, multiple tenant
non-residential developments in either the NMU or MICR zones and which have
street frontage on U.S. or N.C. highways will be permitted to have a) a
freestanding sign, subject to the same setback requirements as other
freestanding signs allowed by this section, that shall not exceed 50 square
feet in area and shall not exceed ten feet in height, and b) attached signage
not to exceed one square foot for each linear foot of building frontage. Any
such signs may also be illuminated.
      (2)   On plots containing permitted public utility buildings or home
occupations or uses, other than accessory, one attached non-illuminated sign
not exceeding six square feet in area unless otherwise regulated by the Unified
Development or other ordinance provisions.
   (B)   Commercial and industrial districts.
      (1)   As this subsection is applied to multiple tenant developments, only
one illuminated freestanding sign shall be permitted per street frontage.
Second street frontage must be at least 100 feet long with a street entrance to
be counted as a frontage. In the C-1 Central Commercial zoning district, the
sign shall not exceed 70 square feet in area. In the C-2 Secondary Commercial
zoning district, the sign shall not exceed 90 square feet in area. In the C-
3 Highway Commercial or I-1 Industrial zoning districts, the sign shall not
exceed 150 square feet in area. Signs regulated by this subsection shall be a
maximum of 18 feet in height, and shall be located no closer than eight feet to
the street right-of-way or ten feet to the traveled portion of a street where
the street right-of-way does not exist of cannot be determined.
         (a)   In addition, each establishment may be issued a temporary banner
permit, not to exceed 30 days, for a banner not exceeding 32 square feet; or
         (b)   Each establishment may be issued a temporary permit, not to
exceed 30 days, for an illuminated portable sign not exceeding 32 square feet.
Each establishment is limited to no more than two such temporary permits, as
described in (a) or (b) above, during a calendar year.
      (2)   Any establishment not operating in a multiple tenant development
shall be allowed one illuminated free-standing sign per street frontage. Second
street frontage must be at least 100 feet long with a street entrance to be
counted as a frontage. The sign not to exceed 50 square feet in area, shall be
a maximum of 18 feet in height, and shall be located no closer than eight feet
to the street right-of-way or ten feet to the traveled portion of a street
where the right-of-way does not exist or cannot be determined. Illuminated
attached signage shall also be allowed not to exceed one square foot for each
linear foot of building frontage.
         (a)   In addition, each establishment may be issued a temporary banner
permit, not to exceed 30 days, for a banner not exceeding 32 square feet; or
         (b)   Each establishment may be issued a temporary permit, not to
exceed 30 days, for an illuminated portable sign not exceeding 32 square feet.
Each establishment is limited to no more than two such temporary permits, as
described in (a) or (b) above, during a calendar year.
      (3)   Any establishment in I-1 Industrial zoned areas shall be allowed
one illuminated freestanding sign. The sign is not to exceed 200 square feet
and shall be a maximum of 24 feet in height. The sign shall be located no
closer than eight feet to the street right-of-way or ten feet to the traveled
portion of a street where the right-of-way does not exist or cannot be
determined.
   (C)   Electronic changeable message signs.
      (1)   Electronic changeable message signs (ECMS) shall be permitted on
freestanding on premises business identification signs subject to the following
limitations and requirements:
         (a)   The ECMS shall be part of the single-tenant freestanding
business identification sign or be allowed in lieu thereof, but in no case
shall the square footage of the ECMS exceed 50% of the total allowed sign face
area for any such freestanding sign. In the case of multi-tenant signs the ECMS
shall not exceed 50% of the total allowed sign face area for multi-tenant signs
or 36 square feet, whichever is less;
         (b)   ECMS on freestanding signs shall be allowed in certain zoning
districts subject to certain location and land use restrictions as follows:
(All street designations are as defined in the Unified Development Chapter
(UDO) in §
152.098(A) - Street Classification.)
            1.   In all commercial (C) districts, except C-l, but not allowed
along frontages of streets smaller than Collector rated, opposite residential
(R) districts.
            2.   In all industrial (I) districts, but not allowed along
frontages of streets smaller than collector rated, opposite residential (R)
districts.
            3.   In residential (R) districts for schools, museums, and
churches/houses of worship, provided that the ECMS is located along the
frontage of a arterial street having three or more lanes at the time of
permitting.
         (c)   ECMS shall not be permitted on sites where existing freestanding
signs are nonconforming unless such signs are made conforming to this chapter.
ECMS is not permitted on off-premises advertising signs.
      (2)    In the downtown commercial (C-l) district, an ECMS is permitted
for theaters, and other public event facilities (spectator sports facilities,
civic and conference facilities), whether publicly or privately owned; and the
ECMS may be attached to the building or may be freestanding if at a location
permitting a freestanding sign.
      (3)   In any commercial (C) district, industrial (I) district, or
neighborhood mixed use (NMU) district, an ECMS, not exceeding six square feet
may be permitted behind a street fronting window of any business where an ECMS
is not used on a freestanding sign. In any commercial (C) district or
industrial (I) district an ECMS may be used on the motor fuel pump canopy for
up to 50% of the allowable signage for such structure, provided no ECMS is used
on any freestanding sign and all other signage on the site conforms to this
chapter.
      (4)   No ECMS message (copy and/or image) shall be allowed to flash,
animate, scroll, or otherwise move, or transition from one message to another
in a moving manner. Transition between messages shall be instantaneous. Each
message shall be continuously displayed for a minimum of ten seconds before
changing to another message.
      (5)   Each ECMS or other sign employing the use of light emitting diodes
(LEDs) for display shall be equipped with a control system that automatically
adjusts the light emission level to ambient light conditions so as to not cause
glare or excessive brightness. In no case shall the light level of any such
sign exceed 500 NITS (candelas per square meter) between the time of sunset and
sunrise, and 5,000 NITS at other times (daytime). If ambient light levels, day
or night, in the area of the sign are significantly lower and the sign still
produces glare or is excessively bright at the levels listed above, the sign
light levels will be further reduced to eliminate the glare or excessive
brightness. Focused or directed light shall be aimed away from passing traffic
and residential occupancies.
      (6)   Any EMCS within or opposite a residential (R) district as described
above shall be operated or lit only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m.
(Ord. passed 3-1-10; Am. Ord. passed 2-7-11; Am. Ord. passed 11-2-15; Am. Ord.
2019-002, passed 3-4-19; Am. Ord. passed 4-19-21)
§ 155.12 OFF-PREMISES SIGNS.
   No new off-premises advertising signs shall be allowed within the corporate
limits or the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) of the town.
(Ord. passed 3-1-10)
§ 155.13 SIGN MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Maintenance provisions. All signs, supports, braces, poles, wires and
other appurtenances of signs or sign structures shall be kept in good repair,
maintained in safe condition, and shall conform to the following standards:
      (1)   A sign shall be in a state of disrepair when more than 20% of its
total surface area is covered with disfigured, cracked, ripped or peeling paint
or poster paper, or any combination of these conditions. Any sign in a state of
disrepair shall be considered in violation of this chapter;
      (2)   No sign shall be allowed to stand with bent or broken sign facing,
broken supports, loose appendages, or struts that cause the sign to stand more
than 15 degrees from the perpendicular;
      (3)   No sign or sign structure shall be allowed to have weeds, vines, or
other vegetation growing on it and obscuring it from the street or highway from
which it is intended to be viewed;
      (4)   No illuminated sign shall be allowed to stand with only partial
illumination operational;
      (5)   If illuminated, signs shall be illuminated only by the following
means:
         (a)   By steady stationary light of reasonable intensity, shielded and
directed solely at the sign;
         (b)   External light sources to illuminate signs shall be shielded
from all adjacent residential buildings and streets and shall not be of such
brightness so as to cause glare hazardous to pedestrians or vehicle drivers or
so as to create a nuisance; or
         (c)   Electrical requirements pertaining to signs shall be as
prescribed in local codes; and
      (6)   Any sign which violates the maintenance provisions listed above
shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be repaired or removed as
required by the applicable sections of this chapter.
   (B)   Unlawful cutting of trees or shrubs. No person may, for the purpose of
increasing or enhancing the visibility of any sign, damage, trim, destroy or
remove any trees, shrubs or other vegetation located within a public right-of-
way of any road or highway, except as required by the North Carolina Department
of Transportation.
(Ord. passed 3-1-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 155.14 NON-COMMERCIAL MESSAGES.
    Not-withstanding any other provisions of this chapter, any sign display or
device allowed under this chapter may contain, in lieu of any other copy, any
otherwise lawful noncommercial message that does not direct attention to a
business operated for profit, or to a commodity or service for sale, and that
complies with size, lighting, height and other requirements of the district in
which it is located.
(Am. Ord. passed 4-19-21)
§ 155.15 PERMITS, FEES, NON-CONFORMING SIGNS, AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Permits. All new signs, except as otherwise provided in §
155.09, shall require a sign permit prior to being located or erected on any
property within the jurisdiction of this chapter. A sketch of the proposed sign
to scale, along with a general sketch of the proposed placement of the sign in
the parcel shall accompany the application for a permit. Sign permits shall be
issued by the Land Use Administrator. If a sign permit is denied, the decision
may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment as provided in this chapter,
specifically as indicated in §
152.075 through §
152.078.
   (B)   Permit fees. The Town Council may establish a fee schedule by
resolution for all sign permits issued in accordance with this chapter.
   (C)   Nonconforming signs.
      (1)   Signs that are erected and were in place prior to the adoption of
this chapter but which do not conform to the provisions of this chapter are
declared nonconforming signs. Signs that were erected and that are in place and
which conformed to the provisions of this chapter at the time erected, but
which do not conform to an amendment of this chapter enacted subsequent to the
erection of the signs also are declared nonconforming signs. Any sign erected
after the passage of this chapter must meet all the criteria within this
chapter.
         (a)   All nonconforming signs erected and located within the town’s
jurisdiction at the time of the adoption of the sign ordinance on May 3, 2004
must be made conforming or removed within five years of the adoption of this
chapter.
         (b)   All signs made nonconforming by the adoption of this chapter
must be made conforming or removed within 12 years of the adoption of this
chapter.
      (2)   All nonconforming signs shall be maintained in accordance with §
155.13 but shall not be:
         (a)   Moved, changed, replaced, reestablished, or relocated except in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, provided that copy may be
changed on an existing sign;
         (b)   Expanded; or
         (c)   Modified in any way which increases the sign’s degree of
nonconformity.
      (3)   Existing off-premises nonconforming billboards cannot be modified
to include digital or other electrically or electronically controlled signage
in accordance with §
155.11(C)(1)(c).
   (D)   Enforcement. Violation of the provisions of these sign regulations
shall be enforceable as set forth below in addition to the enforcement
provisions as set forth in this chapter.
      (1)   Notice of violation. The Land Use Administrator shall have the
authority to issue a notice of violation for all violations of the sign
ordinance. Where the owner of the sign is indicated on the sign or is otherwise
apparent or known to the Land Use Administrator, a copy of the notice of
violation shall be delivered to the sign owner by hand delivery or by certified
mail. In all other cases, a copy of the notice of violation shall be posted on
the sign and a copy shall be delivered by hand delivery or certified mail to
the property owner as shown on the Macon County tax records. In addition,
service hereunder may be made in accordance with Rule 4 of the North Carolina
Rules of Civil Procedure.
      (2)   Time to remedy violation.  In instances where the violation or
violations of the sign ordinance is or includes failure to obtain a sign permit
as required in §
155.15(A), all violations must be remedied immediately. For purposes of this
division, “immediately” means within a 24-hour period following the earlier of
the posting of the notice of violation on the sign or the delivery of a copy of
the notice of violation to the sign owner or property owner. In all other
cases, the sign owner and/or the property owner shall have ten days to remedy
all violations set forth in the notice of violation. The ten- day period shall
commence upon the earlier of the posting of the notice of violation on the sign
or the delivery of a copy of the notice of violation to the sign owner or
property owner.
      (3)   Extension of time for compliance. The Land Use Administrator shall
have the authority to grant a single 30-day extension of time within which the
sign owner must comply with the notice of violation. The single extension of
time may be issued based upon a written request for extension of time, which
sets forth valid reasons for not complying within the original 30-day period.
      (4)   Remedies for failure to comply. Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175(f), the
Land Use Administrator may choose from the remedies set forth below to enforce
the ordinance when there is a failure to comply with the notice of violation.
Those remedies are as follows:
         (a)   In addition to or in lieu of the other remedies set forth in
this section, the Land Use Administrator may issue a citation setting forth a
civil penalty of $50. In the case of a continuing violation, each 24-hour
period during which the violation continues to exist shall constitute a
separate violation. Where multiple violations are located upon a single
property, each shall constitute a separate violation, with each violation
subject to separate fines pursuant to this subsection. The citation shall be
served upon the person(s) described in division (A) of this section by the
means set forth therein. In the event the offender does not pay the penalty
within ten days of service of the citation, the civil penalty shall be
collected by the town in a civil action in the nature of debt, which shall not
constitute a misdemeanor, and in so providing, the Town Council hereby chooses
to exercise the option provided by G.S. § 160A- 175(b);
         (b)   In addition to or in lieu of the other remedies set forth in the
section, the Land Use Administrator shall have the authority to issue a remove
order for any sign not repaired or brought into compliance within the time
required by the foregoing provisions. Remove orders shall be issued to and
served upon the person(s) described in division (D)(4)(a) of this section by
the means set forth therein. The sign owner or the landowner shall be allowed a
period of 30 days after the service of the remove order within which to remove
the sign at his or her own expense. The remove order shall describe
specifically the location of the sign to be removed and all of the reasons for
issuance of the remove order, including specific reference to the provisions of
the code that have been violated; and
         (c)   In addition to or in lieu of the other remedies set forth in
this section, the Land Use Administrator may seek injunctive relief in the
appropriate court.
      (5)   Removal and recovery expense. If a sign owner or property owner
fails to comply with the requirements of a remove order, the Land Use
Administrator may cause such sign to be removed. The sign owner and property
owner shall be jointly and severally liable for the expense of removal. Notice
of the cost of removal shall be served upon the person(s) described in division
(D)(4)(a) by the means set forth therein. If the sum is not paid within 30 days
thereafter, the sum shall be collected by the town in a civil action in the
nature of debt, which shall not subject the offender to the penalty provisions
of G.S. § 14.4.
      (6)   Removal of dangerous signs. Pursuant to G.S. § 160A-193, the Land
Use Administrator shall have the authority to summarily remove, abate, or
remedy a sign, which is dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or
safety. The expense of the action shall be paid by the sign owner, or if the
sign owner cannot be determined, by the land owner, and if not paid, shall be a
lien upon the land or premises where the nuisance arose, and shall be collected
as unpaid taxes.
(Ord. passed 3-1-10; Am. Ord. passed 6-6-11)
§ 155.16 SPECIAL EVENTS BANNERS.
   (A)   Anything in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, special
events banners shall be permitted pursuant to this section.
   (B)   Permits required. Any person, nonprofit association or corporation,
may apply to the Town Planner for a permit to display a special event banner.
Any banner which is displayed without the requisite permit shall be in
violation of this chapter and shall be considered an illegal sign.
   (C)   Content. Special events banners may display promotions for nonprofit
and community events, which may include fundraising activities and/or promote
the Town of Franklin. The names of businesses and for-profit corporate entities
may not be included on special events banners, and the use of banners to
display commercial messages or promote any particular business or businesses is
not permitted.
   (D)   Location and number. No more than one special event banner may be
displayed at any time. Permits shall be issued on a first come, first served
basis. The location of the banner shall be as approved from time to time by the
Town Planner, but in any case the banner must be located on East Main Street,
between the eastern boundary of the Town Hall property and the intersection of
East Main Street and Phillips/Iotla Street.
   (E)   Duration of display. Special events banners may be displayed pursuant
to this section for a period of time not to exceed two weeks before the event
promoted by the banner. The special event banner must be removed within three
days after the conclusion of the event.
   (F)   Property owner and NCDOT approval. As a condition to issuance of a
special events banner permit, the applicant shall demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Town Planner the following: 1) that the applicant has
permission from any property owner upon whose property the banner will be
anchored or otherwise affixed to attach the banner for the duration that it
will be displayed; and 2) that the North Carolina Department of Transportation
has given permission for the banner to be displayed, and/or that the banner
conforms to all NCDOT regulations regarding banners crossing state roads then
in place. In any event, the lower edge of the special event banner shall be at
least 20 feet-above the surface of the street.
   (G)   Liability; insurance. The Town of Franklin shall not be liable for the
installation or maintenance of any special event banner displayed pursuant to
this section, nor for any cause of action arising from the display of the same.
As a part of the application required by this section, the applicant shall sign
a statement acknowledging the town’s nonliability, and indemnifying the town,
its officers, employees and agents from any liability arising therefrom. The
applicant shall provide proof of special event insurance or general liability
insurance covering the event promoted by the special event banner, and shall
have the Town of Franklin named as additional insured on such policy.
   (H)   Enforcement. Except as otherwise specified herein, special events
banners shall be permitted and enforced pursuant to §
155.15 of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-1-15; Am. Ord. passed 4-19-21)
CHAPTER 156: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
156.01   Purpose; exemptions
   
156.02   Definitions
   
156.03   Classification
   
156.04   Licence required
   
156.05   Issuance of license
   
156.06   Appeal
   
156.07   Fees
   
156.08   Location
   
156.09   Hours of operation
   
156.10   Inspection
   
156.11   Expiration of license
   
156.12   Suspension
   
156.13   Revocation
   
156.14   Denial
 
   
156.99   Penalty
§ 156.01 PURPOSE; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The Board of Aldermen is committed to protecting the general welfare
of the town through the enforcement of laws prohibiting obscenity, indecency
and sexual offenses. It seeks to reduce and eliminate the deleterious effects
of sexually oriented businesses while preserving constitutionally protected
forms of expression.
   (B)   The Town Board finds that sexually oriented businesses in certain
locations contribute to neighborhood deterioration and blight through an
increase in crime and diminution of property values, among other adverse
consequences, and finds that such effects are contrary to the general welfare
of the town.
   (C)   The Town Board recognizes that important and substantial government
interests provide a constitutional basis for reasonable regulation of the time,
place and manner under which sexually oriented businesses operate; and that,
therefore, the town has determined that persons seeking to operate sexually
oriented businesses shall be required to observe specific locational
requirements before they commence business, as provided for in this chapter.
   (D)   The Town Board finds that the licensing of sexually oriented
businesses is necessary to ensure compliance with the locational and zoning
requirements of such businesses.
   (E)   The Town Board finds that sexually oriented businesses in other
communities have been used for unlawful sexual activities, including
prostitution, and sexual encounters of a casual nature. The concern over
sexually transmitted diseases is a legitimate health concern of the town.
   (F)   The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as permitting
any use, activity or structure that is otherwise prohibited, illegal or made
punishable by law, nor shall it be construed so as to prohibit conduct or
expression that is subject to constitutional protection.
(Ord. passed 4-4-05) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.02 DEFINITIONS.
   ADULT ARCADE (also known as PEEP SHOW). Any place to which the public is
permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically- controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to
persons in booths or viewing rooms where the images so displayed depict or
describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
   ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE.  A commercial establishment which as
one of its principal business purposes offers for sale or rental for any form
of consideration any one or more of the following:
      (1)   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions,
slides or other visual representations that depict or describe “specified
sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; or
      (2)   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with “specified sexual activities.”
   ADULT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, or other commercial
establishment that regularly features, exhibits, or displays as one of its
principal business purposes:
      (1)   Person who appear nude or semi- nude; or
      (2)   Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of
“specified anatomical areas” or by “specified sexual activities”; or
      (3)   Films, motion pictures, video- cassettes, slides or other
photographic reproductions which depict or describe “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
   ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that:
      (1)   Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration,
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that
depict or describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical
areas” as one of its principal business purposes;
      (2)   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less
than ten hours; or
      (3)   Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room
for a period of less than ten hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown as one of its principal business
purposes that depict or describe “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
   ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features, exhibits or displays, as one of its
principal business purposes, persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-
nude, or live performances that expose or depict “specified anatomical areas”
or “specified sexual activities.”
   APPLICANT. The person who will operate the sexually oriented business, and
shall include each of the following persons associated with that business:
      (1)   The owner of a sole proprietorship;
      (2)   Each member of a firm, association or general partnership;
      (3)   Each general partner in a limited partnership;
      (4)   Each officer, director and owner of more than 10% of the stock of a
corporation;
      (5)   The manager of an establishment operated by a corporation; and
      (6)   Any manager who has been empowered as attorney-in-fact for a
nonresident individual or partnership.
   EMPLOY, EMPLOYEE and EMPLOYMENT. Describe and pertain to any person who
performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business on a full-
time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an
employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise. Employee does not include
a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises
or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
   ESCORT.  A person who, for tips or any other form of consideration, agrees
or offers to act as a date for another person, or who agrees to privately model
lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person.
   ESCORT AGENCY.  A person or business that furnishes, offers to furnish, or
advertises to furnish escorts as one of its principal business purposes, for a
fee, tip, or other consideration.
   ESTABLISHMENT.  Includes any of the following:
      (1)   The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a
new business;
      (2)   The conversion of any existing business, whether or not a sexually
oriented business, to any sexually oriented business;
      (3)   The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other
existing sexually oriented business; or
      (4)   The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
   LICENSEE. Person(s) in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued.
   NUDE MODEL STUDIO. Any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a
state of nudity, or who displays “specified anatomical areas” is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. NUDE
MODEL STUDIO shall not include a proprietary school or a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a
private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs
in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure:
      (1)   That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for
viewing;
      (2)   Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class; and
      (3)   Where no more than one nude or semi-nude is on the premises at any
one time.
   OPERATES or CAUSES TO BE OPERATED. To cause to function or to put or keep in
operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a
sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner,
or licensee of the business.
   NUDITY or a STATE OF NUDITY.
      (1)   The appearance of a human anus, male genitals, or female genitals;
or
      (2)   A state of dress which fails to opaquely cover a human anus, male
genitals or female genitals.
   PERSON.  An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
   SEMI-NUDE. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of
the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of
its principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration physical
contact in form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex,
or activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex
when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nudity.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater,
escort agency, nude model studio, sexual encounter center, or any combination
of the foregoing.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Human genitals in a state of sexual arousal.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. Includes any of the following:
      (1)   The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts;
      (2)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
      (3)   Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
      (4)   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections (1) through (3) above.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL. For a sexually oriented business means and
includes any of the following:
      (1)   The sale, lease or sublease of the business.
      (2)   Persons other than those named as applicants for a license becoming
associated with the business, as provided in the definition of “applicant”;
except that a mere substitution of a person as manager of an establishment
shall only require filing with the town planner as provided for in §
156.07.
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device
which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing
the ownership or control.
(Ord. passed 4-4-05)
§ 156.03 CLASSIFICATION.
   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
   (A)   Adult arcades.
   (B)   Adult bookstores or adult video stores.
   (C)   Adult cabarets.
   (D)   Adult motels.
   (E)   Adult motion picture theaters.
   (F)   Adult theaters.
   (G)   Escort agencies.
   (H)   Nude model studios.
   (I)   Sexual encounter centers.
(Ord. passed 4-4-05)
§ 156.04 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business
without a valid sexually oriented business license issued by the Town Planner
pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form prescribed by the
Town Planner. An application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing
the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked
dimensions of the interior of the premises.
   (C)   The applicant may request and the applicant shall provide such
information as to enable the Town Planner to determine whether each applicant
meets the qualifications established in this chapter.
   (D)   Each applicant must be qualified under §
156.04 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is
granted.
   (E)   Each applicant must request and receive a special use permit when
required by the local zoning ordinance.
(Ord. passed 4-4-05; Am. Ord. 2017-011, passed 7-3-17) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.05 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   Within 30 days after receipt of a completed application, the Town
Planner will approve or deny the issuance of a license to an applicant for a
sexually oriented business license. The Town Planner will approve the issuance
of a license to an applicant unless the Police Department finds one or more of
the following to be true:
      (1)   The applicant is under 18 years of age.
      (2)   The license fee required by this section has not been paid.
      (3)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse is overdue in payment to the
town of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the
applicant or the applicant’s spouse in relation to a sexually oriented
business.
      (4)   An applicant has failed to provide information required in order to
determine the qualifications of the applicant under this chapter for issuance
of the license, or has falsely answered a question or request for information
on the application form.
      (5)   An applicant or the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with this chapter or other provisions of this code, including
local zoning requirements.
      (6)   An applicant or an applicant’s spouse has been convicted of a
violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the offense of operating a
sexually oriented business without a license, within two years immediately
preceding the application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall
have no effect.
      (7)   The Chief of Police shall make a recommendation to the Town Planner
based on a check of any state, federal and/or local repository for criminal
history to determine if an applicant and/or an applicant’s spouse has been
convicted of a crime involving any offense described in G.S. Chapter 14
(Articles 7A, 26, 26A, 27, 37 or 39); or any similar offenses to those
described above under the criminal or penal code of the state, other states,
the town, or other towns, cities, or other countries; or facilitation, attempt,
conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; for which:
         (a)   Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, of the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
         (b)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction
or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the
later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or
         (c)   Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement of the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses within any 24-month period.
         (d)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the disqualification of the applicant or applicant’s spouse.
         (e)   An applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been
convicted of an offense listed above may qualify for a sexually oriented
business license only when the period required by this chapter has lapsed.
         (f)   The applicant has failed to make application using a legal name
or has filed to produce a valid state driver’s license or a valid state
identification card.
   (B)   The license, if granted, shall state on its face the legal name of the
person or persons to whom it is granted, the classification of the sexually
oriented business for which it is granted, the expiration date, and the address
of the sexually oriented business. Licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous
place at or near the entrance to a sexually oriented business so that they may
be easily read at any time.
(Ord. passed 4-4-05) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.06 APPEAL.
   An applicant whose application is denied, suspended or revoked by the Town
Planner may appeal such action in writing within 30 days to the Town Council,
who shall decide either to uphold the action or to issue the license not later
than the second regular Town Council meeting after receipt of the appeal. The
applicant or licensee shall have the right to present evidence before the Town
Council. The decision to uphold the action of the Town Planner or to issue the
license shall be based solely on the criteria established in this chapter for
the action by the Town Planner. A suspension or revocation shall be stayed
during the pendency of an appeal to the Town Council.
(Ord. passed 4-4-05) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.07 FEES.
   (A)   Every sexually oriented business that is granted a license (new or
renewal) shall pay to the town an annual nonrefundable business license fee in
the amount then in effect for business licenses, pursuant to the applicable
schedule, upon license issuance or renewal.
   (B)   A substitution of a manager of the business which occurs during the
license year shall be filed with the Town Planner within 30 days of its
occurrence, and a $100 investigation fee paid.
   (C)   All license applications and fees shall be submitted to the Town
Planner.
(Ord. passed 4-4-05; Am. Ord. 2017-011, passed 7-3-17) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.08 LOCATION.
   (A)   Overconcentration. No more than one sexually oriented business shall
be located within any 1,000 foot radius, as determined by a straight line and
not street distance. Sexually oriented businesses, because of their very
nature, are recognized as having serious objectionable operational
characteristics upon adjacent neighborhoods, particularly when they are
concentrated. Special regulation of these establishments is necessary to insure
that these adverse effects will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading
of the surrounding neighborhood. To prevent an overconcentration of sexually
oriented businesses and the creation of a de facto downgrading or blighting of
surrounding neighborhoods, this radius requirement is necessary.
   (B)   Prohibited. No sexually oriented business shall be located in a
residential district nor a neighborhood mixed used district as defined by the
town’s zoning ordinance and zoning map.
   (C)   Residential proximity. No sexually oriented business shall be located
within a 250-foot radius (determined by a straight line and not street
distance) of any place of worship, school (public or private), specialty
school, day-care facility or any residential zoning districts or residential
properties. Sexually oriented businesses, because of their very nature, are
recognized as having serious objectionable operational characteristics,
primarily when they are located near a residential zoning district or certain
other districts which permit residential uses. Special regulation of these
establishments is necessary to insure that these adverse effects will not
contribute to a downgrading or blighting of surrounding residential districts
or certain other districts which permit residential uses.
(Ord. passed 4-4-05; Am. Ord. 2017-011, passed 7-3-17) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.09 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No sexually oriented business, except for an adult motel, may remain open at
any time between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. on weekdays and
Saturdays, and 1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. on Sundays, except to the extent
allowed by state law and regulations pertaining to the sale of alcoholic
beverages by the business if the sexually oriented business has a state ABC
permit.
(Ord. passed 4-4-05) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.10 INSPECTION.
   (A)   A business license applicant or licensee shall permit representatives
of the police department or any other town, city, county, state or federal
department, division or agency that enforces codes, regulations of statutes
relating to human health, safety or welfare or structural safety to inspect the
premises of a sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance
with the law at any time it is occupied or open for business.
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter do not apply to areas of an adult motel
which are currently being rented by the customer for use as a permanent or
temporary habitation.
(Ord. passed 4-4-05) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.11 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   All licenses shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in this chapter. Application for
renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when
made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the
license will not be affected.
(Ord. passed 4-4-05) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.12 SUSPENSION.
   The Town Planner is authorized to, and will, suspend a sexually oriented
business license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the police department
and/or inspections department determines that a business licensee has:
   (A)   Violated or is not in compliance with this chapter or with any other
requirements of this code, including those relating to buildings, electricity,
plumbing, fire safety and mechanical equipment;
   (B)   Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter;
   (C)   Permitted illegal gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises; or
   (D)   Demonstrated an inability to operate or manage a sexually oriented
business in a peaceful and law-abiding manner thus necessitating action by law
enforcement officers.
(Ord. passed 4-4-05) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.13 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Town Planner is authorized to, and will, revoke a license if a
cause for suspension in §
156.12 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12
months.
   (B)   The Town Planner is authorized to, and will, revoke a sexually
oriented business license if the police department determines that a business
licensee;
      (1)   Gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to
the town during the application process, including, but not limited to, the use
of a name other than a legal name to procure a license;
      (2)   Has allowed the possession, use or sale of controlled substances on
the premises; or
      (3)   Has allowed prostitution on the premises;
      (4)   Has operated or worked in the sexually oriented business during a
period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
      (5)   Has been convicted of an offense named in §
156.04 for which the time period required has not lapsed;
      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 12-month period, a person or
persons committed an offense occurring in or on the licensed premises of a
crime named in §
156.99 for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were
employees of the sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were
committed;
      (7)   Has allowed any act of sexual intercourse, masturbation, oral
copulation or sodomy to occur in or on the licensed premises;
      (8)   Is delinquent in payment to the town of ad valorem taxes, sales
taxes, or the annual business license fee, or any other fee or tax related to
the sexually oriented business or other business of the licensee.
      (9)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect
on the revocation of the license.
   (C)   When the Town Planner revokes a license, the revocation shall continue
for one year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business
license for one year from the date revocation became effective. If, subsequent
to revocation, the Town Planner finds that the basis for the revocation has
been corrected or abated, the licensee may be granted a license if at least 90
days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the
license was revoked, an applicant may not be granted another license until the
appropriate number of years required under this chapter have elapsed.
(Ord. passed 4-4-05) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.14 DENIAL.
   If the Town Planner denies the issuance of a license, or suspends or revokes
a license, or denies an appeal, the town will send to the applicant, or
licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the
action.
(Ord. passed 4-4-05) Penalty, see §
156.99
§ 156.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of $500, or
imprisonment, or both.
(Ord. passed 4-4-05)
CHAPTER 157: MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS
Section
General Provisions
   
157.001   Findings and purpose
   
157.002   Scope
   
157.003   Definitions
   
157.004   Responsibilities of owners and occupants
Administration and Enforcement
   
157.036   Town Planner designated; power and duties
   
157.037   Right of entry
   
157.038   Enforcement procedure
   
157.039   Methods of service of complaints and orders
   
157.040   In rem action by Town Planner; placarding
   
157.041   Costs a lien on premises
   
157.042   Alternative remedies
   
157.043   Conflicting provisions
   
157.044   Violations
Minimum Standards for Dwellings and Dwelling Units
   
157.076   Compliance required
   
157.077   Structural conditions
   
157.078   Basic equipment and facilities
   
157.079   Ventilation
   
157.080   Space, use, location
   
157.081   Safety and sanitary maintenance
   
157.082   Control of insects, rodents, infestations
Standards for Roominghouses
   
157.116   Application of regulations
   
157.117   Water closet, lavatory, bath facilities
   
157.118   Minimum floor area
   
157.119   Sanitary conditions
 
   
157.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 157.001 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)    Pursuant to G.S. § 160D-1201, it is found and declared that there
exist in the town dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to
dilapidation; defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents and other
calamities; lack of ventilation, light and sanitary facilities; and other
conditions rendering dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, dangerous and detrimental
to the health, safety and morals, and otherwise inimical to the welfare of the
residents of the town.
   (B)   In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
the town as authorized by G.S. Ch. 160D, Art. 12, it is the purpose of this
chapter to establish minimum standards of fitness for the initial and continued
occupancy of all buildings used for human habitation, as expressly authorized
by G.S. § 160D-1205.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11; Am. Ord. passed 3-15-21)
§ 157.002 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all land within the
corporate limits of the town and within the territory beyond the corporate
limits and known as the town's one-mile extraterritorial jurisdiction, as
established on the Official Zoning Map.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
§ 157.003 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASEMENT. A portion of a dwelling which is located partly underground,
having direct access to light and air from windows located above the level of
the adjoining ground.
   CELLAR. A portion of a dwelling which is located partly or wholly
underground, having an inadequate access to light and air from windows located
partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.
   DETERIORATED. A dwelling that is unfit for human habitation and can be
repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards
established by this chapter at a cost not in excess of 50% of its value, as
determined by finding of the Town Planner.
   DILAPIDATED. A dwelling which is unfit for human habitation and cannot be
repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the minimum standards
established by this chapter except at a cost in excess of 50% of its value, as
determined by finding of the Town Planner.
   DWELLING. Any building, structure, manufactured home or mobile home used and
occupied for human habitation or intended to be so used, and includes any
outhouses and appurtenances belonging to or usually enjoyed with such dwelling;
except it does not include any manufactured home or mobile home which is used
solely for a seasonal vacation purpose. Temporary housing shall not be regarded
as a dwelling. The term shall include within its meaning the terms
"roominghouse" and "rooming unit."
   DWELLING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rodents or other
pests by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their
food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other
recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the Town Planner.
   GARBAGE. The organic waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food.
   HABITABLE ROOM. A room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be used
for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms, water
closet compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers or communicating
corridors, closets and storage spaces.
   INFESTATION. The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents or other pests in such number as to constitute a menace to the health,
safety or welfare of the occupants or the public.
   MULTIPLE DWELLING. Any dwelling containing more than two dwelling units.
   OCCUPANT. Any person over one year of age living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a building or part
of a building in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
   OWNER. Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others shall:
      (1)   Have title to any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession;
      (2)   Be a mortgagee of record for any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit; or
      (3)   Have charge, care or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit, as owner or agent of the actual owner, or as executor,
administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the actual owner. Any such
person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply with the
provisions of this chapter, and of rules and regulations adopted pursuant to
this chapter, to the same extent as if he were the owner.
   OWNER-OCCUPIED DWELLING. Any dwelling, whether owned by a single owner,
jointly or severally with others, which is occupied by at least one owner. No
dwelling that is rented, let, or leased, whole or in part, to any person or
persons for the purposes of living, sleeping, cooking and/or eating, or
advertised for such rental shall be considered an owner-occupied dwelling for
purposes of this chapter. No dwelling that is or becomes unoccupied due to
structural deficiencies or dilapidation of its structure for a period of 180
days or longer shall be considered an owner-occupied dwelling for purposes of
this chapter.
   PARTY or PARTIES IN INTEREST. All persons who have interests of record in
and any persons who are in possession of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit.
   PLUMBING. All of the following supplied facilities and equipment: gas pipes,
gas burning equipment, water pipes, mechanical garbage disposal units
(mechanical sink grinders), sewage disposal pipes, water closets, sinks,
installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes
washing machines, catch basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied
fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
   PUBLIC AUTHORITY. The town housing authority or officer who is in charge of
the department or branch of the government of the town or of the county or
state relating to health, fire, building regulations, or other activities
concerning dwellings in the town.
   ROOMING UNIT. Any room or group of rooms forming a single, habitable unit
used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or
eating purposes.
   ROOMINGHOUSE. Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or
more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or
more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or
sibling of the owner or operator. The owner or operator shall be a permanent
resident of the roominghouse.
   RUBBISH. Nonorganic waste materials. The term shall include paper, rags,
cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard
trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass and dust.
   SUPPLIED. Paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the
owner or operator.
   TEMPORARY HOUSING. Any tent, trailer or other structure used for human
shelter, which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the
ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises
for more than 30 consecutive days.
   TOWN PLANNER. The Town Planner of the town or his authorized agent.
   UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. A dwelling in which conditions exist in a
dwelling, dwelling unit, roominghouse or rooming unit which violate or do not
comply with one or more of the minimum standards of fitness or one or more of
the requirements established by this chapter.
   (B)   Whenever the term "Dwelling," "Dwelling unit," "Roominghouse,"
"Rooming unit," or "Premises" is used in this chapter, it shall be construed as
though followed by the term "or any part thereof."
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
§ 157.004 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS AND OCCUPANTS.
   (A)   Public areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary
condition the shared or public areas of the dwelling and its premises.
   (B)   Cleanliness. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep
in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and
premises which he occupies and controls.
   (C)   Rubbish and garbage. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit
shall dispose of all his rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by
placing it in proper rubbish container(s). The owner shall be responsible for
designating a proper outdoor location for such containers to be located and
collected.
   (D)   Supplied plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall
keep all supplied plumbing fixtures in the unit in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in their
proper use and operation.
   (E)   Care of facilities, equipment and structure. No occupant shall
willfully destroy, deface or impair any of the facilities or equipment, or any
part of the structure of a dwelling or dwelling unit.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 157.036 TOWN PLANNER DESIGNATED; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Town Planner is designated as the officer to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and to exercise the duties and powers prescribed in
this chapter. The Town Planner is authorized to exercise such powers as may be
necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions
of this chapter.
   (B)   The Town Planner shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   To investigate the dwelling conditions, and to inspect dwellings
and dwelling units located in the town, in order to determine which dwellings
and dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for the purpose of
carrying out the objectives of this chapter with respect to the repair, closing
or demolition of such dwellings and dwelling units.
      (2)   To take such action, together with other appropriate departments
and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect rehabilitation
of housing which is deteriorated.
      (3)   To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this
chapter and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the minimum
standards of fitness prescribed in this chapter.
      (4)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence.
      (5)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations and
inspections. Such entries shall be made in accordance with §
157.037 and state law, and shall be made in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession.
      (6)   To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and
employees as he deems necessary to assist in carrying out the purposes of this
chapter, and to delegate any of his functions and powers to such officers,
agents and employees.
      (7)   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed in this chapter
or by the Town Manager.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
§ 157.037 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)    Pursuant to G.S. § 160D-1210, the Town Planner is authorized to
enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling
units, roominghouses, rooming units and the associated premises for the purpose
of making inspections. The owner, occupant or the person in charge of every
dwelling, dwelling unit, roominghouse or rooming unit, shall give the Town
Planner free access to that dwelling and its premises at all reasonable times
for the purposes of such inspection, examination and survey.
   (B)   Every occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit, roominghouse or rooming
unit shall give the owner, his agent or employee, access to any part of that
dwelling or dwelling unit and its premises at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11; Am. Ord. passed 3-15-21)
§ 157.038 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing.  Whenever a petition is
filed with the Town Planner by a public authority or by at least five residents
of the town, charging that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human
habitation, or whenever it appears to the Town Planner, upon inspection, that
any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, he shall, if his
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for such charges, issue and cause
to be served upon the owner of and parties in interest in such dwelling or
dwelling unit a complaint stating the charges and containing a notice that a
hearing will be held before the Town Planner at a place fixed in the notice,
not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the serving of the complaint. The
owner or any party in interest shall have the right to file an answer to the
complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the
place and time fixed in the complaint. Notice of the hearing shall also be
given to at least one of the persons signing a petition relating to the
dwelling. Any person desiring to do so may attend the hearing and give
evidence. Evidence relevant in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling
in hearings before the Town Planner, and the normal rules of evidence will not
apply to such hearings.
   (B)   Procedure after hearing. After the notice and hearing prescribed in
division (A) of this section, the Town Planner shall state in writing his
determination whether the dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human
habitation, and if so, whether it is deteriorated or dilapidated.
      (1)   Deteriorated dwelling, dwelling unit. If the Town Planner
determines that the dwelling or dwelling unit is deteriorated, he or she shall
state in writing his or her findings of fact in support of that determination,
and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner an order directing and
requiring the owner to repair, alter or improve the dwelling or dwelling unit
to comply with the minimum standards of fitness established by this chapter
within a specified period of time, not to exceed 90 days. The order may also
direct and require the owner to vacate and close the dwelling or dwelling unit
until the repairs, alterations and improvements have been made.
      (2)   Dilapidated dwelling. If the Town Planner determines that the
dwelling is dilapidated, he or she shall state in writing his or her findings
of fact to support that determination, and shall issue and cause to be served
upon the owner an order directing and requiring the owner either to repair,
alter or improve the dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with the minimum
standards of fitness established by this chapter, or else to vacate and remove
or demolish them within a specified period of time not to exceed 90 days.
      (3)   Vacated and closed dwellings.    
         (a)    If the Town Council shall have adopted an ordinance as
described in division (C) below, ordering a dwelling to be repaired, altered or
improved pursuant to the findings of the Town Planner pursuant to (B)(1) or (2)
or division (C), and if the owner has vacated and closed such dwelling and kept
such dwelling vacated and closed for a period of one year pursuant to the
ordinance or order, if the Town Council shall then find that the owner has
abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter or improve the dwelling in
order to render it fit for human habitation and that the continuation of the
dwelling in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health,
safety, morals and welfare of the city in that the dwelling would continue to
deteriorate, would create a fire and safety hazard, would be a threat to
children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal activities,
would cause and contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values
in the area, and would render unavailable property and a dwelling which might
otherwise have been made available to ease the persistent shortage of decent
and affordable housing in this state, in such circumstances, the Town Council,
may, after the expiration of such one-year period, enact an ordinance and serve
such ordinance on the owner, setting forth the following:
            1.   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render
it fit for human habitation can be made at a cost not exceeding 50% of the then
current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the owner
either repair or demolish the dwelling within 90 days; or
            2.   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render
it fit for human habitation cannot be made at a cost not exceeding 50% of the
then current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the owner to
demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days.
         (b)   An ordinance adopted pursuant to this section shall be recorded
in the office of the County Register of Deeds and shall be indexed in the name
of the property owner in the grantor index. If the owner fails to comply with
this section, the Town Planner shall effectuate the purpose of the ordinance.
The cost to repair or demolish and remove the dwelling shall be a lien against
the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such lien shall be filed,
have priority and be collected in the same manner as the lien for special
assessments established by G.S. § 160A-216 et seq.
         (c)   For the purpose of this section, the "current value" of a
dwelling or structure shall be defined as the fair market value as determined
by a certified appraiser or the current tax value on record with the county tax
office, whichever is less.
   (C)   Failure to comply with order.
      (1)   In personam remedy. If the owner of any deteriorated dwelling or
dwelling unit shall fail to comply with an order of the Town Planner to repair,
alter or improve, or to vacate and close the dwelling or dwelling unit within
the time specified, or if the owner of a dilapidated dwelling or dwelling unit
shall fail to comply with an order of the Town Planner to repair, alter or
improve, or to vacate and close and remove or demolish the dwelling or dwelling
unit within the time specified, the Town Planner shall submit to the Town
Council at its next regular meeting a resolution directing the Town Attorney to
petition the Superior Court for an order directing that owner comply with the
order of the Town Planner, as authorized by G.S. § 160D-1208(e).
      (2)   In rem remedy. After failure of an owner of a deteriorated or
dilapidated dwelling or dwelling unit to comply with an order of the Town
Planner within the time specified, if injunctive relief has not been sought or
has not been granted as provided in division (C)(1), the Town Planner shall
submit to the Town Council an ordinance ordering the Town Planner to cause that
dwelling or dwelling unit to be repaired, altered, improved, vacated, closed,
removed or demolished, as provided in the original order of the Town Planner,
and pending removal or demolition, to place a placard on that dwelling as
provided by G.S. § 160D-1203(4) and §
157.040 of this code.
   (D)   Appeals from orders of the Town Planner.
      (1)   An appeal from any decision or order of the Town Planner may be
taken by any aggrieved person. Any appeal from the Town Planner shall be taken
within ten days from the rendering of the decision or service of the order and
shall be taken by filing with the Town Planner and with the Board of Adjustment
a notice of appeal which shall specify the grounds upon which the appeal is
based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the Town Planner shall
forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the
record upon which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from a
decision of the Town Planner refusing to allow the aggrieved person to do any
act, his or her decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When
an appeal is from a decision of the Town Planner requiring the aggrieved person
to do any act, the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement
until the hearing by the Board of Adjustment unless the Town Planner certifies
to the Board of Adjustment, after the notice of appeal is filed with him or
her, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate, a copy of which
shall be furnished the appellant, a suspension of this requirement would cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the requirement shall not be
suspended except for due cause shown upon not less than one day's written
notice to the Town Planner, by the Board of Adjustment,  or by a court of
record upon petition made pursuant to G.S. § 160D- 1208(e) and division (E) of
this section.
      (2)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing
of all appeals, shall give due notice to all the parties, and shall render its
decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent
or attorney. The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly,
or may modify the decision or order appealed from, and may make such decision
and order as in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end
shall have all the powers of the Town Planner; but the concurring vote of four
members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to reverse or modify any
decision or order of the Town Planner. The Board of Adjustment shall have power
also in passing upon appeals, in any case where there are practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict
letter of this chapter, to adapt the application of this chapter to the
necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of this chapter shall be
observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done.
      (3)    Every decision of the Board of Adjustment shall be subject to
review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of
the decision of the Board as provided by G.S. § 160D-1208(c).
   (E)   Petition to superior court by owner. Any person aggrieved by an order
issued by the Town Planner or a decision rendered by the Board shall have the
right, within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision,
to petition the superior court for a temporary injunction restraining the Town
Planner pending a final disposition of the cause, as provided by G.S. § 160D-
1208(d).
(Ord. passed 6-6-11; Am. Ord. passed 3-15-21)
§ 157.039 METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.
   Complaints or orders issued by the Town Planner shall be served upon persons
either personally or by registered or certified mail. When service is made by
registered or certified mail, a copy of the complaint or order may also be sent
by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the registered or
certified mail is unclaimed or refused, but the regular mail is not returned by
the post office within ten days after the mailing. If regular mail is used, a
notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises affected. If the whereabouts of such persons are unknown and cannot be
ascertained by the Town Planner in the exercise of reasonable diligence, or, if
the owners are known but have refused to accept service by registered or
certified mail, the Town Planner shall make an affidavit to that effect; and
the serving of the complaint or order upon that person may be made by
publishing the complaint or order at least once no later than the time at which
personal service would be required under the provisions of this chapter in a
newspaper having general circulation in the town. Where service is made by
publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
§ 157.040 IN REM ACTION BY TOWN PLANNER; PLACARDING.
   (A)   After failure of an owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit to comply
with an order of the Town Planner issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter, and upon adoption by the Town Council of an ordinance authorizing and
directing him to do so, as provided by G.S. § 60D-1203(5) and §
157.037(C) of this code, the Town Planner shall proceed to cause such dwelling
or dwelling unit to be repaired, altered or improved to comply with the minimum
standards of fitness established by this chapter, or to be vacated and closed
and removed or demolished, as directed by the ordinance of the Town Council,
and shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the dwelling or dwelling
unit a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is
prohibited and unlawful." Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a
misdemeanor.
   (B)    Each ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the register of
deeds in the county wherein the property is located and shall be indexed in the
name of the property owner in the grantor index, as provided by G.S. § 160D-
1203.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11; Am. Ord. passed 3-15-21)
§ 157.041 COSTS A LIEN ON PREMISES.
   As provided by G.S. § 160D-1203(7), the cost of any repairs, alterations or
improvements, or of vacating and closing, or removal or demolition, caused to
be made or done by the codes administrator pursuant to §
157.040 shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was
incurred. The lien shall be filed, having priority, and be collected in the
same manner as the lien for special assessments established by G.S. §§ 160A-216
through 160A-238.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11; Am. Ord. passed 3-15-21)
§ 157.042 ALTERNATIVE REMEDIES.
   Neither this chapter nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair
or limit in any way the power of the town to define and declare nuisances and
to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to enforce this
chapter by criminal process as authorized by G.S. §§ 14-4 and this code; and
the enforcement of any remedy provided in this chapter shall not prevent the
enforcement of any other remedy or remedies provided in this chapter or in
other ordinances or laws.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
§ 157.043 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
   If any provision, standard or requirement of this chapter is found to be in
conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of the town, the
provision which establishes the higher standard or more stringent requirement
for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the residents of
the town shall prevail.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
§ 157.044 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to
fail, neglect or refuse to repair, alter or improve it, or to vacate and close
and remove or demolish it, upon order of the Town Planner duly made and served
as provided in this chapter, within the time specified in that order. Each day
that any such failure, neglect or refusal to comply with the order continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit,
with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to §
157.038, to occupy or permit its occupancy after the time prescribed in the
order for its repair, alteration or improvement or its vacation and closing.
Each day the occupancy continues after the prescribed time shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR DWELLINGS AND DWELLING UNITS
§ 157.076 COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Except where owner-occupied dwellings are specifically exempted, every
dwelling and dwelling unit used as a human habitation, or held out for use as a
human habitation, shall comply with all of the minimum standards of fitness for
human habitation and all of the requirements of this article.
   (B)   Except where owner-occupied dwellings are specifically exempted, no
person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy or use
as a human habitation, any dwelling or dwelling unit which does not comply with
all of the minimum standards of fitness for human habitation and all of the
requirements of this article.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
§ 157.077 STRUCTURAL CONDITIONS.
   The following shall be the minimum standards for structural condition of
dwellings or dwelling units (except that only division (B) below shall apply to
owner-occupied dwellings, which are specifically exempted from the other
standards of this section):
   (A)   Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills, joists, rafters or
other structural members shall not list, lean or buckle, and shall not be
rotted, deteriorated or damaged.
   (B)   Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills, joists, rafters or
other structural members shall not have holes or cracks which might admit
rodents.
   (C)   Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and strength to
be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
   (D)   Foundations, foundation walls, piers or other foundation supports
shall not be deteriorated or damaged.
   (E)   Steps, stairs, landings, porches or other parts or appurtenances shall
be maintained in such condition that they will not fail or collapse.
   (F)   Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall be
provided.
   (G)   Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets and hallways shall
be finished of suitable materials, which will, by use of reasonable household
methods, promote sanitation and cleanliness, and shall be maintained in such a
manner as to enable the occupants to maintain reasonable privacy between
various spaces.
   (H)   The roofs, flashings, exterior walls, basement walls, floors and all
doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and maintained so
as to be weathertight and watertight.
   (I)   There shall be no chimneys or parts of chimneys which are defective,
deteriorated or in danger of falling, or in such condition or location as to
constitute a fire hazard.
   (J)   There shall be no use of the ground for floors, or wood floors on the
ground.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
§ 157.078 BASIC EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES.
   The following shall be the minimum standards for basic equipment and
facilities in dwellings and dwelling units (except owner-occupied dwellings,
which are specifically exempted from the standards of this section):
   (A)   Plumbing system.
      (1)   Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a potable water supply and
to the public sewer or other approved sewage disposal system.
      (2)   Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen sink,
lavatory, tub or shower, water closet, and adequate supply of both cold water
and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe
distribution system connected to a potable water supply.
      (3)   All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the Macon County
Plumbing Code, as adopted, and shall be maintained in a state of good repair
and in good working order.
      (4)   All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling
unit and be accessible to the occupants. The water closet and tub or shower
shall be located in a room affording privacy to the user.
   (B)   Heating system. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have facilities
for providing heat in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Central and electric heating systems.  Every central or electric
heating system shall be of sufficient capacity to heat all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit to which it is
connected with a minimum temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit measured at a
point three feet above the floor during ordinary winter conditions.
      (2)   Other heating facilities. Where a central or electric heating
system is not provided, each dwelling and dwelling unit shall be provided with
sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues, or gas vents, or other facilities to
which heating appliances may be connected to heat all habitable rooms with a
minimum temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit measured three feet above the
floor during ordinary winter conditions.
      (3)   Electrical system.
         (a)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be wired for electric
lights and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall contain at least
two floor- or wall-type electric convenience receptacles, connected in such
manner as determined by the State Electrical Code. There shall be installed in
every bathroom, water closet room, laundry room and furnace room at least one
supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. If wall or ceiling light
fixtures are not provided in any habitable room, each such habitable room shall
contain at least three floor- or wall-type electric convenience receptacles.
         (b)   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall
be adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when natural daylight is
not sufficient.
         (c)   All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be
maintained in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used, and
installed in accordance with the State Electrical Code.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
§ 157.079 VENTILATION.
   The following shall be the minimum standards for ventilation in dwellings
and dwelling units (except owner-occupied dwellings, which are specifically
exempted from the standards of this section):
   (A)   Generally. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or
skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area,
measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor area
of that room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a window or
any room and those light-obstructing structures are located less than five feet
from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room,
such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall
not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area.
Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of the
room, the total window area of that skylight shall equal at least 15% of the
total floor area of the room.
   (B)   Habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one window
or skylight which can easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately
ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every habitable room
shall be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size or minimum
skylight-type window size as required, or shall have other approved, equivalent
ventilation.
   (C)   Bathroom and water closet rooms. Every bathroom and water closet
compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for
habitable rooms, except that no window or skylight shall be required in
adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet rooms equipped with an
approved ventilation system.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
§ 157.080 SPACE, USE, LOCATION.
   The following shall be the minimum standards for space, use and the location
applicable to dwellings and dwelling units (except owner-occupied dwellings,
which are specifically exempted from the standards of this section):
   (A)   Room sizes.
      (1)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the minimum room size in
each habitable room as required by the State Residential Building Code.
      (2)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of
habitable floor area for the first occupant, at least 100 square feet of
additional habitable area for each of the next three occupants, and at least 75
square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional occupant.
      (3)   In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square
feet of floor area; and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each
occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area for
each occupant under 12 years of age.
   (B)   Ceiling height. At least half the floor area of every habitable room
shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet six inches.
   (C)   Floor area calculation. Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of
habitable room area. However, closet area and wall area within the dwelling
unit may count for not more than 10% of the required habitable floor area. The
floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height is less than 4 1/
2 feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area for the purpose of
determining maximum permissible occupancy.
   (D)   Cellar. No cellar shall be used for living purposes.
   (E)   Basements. No basement shall be used for living purposes unless the:
      (1)   Floor and walls are substantially watertight.
      (2)   Total window area, total openable window area, and ceiling height
are equal to those required for habitable rooms.
      (3)   Required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely
above the grade adjoining that window area, except where the window faces a
stairwell, window well or accessway.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
§ 157.081 SAFE AND SANITARY MAINTENANCE.
   The following shall be the minimum standards for safe and sanitary
maintenance applicable to dwellings and dwelling units (except owner-occupied
dwellings, which are specifically exempted from the standards of this section
except for divisions (G) and (H), which shall apply to all dwellings covered by
this chapter):
   (A)   Exterior foundations, walls and roofs.  Every foundation wall,
exterior wall, and exterior roof shall be:
      (1)   Substantially weathertight and rodentproof;
      (2)   Kept in sound condition and good repair;
      (3)   Capable of affording privacy; and
      (4)   Safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use
would cause to be placed thereon.
      (5)   Every exterior wall shall be protected with paint or other
protective covering to prevent the entrance or penetration of moisture or the
weather.
   (B)   Interior floors, walls and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall and
ceiling shall be:
      (1)   Substantially rodentproof;
      (2)   Kept in sound condition and good repair; and
      (3)   Safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use
would cause to be placed on the floor, wall or ceiling.
   (C)   Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, basement, or cellar
door and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight, watertight and
rodentproof and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.
   (D)   Stairs, porches and appurtenances.  Every outside and inside stair,
porch and any appurtenance shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the
load that normal use would cause to be placed on the stair, porch or
appurtenance and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
   (E)   Bathroom floors. Every bathroom floor surface and water closet
compartment floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so that it will
be reasonably impervious to water and will permit that floor to be easily kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (F)   Supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment, or
utility which is required under this chapter shall be so constructed or
installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained
in satisfactory working condition.
   (G)   Drainage. Every yard shall be properly graded in order to obtain
thorough drainage and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.
   (H)   Noxious weeds. Every yard and all exterior property areas shall be
kept free of species of weeds or plant growth which are noxious or detrimental
to health.
   (I)   Egress. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with adequate means of
egress as required by the State Residential Building Code.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
§ 157.082 CONTROL OF INSECTS, RODENTS, INFESTATIONS.
   The following shall be the minimum standards for control of insects, rodents
and infestations in dwellings and dwelling units:
   (A)   Screens. In every dwelling unit, for protection against mosquitoes,
flies and other insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to
outdoor space shall be equipped with screens and a self-closing device. Every
window or other device with openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be
used for ventilation, shall likewise be equipped with screens.
   (B)   Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be
used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide
an entry for rodents, shall be equipped with screens or such other approved
device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
   (C)   Infestation. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling
unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or
other pests in or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Whenever
infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a
rodentproof or reasonably insectproof condition, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the
dwelling units in any dwelling or in the shared or public parts of any dwelling
containing two or more dwelling units, extermination shall be the
responsibility of the owner.
   (D)   Rubbish storage and disposal. Every dwelling and every dwelling unit
shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for storage of rubbish as
required by this chapter and other town ordinances; and the owner, operator or
agent in control of that dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for the
removal of rubbish.
   (E)   Garbage storage and disposal. Every dwelling and every dwelling unit
shall be supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility, which may be an
adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink grinder) in each
dwelling unit, or an approved outside garbage can as required by this chapter
or other town ordinances.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
STANDARDS FOR ROOMINGHOUSES
§ 157.116 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
   All of the provisions and all of the minimum standards and requirements of
this chapter shall be applicable to roominghouses, and to every person who
operates a roominghouse, or who occupies or lets to another for occupancy and
any rooming unit in any roominghouse, except as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
§ 157.117 WATER CLOSET, LAVATORY, BATH FACILITIES.
   (A)   At least one water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower,
properly connected to an approved water and sewer system and in good working
condition, shall be supplied for each four rooms within a roominghouse wherever
these facilities are shared. All such facilities shall be located within the
residence building served and shall be directly accessible from a common hall
or passageway, and shall be not more than one story removed from any of the
persons sharing such facilities. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower
shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all times. Such required
facilities shall not be located in a cellar.
   (B)   Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory basin, and bathtub or
shower required by division (A) of this section shall be located within the
roominghouse and within rooms which afford privacy, are separate from the
habitable rooms, are accessible from a common hall, and are accessible without
going outside the roominghouse or through any other room in the roominghouse.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
§ 157.118 MINIMUM FLOOR AREA.
   Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at
least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of
floor area for each occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square
feet of floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
§ 157.119 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   The operator of every roominghouse shall be responsible for the sanitary
maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings, and for the sanitary maintenance
of every other part of the roominghouse. He shall be further responsible for
the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or
building within which the roominghouse is contained is leased or occupied by
the operator.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
§ 157.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor, as provided by G.S. § 14-4; and any person who shall violate the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance
with §
10.99.
   (B)   In addition to the penalty established by division (A) of this
section, and the remedies provided by other provisions of this chapter, this
chapter may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 6-6-11)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.    Date   Description
No.     Passed
               Annexing land beginning at the intersection of the Franklin Town Limit Boundary
               Line with the north margin of Circle Drive, on or near the west boundary of Lot
1       9-5-78 No. 11 of the Ethel Hurst's Addition to the City of Franklin, N.C., a plat of
               which is recorded in the Office of Register of Deeds for Macon County, North
               Carolina in Plat Book 1, at page 158, to which can be referred for a more
               complete and accurate description.
2       3-2-81 Annexing 22.04 acres of land in Franklin Township, and being part of what is
               known as Fox Ridge Subdivision.
3       5-5-86 Annexing 28.70 acres of land in the East Main Street area.
               Annexing 4.13 acres of land with the beginning corner being the beginning corner
4       11-3-  of the land described in the deed from Billy J. Tallent and wife to John C.
        86     Trout, dated September 5, 1986, and recorded in the Office of Register of Deeds
               for Macon County, North Carolina in Deed Book Z-16 at page 185.
               Annexing land beginning at a right-of- way monument located on the southerly
5       6-20-  right-of-way of U.S. 64 (Franklin By- Pass) at the northeastern corner of the
        88     property described herein and bounded on the east by land now or formerly owned
               by E.W. Fisher.
6       8-1-88 Annexing the following tracts of land:
               (1)   Annexing 6.665 acres as shown on a plat entitled A New Retail Facility,
             Horne Properties, Inc., Franklin Township, Macon County, North Carolina, as
               prepared by G.L. Sprinkle, Registered Land Surveyor, L- 1454, under date of
               October 22, 1987, and revised November 27, 1987.
               (2)   Annexing 18.364 acres as shown on a plat entitled A New Retail Facility,
               Horne Properties, Inc., Franklin, Township, Macon County, North Carolina, as
             prepared by G.L. Sprinkle, Registered Land Surveyor, L- 1454 under date of
               October 22, 1987, and revised November 27, 1987. This tract is subject to an
               access easement as shown on the aforemention ed plat.
               (3)   Annexing 5.007 acres as shown on a plat entitled A New Retail Facility,
             Horne Properties, Inc., Franklin Township, Macon County, North Carolina, as
               prepared by G.L. Sprinkle, Registered Land Surveyor, L- 1454, under date of
               October 22, 1987, and revised November 27, 1987.
               (4)   Annexing .725 acre as shown on a plat entitled A New Retail Facility,
             Horne Properties, Inc., Franklin Township, Macon County, North Carolina, as
               prepared by G.L. Sprinkle, Registered Land Surveyor, L- 1454, under date of
               October 22, 1987, and revised November 27, 1987.
               (5)   Annexing 2.359 acres as shown on a plat entitled A New Retail Facility,
             Horne Properties, Inc., Franklin Township, Macon County, North Carolina, as
               prepared by G.L. Sprinkle, Registered Land Surveyor, L- 1454, under date of
               October 22, 1987, and revised November 27, 1987.
               (6)   Annexing .820 acre as shown on a plat entitled A New Retail Facility,
             Horne Properties, Inc., Franklin Township, Macon County, North Carolina, as
               prepared by G.L. Sprinkle, Registered Land Surveyor, L- 1454, under date of
               October, 22, 1987.
               (7)   Annexing .724 acre as shown on a plat entitled A New Retail Facility,
             Horne Properties, Inc., Franklin Township, Macon County, North Carolina, as
               prepared by G.L. Sprinkle, Registered Land Surveyor, L- 1454, under date of
               October 22, 1987, and revised November 27, 1987.
               (8)   Annexing .573 acre as shown on a plat entitled A New Retail Facility,
             Horne Properties, Inc., Franklin Township, Macon County, North Carolina, as
               prepared by G.L. Sprinkle, Registered Land Surveyor, L- 1454, under date of
               October 22, 1987, and revised November 27, 1987.
               (9)   Annexing .766 acre as shown on a plat entitled A New Retail Facility,
             Horne Properties, Inc., Franklin Township, Macon County, North Carolina, as
               prepared by G.L. Sprinkle, Registered Land Surveyor, L- 1454, under date of
               October 22, 1987, and revised November 27, 1987.
               (10)   Annexing land beginning on an existing iron pipe, the fourth corner of
             the tract of land described in a deed from John M. Corey and wife, Kathleen L.
               Corey; William M. Corey and wife, Brenda Corey; and James S. Bickel and wife,
               Patricia Bickel to Horne Properties, Inc.
6       8-1-88 Annexing the following tracts of land:
             (1)   Annexing 8.635 acres and being shown on plat prepared by James T. Herron,
               R.L.S., dated November 9, 1973, and entitled “Duncan and Watkins.”
             (2)   Annexing 2.087 acres and being shown on the plat prepared by James T.
               Herron, R.L.S., dated November 9, 1973, and entitled “Duncan and Watkins.”
             (3)   Annexing .062 of an acre as per survey and plat of James T. Herron,
               R.L.S., bearing date of December 9, 1973, entitled “Franklin Plaza.”
               Annexing 38 acres, as shown on the plat thereof prepared from a survey by
8       9-5-89 Benjamin A. West, Registered Land Surveyor, dated August 3, 1987, revised August
               3, 1989.
9       4-8-91 Annexing noncontiguou s territory being Section Two of Brookwood Heights.
               Annexing noncontiguous territory beginning at a point on the end of a culvert at
               a branch which runs under N.C. State Highway No. 28, said point of beginning
10      4-6-92 being the second corner in the deed from E.L. Whittington and wife, Hettie
               Whittington to Herman Houston and wife, Bonnie Houston, dated July 19, 1946, and
               recorded in the County Office of the Register of Deeds in Deed Book R-5, Page
               26.
               Annexing noncontiguous territory being all of the property as described in a
11      11-2-  deed dated August 25, 1976 from Cecil Wayne Cole and wife, Mildred T. Cole, to
        92     Eric A. McDonnell and wife, Ruth H. McDonnell, as recorded in the County Office
               of the Register of Deeds, in Deed Book E-11, Page 110.
12      5-2-94 Annexing noncontiguous territory, recorded in the office of the Register of
               Deeds for Macon County, in Book 1 at Page 53, on 9-13-94.
14      3-6-95 Annexing noncontiguous territory.
15      5-1-95 Annexing noncontiguous territory.
17      5-1-95 Annexing noncontiguous territory.
               Annexing real property described in the deed dated August 3, 1994, from Howard
               Guest and wife, Henrietta Guest, to Edward L. Sibilsky, Jr., and wife, Marjorie
16      5-1-95 K. Sibilsky, and Richard K. Beauchemin, Jr., and wife, Sandra M. Beauchemin,
               recorded in Book N-20 at Pages 1344-1346, Macon County Public Registry. Recorded
               in the office of the Register of Deeds for Macon County, in Book X-20 at Pages
               435-437, on 6-13-95.
18      6-5-95 Annexing Study Area 2.
19      8-5-96 Annexing two tracts of land recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for
               Macon County, in Book Q-21 at Pages 810-812, on 10-24-96.
20      3-3-97 Annexing tract of land recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for Macon
               County, in Book V-21 at Pages 2191-2192, on 3-18-97.
               Annexing a portion of the property as described in the deed dated April 1989,
21      2-2-98 from Bob Gillespie and wife, Sue Gillespie, to Richard Gillespie. Recorded in
               the office of the Register of Deeds for Macon County, in Book L-22 at Pages
               1520-1521, on 3-3-98.
22      4-6-98 Annexing noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds
               for Macon County, Book O-22 at Pages 939-941, on 5-5-98.
NC
Session 7-22-  An Act to Add Certain Described Property to the Corporate Limits of the Town of
Law     98     Franklin.
1998-51
29      6-7-99 Extending the town's corporate limits to include the Baird Cove Road Annexation
               Study Area.
24      8-2-99 Annexing tract of land recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds for Macon
               County, in Book O-23 at Pages 191-192, on 9-28-99.
25      9-7-99 Annexing noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds
               for Macon County, in Book O-23 at Pages 193-196, on 9-28-99.
26      9-7-99 Annexing noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds
               for Macon County, in Book O-23 at Pages 197-199, on 9-28-99.
27      11-1-  Annexing noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds
        99     for Macon County, in Book Y-23 at Pages 985-986, on 5-4-00.
28      4-3-00 Annexing noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds
               for Macon County, in Book Z-23 at Pages 439-442, on 5-22-00.
30      9-5-00 Annexing noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds
               for Macon County, in Book G-24 at Pages 1194-1196, on 10-30-00.
31      12-4-  Annexing noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds
        00     for Macon County, in Book K-24 at Pages 1805-1807, on 1-23-01.
32      12-4-  Annexing noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds
        00     for Macon County, in Book K-24 at Pages 1808-1809, on 1-23-01.
33      6-11-  Annexing noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds
        01     for Macon County, in Book Z-24 at Pages 222- 224, on 8-23- 01.
34      12-3-  Annexing noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds
        01     for Macon County, in Book J-25 at Pages 960- 961, on 1-17- 02.
35      2-3-03 Annexing noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds
               for Macon County, in Book Q-26 at Pages 799-801, on 3-21-03.
35A     8-4-03 Annexing noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds
               for Macon County, in Book H-27 at Pages 891-893, on 9-4-03.
35B     11-4-  Annexing noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds
        03     for Macon County, in Book B-28 at Pages 1347-1352, on 5-11-04.
37      10-3-  Annexing a noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of
        05     Deeds for Macon County, in Book H-30 at Pages 1986- 1989, on 5- 19-06.
36      10-3-  Annexing a noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of
        05     Deeds for Macon County, in Book H-30 at Pages 1990- 1992, on 5- 19-06.
38      1-2-06 Annexing a noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of
               Deeds for Macon County, in Book D-30 at Pages 736- 738, on 3-27- 06.
39      1-2-06 Annexing a noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of
               Deeds for Macon County, in Book D-30 at Pages 739- 740, on 3-27- 06.
40      2-5-07 Annexing a noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of
               Deeds for Macon County, in Book G-31 at Pages 775- 777, on 4-11- 07.
41      4-2-07 Annexing a noncontiguous territory recorded in the office of the Register of
               Deeds for Macon County, in Book S-31 at Pages 892- 894, on 9-20- 07.
               Annexing a portion of the lands and premises described in a deed to Gary D. and
42      3-2-09 Edith English Holland, the deed being dated August 18, 2006, and recorded in
               Deed Book R-30, page 691, Macon County Registry.
43      6-7-10 Annexing a noncontiguous territory recorded in the Office of the Register of
               Deeds for Macon County, in Book F-29, at Pages 339- 341 on 5-26-05.
44      6-7-10 Annexing a noncontiguous territory recorded in the Office of the Register of
               Deeds for Macon County, in Book U-20, at Pages 525- 527 on 3-6-95.
        3-16-  To extend the corporate limits of the town of Franklin recorded in the Office of
45      09     the Register of Deeds for Macon County, in Book CRP V-33, at Pages 165- 182 on
               8-5- 10.
               To extend the corporate limits of the town of Franklin recorded in the Office of
46      7-6-10 the Register of Deeds for Macon County, in Book CRP V-33, at Pages 186- 189 on
               8-5- 10.
               To extend the corporate limits of the town of Franklin recorded in the Office of
47      7-6-10 the Register of Deeds for Macon County, in Book CRP V-33, at Pages 183- 185 on
               8-5- 10.
               To extend the corporate limits of the town of Franklin recorded in the Office of
48      7-6-10 the Register of Deeds for Macon County, in Book CRP U-33, at Pages 1813- 1815 on
               7- 28-10.
               To extend the corporate limits of the town of Franklin recorded in the Office of
49      7-6-10 the Register of Deeds for Macon County, in Book CRP U-33, at Pages 1816- 1819 on
               7- 28-10.
               To extend the corporate limits of the town of Franklin recorded in the Office of
50      3-7-11 the Register of Deeds for Macon County, in Book CRP L- 34. at Pages 2222-2226 on
               8-2-11.
        12-20- To extend the corporate limits of the town of Franklin recorded in the Office of
51      10     the Register of Deeds for Macon County, in Book CRP T- 34. at Pages 251-284 on
               1-12-12.
-       3-3-14 Annexing certain described territory into the town; recorded in the Office of
               the Register of Deeds for Macon County.
-       3-3-14 Annexing certain described territory into the town; recorded in the Office of
               the Register of Deeds for Macon County.
-       3-3-14 Annexing certain described territory into the town; recorded in the Office of
               the Register of Deeds for Macon County.
              
 
TABLE II: FRANCHISES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.   Date Passed Description
                       Granting a franchise to R & G Communications, Inc. to
—        10-1-79     operate and maintain a community antenna television
                       system (CATV System) in the Town of Franklin.
                       Granting a franchise to Nantahala Power and Light
                       Company, to construct and maintain its lines for the
                       transmission and distribution of electricity along, over
—        10-4-93     and under the highways of the town, and to conduct and
                       carry on within the town the business authorized by and
                       under the terms of the charter of the Nantahala Power
                       and Light Company.
—        5-4-98      Granting a gas franchise to the City of Toccoa, Georgia,
                       for thirty years.
                       Extending the expiration date for cable television
—        10-4-99     franchise agreement with Mediacom Southeast LLC until 4-
                       1-00.
—        4-3-00      Cable television agreement with Mediacom Southeast LLC
                       for fifteen years.
Resolution 3-5-01      Approving solid waste franchise granted to J & B
                       Disposal for ten years.
                      
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to 1976 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
G.S. Section Code Section
G.S. Section              Code Section
Ch. 14, Art. 7A           156.05
Ch. 14, Art. 26           156.05
Ch. 14, Art. 26A          156.05
Ch. 14, Art. 27           156.05
Ch. 14, Art. 27A          130.08
Ch. 14, Art. 37           156.05
Ch. 14, Art. 39           156.05
                          Charter, §
                          44,
                          34.99,
                          91.99,
14-4                      94.99,
                          95.99,
                          152.136,
                          155.15,
                          157.042,
                          157.999
14-4(a)                   10.99,
                          70.99
15-27.2                   152.195
Ch. 18B                   95.90
18B-101                   130.01
18B-200                   95.91
18B-904(h)                95.91
18B-1001                  110.40
18B-1001(1)               95.91
18B-1001(3)               95.91
18B-1001(5)               95.91
18B-1001(10)              95.91
18B-1010                  95.94
18B-1100(5)               95.91
19A-20 et seq.            152.123
20-4.01(13)               90.01
20-141                    71.08
20-157                    33.24
20-175                    113.07
20-219.11                 90.09
44A-1 et seq.             90.11
47-30                     152.052
66-385 - 66-399           110.01,
                          110.33
66-387                    110.01
66-390                    110.30
66-390(d)                 110.32
66-399                    110.31
66-405 - 66-419           110.01,
                          110.33
66-406                    110.01
66-420                    110.01
66-420 - 66-439           110.01,
                          110.33
66-429                    110.34
105-164.3                 70.01
105-164.3(7a)             35.01
105-164.4(a), (c)         154.43
105-187.1(3)              35.01
105-187.1(4)              35.01
105-349                   35.01
105-350                   Charter, §
                          20
Ch. 113A, Art. 4          152.002
113A-57                   152.052
Ch. 130A, Art. 9          151.05
130A-290(a)(6)            151.05
130A-290(a)(35 )          151.05
130A- 290(a)(36)          151.05
Ch. 136, Art. 2E          152.101
136-27.4                  95.10
136-66.2                  152.102
136-131.1                 155.06
136-131.2                 155.09
136-141                   90.03
136-143                   90.03
Ch. 143, Art. 21, Part 6  151.01,
                          152.002
Ch. 143, Art. 33C         30.02
143-145(7)                152.010
143-213(18)               51.002
143-215.1                 51.002,
                          51.040
143-215.1(b)              51.040
143-215.1(g)              51.041
143-215.3(a)(14 )         51.002
143-215.3C                51.080
143-215.6B                51.092
143-215.6B(f)             51.092
143-215.6B(g)             51.092
143-215.6B(h)             51.092
143-215.6B(i)             51.092
153A-10                   152.010
153A-275                  51.001
                          Charter, §
159-25                    19;
                          31.02
159-28                    31.02
160-338                   152.163
Ch. 160A                  95.45
Ch. 160A, Art. 12         32.10
Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Part 3 151.01
Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Part 5 151.01
Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Part 8 151.01
160A-1(2)                 152.010
160A-11                   Charter, §
                          1
160A-12                   Charter, §
                          1
160A-61                   Charter, §
                          18
160A-63                   Charter, §
                          7
160A-64                   Charter, §
                          43
                          Charter, §
160A-69                   8,
                          31.01
160A-70                   Charter, §
                          7
                          Charter, §
160A-71                   9,
                          30.02
160A-75                   152.163
160A-77                   30.23
160A-78                   30.23
160A-79                   30.22
160A-162                  31.03
                          Charter, §
160A-171                  19,
                          31.02
160A-174                  Charter, §
                          10
160A-175                  10.99,
                          70.99
160A-175(b)               155.15
160A-175(e)               10.99,
                          70.99
160A-175(f)               155.15
160A-178                  113.01
160A-179                  113.01
                          35.01,
160A-193                  94.06,
                          155.15
160A-205.4                95.90
160A-205.4 et seq.        95.90
160A-208.1                35.01
160A-211                  35.01
160A-215.1                35.01
160A-215.1(b)             35.01
160A-215.1(d)             35.01
160A- 215.1(e)(2)         35.01
160A-215.1(f)             35.99
160A-216 et seq.          157.038
160A-216 - 160A-238       157.041
160A-266(c)               32.10
160A-274                  130.07
160A-281 et seq.          33.01
160A-286                  33.06
160A-291 et seq.          33.20
160A-296 et seq.          70.01
160A-303                  90.01
160A-303.2                90.01
160A-304                  114.01
160A-312                  51.001
160A-361                  152.079
160A-364.1                152.062
160A-393(d)               153.075
160A-417                  152.164
160A-418                  152.164
160A-422                  152.164
160A-435                  150.03
160A-436                  150.02,
                          150.03
160A-441 - 160A-450       157.001
Ch. 160D                  152.002
Ch. 160D, Art. 8          152.010
Ch. 160D, Art. 9, Part 3  154.53
Ch. 160D, Art. 12         157.001
160D-7                    152.010
160D-108                  152.010
160D-202                  130.07
160D-301                  152.010
160D-802                  152.010
160D-903                  152.010
160D-912                  155.02,
                          155.06
160D-1201                 157.001
160D-1203                 157.040
160D-1203(4)              157.038
160D-1203(5)              157.040
160D-1203(7)              157.041
160D-1205                 157.001
160D-1208(c)              157.038
160D-1208(d)              157.038
160D-1208(e)              157.038
160D-1210                 157.037
163-279 et seq.           Charter, §
                          5
                          
 
REFERENCES TO 1976 CODE
1976 Code Section 1994 Code Section
1976 Code Section 1994 Code Section
1-1007            10.19
2-1001            30.01
2-1011            30.02
2-1021            30.20
2-1022            30.21
2-1023            30.22
2-1024            30.23
2-2001            31.01
2-2002            31.02
2-2003            31.03
2-2004            31.04
2-4001            32.01
2-4002            32.02
2-4021            32.15
2-4022            32.16
3-1001            33.01
3-1002            33.02
3-1003            33.03
3-1004            33.04
3-1005            33.05
3-1006            33.06
3-2001            33.20
3-2002            33.21
3-2003            33.22
3-2004            33.23
3-2007            33.24
3-2014            92.02
3-2021            150.01 -
                  150.03
3-3001(a)         34.01
3-3001(d)         34.04
3-3001(e)         34.02
3-3002            34.03
3-3003            34.99
4-1021            95.35
4-1022            95.36
4-1023            95.37
4-1024            95.38
4-1025            95.39
4-1026            95.40
4-1027            95.41
4-2001            50.01
4-2002            50.02
4-2003            50.03
4-2004            50.04
4-2005            50.05
4-2006            50.06
4-2007            50.07
4-2008            50.08
4-2009            50.09
6-1001            114.01
6-1002            114.02
6-1003            114.03
6-1004            114.04
6-1005            114.05
6-1006            114.06
6-1007            114.07
6-1008            114.08
6-1009            114.09
6-1010            114.10
6-1011            114.11
6-1012            114.12
6-1013            114.13
6-1071            113.01
6-1072            113.02
6-1073            113.03
6-1074            113.04
6-1075            113.05
6-1076            113.06
6-2001            95.20
6-2002            95.21
6-2003            95.22
6-2011            95.01
6-2012            95.02
6-2013            95.03
6-2014            95.04
6-2015            95.05
6-2016            95.06
6-2017            95.07
6-2021            95.55
6-2022            95.56
6-2023            95.57
6-2024            95.58
6-2025            95.59
6-2026            95.60
6-2027            95.61
6-2028            95.62
7-1001            70.01
7-1011            70.07
7-1012            70.08
7-1013            70.09
7-1014            70.10
7-1021            70.02
7-1022            70.03
7-1023            70.04
7-1024            70.05
7-1025            70.06
7-1031            70.20
7-1032            70.21
7-1033            70.22
7-1034            70.23
7-1038            70.24
7-1039            70.25
7-1040            70.26
7-1041            70.27
7-1051            71.08
7-1052            71.08
7-1061            71.20
7-1062            71.20
7-1063            71.22
7-1071            71.09
7-1072            71.09
7-1081            71.35
7-1082            71.36
7-1083            71.37
7-1084            71.38
7-1085            71.39
7-1091            71.01
7-1092            71.02
7-1093            71.03
7-1094            71.04
7-1095            71.05
7-1096            71.06
7-1097            71.07
7-1101            71.50
7-1102            71.51
7-1103            71.52
7-1104            71.53
7-1105            71.54
7-1106            71.55
7-1107            71.56
7-1108            71.57
7-1109            71.58
7-1111            72.01
7-1112            72.02
7-1113            72.03
7-1114            72.04
7-1115            72.05
7-1116            72.05
7-1117            72.07
7-1118            72.08
7-1119            72.09
7-1120            72.10
7-1121            72.11
7-1131            73.01
7-1132            73.02
7-1133            73.03
7-1135            73.05
7-1136            73.15
7-1137            73.16
7-1138            73.17
7-1139            73.18
7-1140            73.19
7-1141            73.20
7-1151            73.40
7-1152            73.41
7-1153            73.42
7-1154            73.43
7-1155            73.44
7-1156            73.45
7-1157            73.46
7-1161            73.30
7-1171            73.47
7-1174            73.47
8-1001            130.01
8-1002            130.02
8-1003            130.03
8-2001            91.01
8-2003            91.02
8-2004            91.03
8-2005            91.04
8-5001            93.01
8-5002            93.02
8-5005            93.03
8-6003            130.04
8-6006            95.23
9-5001            111.01
9-5002            111.02
9-5003            111.03
9-5004            111.04
9-6001            151.01
9-6002            151.03
9-6003            151.04
9-6008            151.08
9-6009            151.99
9-6010            151.10
App. I, § 101    Ch. 75, Sch. I
App. I, § 102    Ch. 75, Sch. II
App. I, § 103    Ch. 75, Sch. III
App. I, § 104    Ch. 74, Sch. I
App. I, § 105    Ch. 74, Sch. II
App. I, § 106    Ch. 74, Sch. II
App. I, § 107    Ch. 74, Sch. II
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.               Date Passed Code Section
                                   Ch. 75, Schs.
—                    —         I,
                                   II,
                                   III
—                    7-12-12     71.05
—                    8-12-15     71.07
—                    6-6-21      32.16
—                    6-12-23     73.01
—                    9-3-24      95.22
—                    2-7-27      130.03
—                    7-7-42      95.20
—                    8-4-47      73.15 -
                                   73.20
—                    10-9-56     Ch. 74, Sch. I
                                   34.03,
—                    5-6-68      34.99,
                                   130.01
—                    1-5-70      73.46,
                                   Ch. 75, Sch. I
—                    2-2-70      130.01
—                    7-6-70      71.55
—                    8-24-70     Ch. 74, Sch. II
                                   151.01,
                                   151.03,
—                    12-6-71     151.05,
                                   151.08,
                                   151.10,
                                   151.99
—                    5-1-72      73.05
—                    6-5-72      Ch. 74, Sch. II
—                    8-7-72      95.23
—                    5-6-74      Ch. 74, Sch. II
—                    8-5-74      Ch. 75, Sch. I
—                    12-2-74     150.03
                                   95.55 -
—                    12-6-76     95.62,
                                   95.99
—                    5/8/77      Charter, §
                                   5
—                    6-9-78      Ch. 75, Sch. I
1                      9-5-78      T.S.O. I
—                    9-5-78      Ch. 74, Sch. III
—                    11-6-78     92.03
—                    10-1-79     T.S.O. II
                                   52.01,
—                    2-2-81      52.03 -
                                   52.16
2                      3-2-81      T.S.O. I
—                    10-3-83     130.01,
                                   130.99
—                    10-27-83    52.08
3                      5-5-86      T.S.O. I
4                      11-3-86     T.S.O. I
—                    3-7-88      153.20
5                      6-20-88     T.S.O. I
6                      8-1-88      T.S.O. I
—                    9-14-88     91.16,
                                   91.99
8                      9-5-89      T.S.O. I
9                      4-8-91      T.S.O. I
—                    2-3-92      Ch. 74, Sch. II
10                     4-6-92      T.S.O. I
—                    10-5-92     95.08
—                    10-29-92    Ch. 74, Sch. II
11                     11-2-92     T.S.O. I
—                    10-4-93     T.S.O. II
—                    11-1-93     Ch. 74, Sch. I
12                     5-2-94      T.S.O. I
—                    10-3-94     30.02
14                     3-6-95      T.S.O. I
15                     5-1-95      T.S.O. I
16                     5-1-95      T.S.O. I
17                     5-1-95      T.S.O. I
18                     6-5-95      T.S.O. I
—                    9-5-95      52.08
—                    9-5-95      52.11
—                    9-5-95      52.12
—                    9-5-95      52.13
—                    11-6-95     Ch. 74, Sch. II
—                    1-2-96      130.05
—                    3-4-96      95.45 -
                                   95.52
—                    7-8-96      115.01 - 115.05
19                     8-5-96      T.S.O. I
20                     3-3-97      T.S.O. I
—                    9-2-97      52.17
21                     2-2-98      T.S.O. I
—                    3-2-98      32.10
22                     4-6-98      T.S.O. I
—                    5-4-98      Adopting Ordinance
—                    5-4-98      T.S.O. II
NC Session Law 1998-51 7-22-98     T.S.O. I
—                    2-8-99      Ch. 74, Sch. I
29                     6-7-99      T.S.O. I
24                     8-2-99      T.S.O. I
25                     9-7-99      T.S.O. I
26                     9-7-99      T.S.O. I
—                    10-4-99     T.S.O. II
27                     11-1-99     T.S.O. I
28                     4-3-00      T.S.O. I
—                    4-3-00      T.S.O. II
—                    6-20-00     35.01,
                                   35.99
30                     9-5-00      T.S.O. I
31                     12-4-00     T.S.O. I
32                     12-4-00     T.S.O. I
Resolution             3-5-01      T.S.O. II
33                     6-11-01     T.S.O. I
34                     12-3-01     T.S.O. I
—                    8-5-02      96.01
—                    11-4-02     Ch. 74, Sch. II
35                     2-3-03      T.S.O. I
35A                    8-4-03      T.S.O. I
35B                    11-4-03     T.S.O. I
—                    5-3-04      155.00 -
                                   155.14
                                   156.01 -
—                    4-4-05      156.14,
                                   156.99
36                     10-3-05     T.S.O. I
37                     10-3-05     T.S.O. I
38                     1-2-06      T.S.O. I
39                     1-2-06      T.S.O. I
                                   51.001,
                                   51.002,
                                   51.010 -
                                   51.018,
                                   51.030 -
                                   51.033,
                                   51.040,
                                   51.041,
—                    12-4-06     51.050 -
                                   51.062,
                                   51.070 -
                                   51.072,
                                   51.080,
                                   51.090 -
                                   51.093,
                                   51.100,
                                   51.110 -
                                   51.112
40                     2-5-07      T.S.O. I
41                     4-2-07      T.S.O. I
                                   152.001 -
                                   152.010,
                                   152.020 -
                                   152.033,
                                   152.050 -
                                   152.062,
                                   152.070 -
                                   152.078,
                                   152.090 -
                                   152.105,
—                    10-1-07     152.120 -
                                   152.123,
                                   152.130 -
                                   152.136,
                                   152.150 -
                                   152.154,
                                   152.160 -
                                   152.164,
                                   152.170 -
                                   152.179,
                                   152.190 -
                                   152.199
                                   Charter, §
                                   3;
—                    3-3-08      30.01,
                                   31.00,
                                   31.01
                                   152.010,
                                   152.022,
                                   152.023,
                                   152.025,
                                   152.026,
                                   152.027,
                                   152.029 -
                                   152.033, 
—                    10-20-08    152.052,
                                   152.053,
                                   152.057,
                                   152.073,
                                   152.090,
                                   152.123,
                                   152.132,
                                   152.175,
                                   152.195
42                     3-2-09      T.S.O. I
45                     3-16-09     T.S.O. I
                                   51.001,
                                   51.002,
                                   51.010 -
                                   51.018,
                                   51.030 -
                                   51.033,
                                   51.040,
                                   51.041,
—                    5-4-09      51.050 -
                                   51.062,
                                   51.070 -
                                   51.072,
                                   51.080,
                                   51.090 -
                                   51.093,
                                   51.100,
                                   51.110 -
                                   51.112
—                    9-8-09      130.06
—                    3-1-10      155.01 -
                                   155.15
43                     6-7-10      T.S.O. I
44                     6-7-10      T.S.O. I
2010-06                6-21-10     Ch. 74, Sch. II
46                     7-6-10      T.S.O. I
47                     7-6-10      T.S.O. I
48                     7-6-10      T.S.O. I
49                     7-6-10      T.S.O. I
51                     12-20-10    T.S.O. I
—                    2-7-11      155.10,
                                   155.11
50                     3-7-11      T.S.O. I
                                   157.001 -
                                   157.004,
                                   157.036 -
                                   157.044,
—                    6-6-11      157.076 -
                                   157.082,
                                   157.116 -
                                   157.119,
                                   157.999
—                    6-6-11      155.15
—                    2-6-12      152.053
—                    8-6-12      152.079
—                    12-3-12     90.01 -
                                   90.14
                                   51.001,
                                   51.002,
                                   51.010 -
                                   51.018,
                                   51.030 -
                                   51.033,
                                   51.040,
                                   51.041,
                                   51.050 -
—                    2-4-13      51.063,
                                   51.070 -
                                   51.072,
                                   51.080,
                                   51.090 -
                                   51.093,
                                   51.100,
                                   51.105,
                                   51.110 -
                                   51.112
—                    3-4-13      94.01 -
                                   94.06
—                    5-6-13      95.08
—                    5-6-13      152.024
—                    2-3-14      152.070 -
                                   152.079
—                    2-3-14      152.161
                                   152.023,
—                    3-3-14      152.031,
                                   152.057
—                    3-3-14      T.S.O. I
—                    3-3-14      T.S.O. I
—                    3-3-14      T.S.O. I
—                    4-7-14      130.01
                                   152.010,
—                    5-5-14      152.110,
                                   152.111
                                   152.010,
                                   152.022,
—                    6-2-14      152.023,
                                   152.029,
                                   152.033
—                    7-7-14      31.02
—                    7-7-14      94.07
                                   110.01 -
                                   110.15,
—                    12-1-14     110.21,
                                   110.22,
                                   110.30 -
                                   110.34
                                   95.75 -
—                    1-5-15      95.82,
                                   95.99
—                    6-1-15      95.08
—                    6-1-15      155.02,
                                   155.16
—                    9-8-15      152.098
                                   152.010,
                                   152.022,
—                    10-5-15     152.027,
                                   152.029,
                                   152.032,
                                   152.123
                                   152.010,
                                   152.027,
—                    10-5-15     152.029,
                                   152.031,
                                   152.123
—                    10-5-15     152.163
—                    11-2-15     155.11
Res. —               11-2-15     91.25
—                    11-2-15     95.09
—                    11-21-15    130.04
—                    12-7-15     130.01
—                    1-4-16      32.02
                                   152.010,
—                    2-1-16      152.022,
                                   152.029,
                                   152.032
Res. —               3-7-16      151.13
—                    3-7-16      50.10.
                                   52.02
—                    3-7-16      73.48
                                   151.01 -
                                   151.12,
                                   151.20 -
                                   151.24,
—                    5-2-16      151.35 -
                                   151.39,
                                   151.50,
                                   151.51,
                                   151.99
                                   31.02,
—                    10-3-16     33.01,
                                   33.02,
                                   33.20
—                    10-3-16     Ch. 74, Sch. II
Res. —               11-7-16     35.02
                                   52.04,
—                    11-7-16     52.11,
                                   52.13
—                    12-5-16     33.22
—                    1-3-17      33.06
                                   71.55,
                                   73.30,
                                   73.44,
2017-002               2-6-17      73.47,
                                   95.01,
                                   95.02,
                                   95.99
2017-003               3-6-17      Ch. 74, Sch. II
2017-004               4-3-17      Ch. 74, Sch. II
                                   Charter, §§
                                   1,
                                   3 -
                                   12,
                                   14 -
                                   16,
2017-006               5-15-17     18 -
                                   27,
                                   29,
                                   30,
                                   32,
                                   34 -
                                   41,
                                   43
                                   156.04,
2017-011               7-3-17      156.06,
                                   156.08
2017-013               10-2-17     110.40
2017-013               11-6-17     152.010
                                   94.15 -
2017-015               1-2-18      94.20,
                                   94.99
                                   154.01 -
                                   154.03,
                                   154.10 -
                                   154.33,
2018-002               4-2-18      154.40 -
                                   154.45,
                                   154.50 -
                                   154.53,
                                   154.99
2018-003               6-4-18      152.052,
                                   152.053
2018-004               9-4-18      152.098
2018-005               8-21-18     91.16
2019-001               2-4-19      152.026
2019-002               3-4-19      155.11
2019-003               1-7-19      52.07
2019-004               1-7-19      92.04
2019-005               5-6-19      152.052,
                                   152.053
                                   73.01 -
                                   73.05,
                                   73.15 -
                                   73.20,
2019-006               3-4-19      73.30,
                                   73.40 -
                                   73.48, Ch. 75, Schs.
                                   I,
                                   II,
                                   III
2019-008               11-4-19     152.052
2019-009               9-3-19      Ch. 75, Sch.
                                   I
2019-010               10-7-19     91.01
2020-001               4-13-20     130.01
2020-002               4-13-20     95.10
                                   95.55 -
-                      1-4-21      95.57,
                                   95.59 -
                                   95.62
                                   157.001,
                                   157.037,
-                      3-15-21     157.038,
                                   157.040,
                                   157.041
                                   154.02,
                                   154.11,
-                      3-15-21     154.14,
                                   154.22,
                                   154.23,
                                   154.53
2021-001               4-5-21      113.05 -
                                   113.07
                                   155.02,
                                   155.06,
                                   155.08,
-                      4-19-21     155.09,
                                   155.11,
                                   155.14,
                                   155.16
                                   152.002,
                                   152.005,
                                   152.008 -
                                   152.010,
                                   152.020 -
                                   152.027,
                                   152.029,
                                   152.031 -
                                   152.033,
                                   152.052 -
                                   152.055,
                                   152.057,
                                   152.060,
                                   152.062,
-                      - -         152.070,
                                   152.071,
                                   152.073,
                                   152.079,
                                   152.091,
                                   152.093,
                                   152.097,
                                   152.098,
                                   152.121,
                                   152.123,
                                   152.130,
                                   152.160 -
                                   152.163,
                                   152.190,
                                   152.195,
                                   152.197
2021-006               7-6-21      33.01,
                                   33.20
2021-007               7-6-21      10.99
-                      11-7-22     Ch. 75, Sch. I
2022-002               1-3-23   72.01 -
                                   72.12
                                   154.03,
2022-008               3-7-22      154.40 -
                                   154.44
2022-003               11-7-22     130.08
2023-001               1-3-23      92.05
2023-002               3-6-23      155.08 -
                                   155.10
2023-003               5-1-23      130.07
                                   33.21,
2023-006               10-2-23     92.03,
                                   92.04
2023-007               10-2-23     52.08
2023-008               11-6-23     73.01,
                                   73.03
2023-008               12-4-23     152.034
                                   95.90 -
2024-001               1-2-24      95.95,
                                   130.01
2024-002               3-4-24      152.090
2024-005               4-1-24      90.01
2024-003               5-6-24      130.09
                                   152.022 -
                                   152.027,
2024-003               6-3-24      152.030,
                                   152.031 -
                                   152.034,
                                   152.163
2025-002               4-7-25      95.09
2025-003               4-7-25      152.123
2025-004               4-7-25      52.05,
                                   52.10
2025-005               4-7-25      Ch. 74, Sch. I
2025-008               7-7-25   94.02,
                                   95.03
2025-010               10-7-25     30.01,
                                   30.02
                                  
 
