KINGS MOUNTAIN, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-13 Supplement contains:
   Local legislation current through Res. 25-07, passed 2-25-2025; and
State legislation current through 2025 North Carolina
Legislative Service, Pamphlet No. 2
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
CITY OFFICIALS
 
Robert Wagman  Mayor
Annie Thombs   Mayor Pro-Tem
Phil Dee       City Council
Shearra Miller City Council
Mike Butler    City Council
Tommy Hawkins  City Council
Jimmy West     City Council
Jay Rhodes     City Council
Todd Carpenter City Manager
Karen Tucker   City Clerk
Mickey Corry   City Attorney
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE 12-24
ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE CITY OF KINGS MOUNTAIN, NORTH CAROLINA,
REVISING, AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF KINGS MOUNTAIN DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH
CODE OF ORDINANCES
WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of the political
subdivision are inadequately arranged and classified and are insufficient in
form and substance for the complete preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality and for the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
WHEREAS, the Acts of the Legislature of the State of North Carolina empower and
authorize the City of Kings Mountain to revise, amend, restate, codify and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of Kings Mountain has authorized a
general compilation, revision and codification of the ordinances of the City of
Kings Mountain of a general permanent nature and publication of such ordinance
in book form; and
WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the ususal daily operation of the
municipality and for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health,
safety and general welfare of the municipality that this ordinance take effect
at an early date.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the City Council of the City of Kings
Mountain, North Carolina:
Section 1.   The general ordinances of the City of Kings Mountain as revised,
amended, restated, codified, and complied in book form are hereby adopted as
and shall constitute the “Code of Ordinances of the City of Kings Mountain,
North Carolina.”
Section 2.   Such Code of Ordinances as adopted in Section 1 shall consist fo
the following Titles:
CODE OF ORDINANCES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
      Chapter
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
         10.   Rules of Construction; General Penalty
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
         30.   General Provisions
         31.   Mayor and City Council
         32.   Employees and Organizations
         33.   Personnel Policy
         34.   Finance and Taxation
TITLE V: UTILITIES
         50.   General Provisions
         51.   Electricity Service
         52.   Gas Service
         53.   Water and Sewers
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
         70.   General Provisions
         71.   Traffic-Control Devices
         72.   Traffic Regulations
         73.   Stopping and Parking Rules
         74.   Golf Carts
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
         90.   Streets and Sidewalks
         91.   Parks and Recreation; Lakes and Watercraft
         92.   John H. Moss Reservoir Area
         93.   Fair Housing
         94.   Libraries
         95.   Cemeteries
         96.   Health and Sanitation; Nuisances
         97.   Garbage and Trash; Weeds and Junk
         98.   Fire Protection and Prevention
         99.   Animals
         100.   Signs
         101.   Abandoned, Junked and Nuisance Vehicles
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
         110.   Occupational Licenses, Taxes and Regulations
         111.   Community Markets
         112.   Advertising
         113.   Junk Dealers
         114.   Massage Establishments
         115.   Peddlers and Solicitors
         116.   Taxicabs
         117.   Ice Cream Vendors
         118.   Room Occupancy
         119.   Cable Television
         120.   Short-Term Lease, Rental of Vehicles
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
         130.   General Provisions
         131.   Illegal Drug Use; Paraphernalia
         132.   Parades
         133.   Exhibition Shows
         134.   Picketing
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
         150.   Building Regulations; Construction
         151.   Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
         152.   Housing
         153.   Flood Damage Prevention
         154.   Community Appearance Standards Code
         155.   Historic Landmarks
         156.   Subdivision Regulations
         157.   Zoning Regulations
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
      Table
         I.   Annexations
         II.   Historic Property
         III.   Street Closings
         IV.   Service District
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
INDEX
Section 3.   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in such
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred ot any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes, appropriating money, annexing or detaching territory,
establishing franchises, or granting special rights to certain persons,
authorizing public improvements, authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money, authorizing the purchase or sale of real or personal property,
granting or accepting easements, plat or dedication of land to public use,
vacating or setting boundaries of streets or other public places; nor shall
such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary or special nature or
pertaining to subjects not contained in or covered by the Code.
Section 4.   Such Code shall be deemed published as of the day of its adoption
and approval by the Legislative Authority and the Clerk of the Political
Subdivision is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code or
Ordinances in the Office of the Clerk.
Section 5.   Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in Section
6, and such Code shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage, and that the same is properly signed,
attested, recorded, and approved and that any public hearings and notices
thereof as required by law have been given.
Section 6.   This ordinance is declared to be a measure necessary for the
immediate preservation of the peace, health, safety and general welfare of the
people of this municipality, and shall take effect at the earliest date
provided by law.
PASSED AND ADOPTED by the City Council of the City of Kings Mountain on this
25th day of September, 2012.
                  CITY OF KINGS MOUNTAIN, NORTH CAROLINA
                  
                  BY:  Edgar O. Murphrey, Jr. /s/
                     Edgar O. Murphrey, Jr., Mayor
ATTEST:
Ann L. Sessom /s/
Ann L. Sessom, MMC
City Clerk
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices; liability
   
10.10   Errors and omissions; alterations
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time; computing time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend code; effect of new ordinances
   
10.18   Section histories; section headings; statutory references
   
10.19   Filing ordinances
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the City of Kings Mountain shall
be designated as the Code of Kings Mountain, North Carolina, and may be so
cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CHARTER. The Charter of the City of Kings Mountain, North Carolina.
      CITY. The City of Kings Mountain, in the Counties of Cleveland and
Gaston, North Carolina.
      CITY LIMITS. The legal boundary of the City of Kings Mountain, North
Carolina.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and the last day; and if the last day is
Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
      COUNCIL. The Mayor and Council, or governing body, of the City of Kings
Mountain, North Carolina.
      COUNTY. The County of Cleveland or the County of Gaston, whichever may be
applicable under the circumstances, in the State of North Carolina.
      DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY. Whenever a provision of this code requires or
authorizes an officer or employee of the city to do some act or perform some
duty, it shall be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate,
delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms
of the provision shall specifically designate or provide otherwise.
      G.S. or GENERAL STATUTES. The latest edition of the GENERAL STATUTES of
North Carolina, as amended.
      GENDER. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine
and neuter.
      GOVERNING BODY. The words CITY COUNCIL, COUNCIL or GOVERNING BODY shall
refer to the duly constituted governing body of the City of Kings Mountain,
North Carolina.
      GOVERNOR. The Governor of North Carolina.
      HEALTH OFFICER. The Health Officer of the respective counties in which
the affected county is located.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of
persons or officers.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      NUMBER. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural
includes the singular number.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named in this code,
they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use
in this city.
      OWNER. Applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or a part of the property.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property, except real property.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
      REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of North Carolina.
      STREET. Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, dedicated alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto
within the city and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between
abutting property lines.
      SUBCHAPTER.
         (a)   A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
         (b)   Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of the building or land, whether alone
or with others.
      TENSE. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
(Prior Code, § 1-2)
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the following
rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or”, if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of an act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES; LIABILITY.
   (A)   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to
any office, officer or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
   (B)   In the event of a violation of any provision of this code or other
ordinance of the city by a corporation, in addition to the corporation being
subject to punishment, the officer, agent or employee thereof who performs the
act constituting the violation, or who controls, directs or supervises, any
officer, agent or employee who performs the act, or who procures, aids or abets
the performance of the act shall be subject to the same penalties as if the
officer, agent or employee had personally committed the violation.
(Prior Code, § 1-9)
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS; ALTERATIONS.
   (A)   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of
any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can
be attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was
clearly intended to express the intent, that spelling shall be corrected and
the word or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the
manifest intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the
correct words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of the error.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of this code or to insert or delete pages, or
any portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with the code in any manner
whatsoever, except pursuant to ordinance or resolution or other official act of
the governing body which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented
thereby.
(Prior Code, § 1-6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this city for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTING TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.
   (B)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following:
      (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective
date of this code;
      (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or
any evidence of the city’s indebtedness;
      (3)   Any contract or obligation assumed by the city;
      (4)   Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee;
      (5)   Any right or franchise granted by the city;
      (6)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, widening, paving and the like, any street or public way in
the city;
      (7)   Any appropriation ordinance;
      (8)   Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or
limited term;
      (9)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes
therefor;
      (10)   Any zoning ordinance or zoning map amendment;
      (11)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat;
      (12)   Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city;
      (13)   The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in
conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this code;
      (14)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein;
      (15)   Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the
city; and/or
      (16)   Any personnel ordinance.
   (C)   Nor shall any ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance or part
thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by
this chapter; and all ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full
force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.
Statutory reference:
   Statutes not repealed by General Statutes, see G.S. § 164-7
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or
in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system hereof and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances
repeal any chapter, section or division, or any portion thereof, the repealed
portions may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages. The
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of
repeal, shall be prima facie evidence that the subsequent ordinances numbered
or omitted are readopted as a new code by the city.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of the code shall be made by
amending provisions by specific reference to the section number of this code in
language substantially similar to the following: “Section                of the
Code of Ordinances, City of Kings Mountain, North Carolina, is hereby amended
as follows....” The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (C)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added,
language substantially similar to the following shall be used: “The Code of
Ordinances, City of Kings Mountain, North Carolina, is hereby amended by adding
a section, to be numbered               , which section shall read as
follows:....” The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (D)   All sections, subchapters, chapters or provisions desired to be
repealed must be specifically repealed by section, subchapter or chapter
number, as the case may be.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; SECTION HEADINGS; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (G.S. §
160A-11) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 132-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the prior code of ordinances
of the city, the prior code section number shall be indicated in the history by
“(Prior Code, §       )”. The history notes following sections and the
references scattered throughout the code are not part of the code, but are
merely for the benefit for the user of the code.
§ 10.19 FILING ORDINANCES.
   Every ordinance passed by the governing body shall be immediately filed in a
book provided for this purpose by the governing body which shall be known as
the “Ordinance Book”.
(Prior Code, § 1-13)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, violation of any provision of
this code or any other ordinance shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction as the
case may be, as provided by G.S. § 14-4, and punishable as provided therein.
   (B)   Violation of any provision of this code or any other ordinance shall
subject the offender to a civil penalty to be recovered by the city in a civil
action in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within a
reasonable period of time prescribed by an administrative officer of the city
after the offender has been cited for the violation.
   (C)   Any provision of this code or any other ordinance may be enforced by
an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.
In that case, the general court of justice shall have jurisdiction to issue
orders as may be appropriate, and it shall not be a defense to the application
of the city for equitable relief that there is an adequate remedy at law.
   (D)   Any provision of this code or any other ordinance that makes unlawful
a condition existing upon or use made of real property may be enforced by
injunction and order of abatement and the general court of justice shall have
jurisdiction to issue the orders. When a violation of a provision occurs, the
city may apply to the appropriate division of the general court of justice for
a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement commanding the
defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of
the property. The action shall be governed in all respects by the laws and
rules governing civil proceedings, including the Rules of Civil Procedure in
general and Rule 65 in particular. In addition to an injunction, the court may
enter an order of abatement as a part of the judgment in the cause. An order of
abatement may direct that buildings or other structures on the property be
closed, demolished or removed; that fixtures, furniture or other movable
property be removed from buildings on the property; that grass and weeds be
cut; that improvements or repairs be made; or that any other action be taken
that is necessary to bring the property into compliance with this code or the
ordinance. If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or
with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, the defendant
may be cited for contempt and the city may execute the order of abatement. The
city shall have a lien on the property for the cost of executing an order of
abatement in the nature of a mechanic’s and materialman’s lien. The defendant
may secure cancellation of an order of abatement by paying all costs of the
proceedings and posting a bond for compliance with the order. The bond shall be
given with sureties approved by the Clerk of Superior Court in an amount
approved by the Judge before whom the matter is heard and shall be conditioned
on the defendant’s full compliance with the terms of the order of abatement
within a time fixed by the Judge. Cancellation of an order of abatement shall
not suspend or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction therewith.
   (E)   The provisions of this code and any other ordinance may be enforced by
any one, all or a combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed by this
section.
   (F)   Except as otherwise specifically provided, each day’s continuing
violation of any provision of this code or any other ordinance shall be a
separate and distinct offense.
(Prior Code, § 1-8)
Statutory reference:
   Abatement of health nuisances, see G.S. § 160A-193
   Authority, see G.S. § 160A-175
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
31.   MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
      
32.   EMPLOYEES AND ORGANIZATIONS
      
33.   PERSONNEL POLICY
      
34.   FINANCE AND TAXATION
CHAPTER 30: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
30.01   Corporate seal adopted; keeper
   
30.02   Extraterritorial jurisdiction
   
30.03   Destruction of city records
   
30.04   Voting precincts
   
30.05   Ward lines
§ 30.01 CORPORATE SEAL ADOPTED; KEEPER.
   (A)   There hereby is adopted as the official corporate seal of the city a
seal consisting of the embossed impression of a circular metallic disk,
containing in the outer rim the words “City of Kings Mountain, North Carolina”
and containing in the center the word “Seal”.
(Prior Code, § 2-1)
   (B)   The official corporate seal shall be in the custody of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 2-2)
§ 30.02 EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The city hereby establishes boundaries for the extraterritorial
enforcement of the following ordinances:
      (1)   Zoning ordinance;
      (2)   Subdivision regulations;
      (3)   State Building Code, as adopted in Chapter 150 of this code;
      (4)   Minimum Housing Standards Code; and
      (5)   Ordinances creating:
         (a)   The Municipal Planning and Zoning Board; and
         (b)   The Municipal Inspection Department.
   (B)   The boundaries are delineated on the face of a map, entitled
“Extraterritorial Jurisdiction of the City of Kings Mountain”, which is hereby
adopted by reference.
   (C)   The official copy of this section and map shall be on record in the
office of the City Clerk for public inspection during normal business hours.
The City Clerk shall cause a certified copy of this section and map and any
subsequent amendments to be recorded in the offices of the Register of Deeds of
the counties of Cleveland and Gaston. The City Clerk shall cause signs,
signposts or similar readily identifiable markers to be installed at all points
of intersection of the above-described boundary with all roads, streets,
highways and railroads.
(Prior Code, § 2-3) (Ord. 96-20, passed 8-27-1996)
Cross-reference:
   Buildings and building regulations, see
Ch. 150
   Planning and Zoning Board, see §§
32.35 through
32.43
   Subdivisions, see
Ch. 156
   Zoning, see
Ch. 157
Statutory reference:
   Abatement of nuisance within city and within one mile thereof, see G.S. §
160A-193
   Building inspection, see G.S. §§ 160A-411 et seq.
   Extraterritorial representation as to zoning and subdivision regulations,
see G.S.§ 160A-362
   Minimum housing standards, see G.S. §§ 160A-441 et seq.
§ 30.03 DESTRUCTION OF CITY RECORDS.
   (A)   The City Manager and Mayor are authorized to enter into an agreement
with the State Division of Archives and History Department of Cultural
Resources to preserve and monitor destruction of city records.
   (B)   The City Clerk and Treasurer is charged as custodian of the city
records and shall seek prior approval according to the procedures as outlined
by the Division of Archives and History agreement before destruction of city
records.
(Prior Code, § 2-4) (Res. passed 2-14-1989)
Statutory reference:
   Records retention provisions, see G.S. Chs. 121, 132
§ 30.04 VOTING PRECINCTS.
   (A)   The registering and voting in the municipal elections for the city by
those residents of the city that do reside in Gaston County on those streets or
portions thereof which are located in Gaston County, those streets being:
Alpine Drive; Boyce Street; Brooklee Drive; Brookwood Drive; Cameron Court;
East End Road; Ettenwood; Fallingwood; Groves Street; Henry Street; Jackson
Street; Jo Anne Court; Linwood Road; Loblolly Lane; Mahogany; Manor Drive;
North Woods Drive; Redwood Circle; Second Street; Stone Street; Woodside Drive;
all of those streets which are and make up the streets of Carolina Garden
Apartments; and Mountain Manor Development shall be in the precinct designated
as “Kings Mountain No. 1”.
   (B)   All of the residents of the city that do reside in Gaston County and
who do reside on: Canterbury Trail; Floyd Street or Floyd Street Extension,
shall be in the precinct designated as “Kings Mountain No. 4” for the purpose
of registering and voting in the municipal elections for the city.
(Ord. 99-11, passed 5-25-1999)
§ 30.05 WARD LINES.
   (A)   Those ward lines as are in existence on this date are hereby amended.
   (B)   The new ward lines and boundaries for the ward lines and electoral
districts for the city shall now become those as set out and shown on the map
which is attached to the ordinance codified herein and marked as “Exhibit A”,
and to which reference is hereby made if the same were fully set out herein.
(Ord. 01-41, passed 6-26-2001; Ord. 11-12, passed 6-28-2011; Ord. 20-33, passed
12-15-2020; Ord. 20-34, passed 12-15-2020; Ord. 21-42, passed 11-10-2021; Ord.
22-10, passed 4-26-2022; Ord. 22-21, passed 6-28-2022; Ord. 23-25, passed 9-14-
2023)
CHAPTER 31: MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
Section
   
31.01   Mayor and City Council; terms and election
   
31.02   Mayor; authority; appointments; duties
   
31.03   Oath
   
31.04   Place, date and time of regular meetings
   
31.05   Special meetings
   
31.06   Adjourned meetings
   
31.07   Presiding officer
   
31.08   Quorum and voting
   
31.09   Rules of procedure
§ 31.01 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL; TERMS AND ELECTION.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be elected by all the qualified voters of the city for
a term of four years.
   (B)   The City Council shall consist of seven members, who shall all serve
terms of four years. The city shall be divided into five single-member
electoral districts (wards), the wards to be delineated and numbered on an
official map, and adopted by the governing body pursuant to G.S. §§ 160A-22 and
160A-23. Five Council members shall be apportioned to the districts (wards) so
that each member represents the same number of persons as nearly as possible.
The qualified voters of each district (ward) shall elect from candidates who
reside in the district (ward) for the seat apportioned to that district (ward).
The other two Council member(s) shall be apportioned to the city at large and
all the qualified voters of the city shall elect candidates apportioned to the
city at large.
   (C)   The terms of office for the Mayor and Council members shall be
staggered, such that some members of the governing body shall run for election
in each biennial municipal election. In the 1991 municipal election, and in
elections every four years subsequent to the election, Council members from
districts (wards) 1 and 2; and one at-large Council seat; and the Mayor shall
be elected for those offices. Because the Council size is increasing from six
to seven members, the second at-large seat will need to be filled for a two-
year term in the 1991 election. Therefore, in the 1991 municipal election, all
qualified voters shall vote for two at-large Council seats, using the methods
prescribed in G.S. § 163-293, so that the successful at-large candidate with
the largest number of votes shall serve a four-year term and the successful at-
large candidate with the next largest number of votes shall serve a four-year
term. In the 1993 municipal election, and in elections every four years
subsequent to the election, candidates for Council member from districts
(wards) 3, 4 and 5; and one at-large Council seat shall be elected for those
offices.
   (D)   The nonpartisan election and runoff election method shall be used, as
authorized by G.S. § 160A-101(7)(c). The elections shall be conducted in
accordance with G.S. Ch. 163, Art. 23 and Art. 24. The determination of
election results shall be made using the methods prescribed in G.S. § 163-293.
   (E)   The Mayor and City Council members shall possess the qualifications
set out in Article VI of the Constitution of the state. In addition, Council
members who were elected to district (ward) seats on the governing body shall
reside in the district (ward) they represent. When the Mayor or any Council
member ceases to meet all of the qualifications for holding office pursuant to
the Constitution, or when a Council member ceases to reside in an electoral
district (ward) that he or she was elected to represent, the office is ipso
facto vacant.
   (F)   Vacancies in either the Office of Mayor, or the Office of any Council
member, shall be filled as prescribed by G.S. § 160A-63.
   (G)   The governing body shall fix the date and time for its organizational
meeting in accordance with G.S. § 160A-68. At the organizational meeting, all
successful candidates for Mayor or Council member shall qualify by taking the
oath of office prescribed in Art VI, § 7, of the Constitution of the state.
(Prior Code, § 2-19) (Ord. passed 5-14-1991; Ord. 07-12, passed 4-24-2007)
Statutory reference:
   Administration of Mayor-Council cities, see G.S. §§ 160A-55 through 160A-59
§ 31.02 MAYOR; AUTHORITY; APPOINTMENTS; DUTIES.
   (A)   Voting authority. When there is an equal division of the governing
body upon any question, the Mayor may vote to break the tie, but shall have no
vote under any other circumstances.
(Prior Code, § 2-20)
   (B)   Appointment of committees; reports of committee; compensation of
members. The Mayor may, from time to time, upon instruction from the governing
body, and as might be necessary for the orderly carrying out of business for
the city, appoint committees as are either ordered by the governing body or as
deemed appropriate by the Mayor. All reports of committees shall be reduced to
writing and shall be filed with the designated person for the purpose of
receipt of the same. Committee members shall receive compensation for extra and
special service as the governing body may designate.
(Prior Code, § 2-21)
   (C)   Executive duties generally. It shall be the duty of the Mayor to:
      (1)   Be informed as to the city’s business;
      (2)   Preside over the meetings of the governing body;
      (3)   Appoint committees and outline their duties and powers as the
governing body may direct;
      (4)   Make recommendations as deemed necessary or expedient to the
governing body;
      (5)   Appear on behalf of the city at public occasions; and
      (6)   Perform other duties as may be required of by the provisions of
this code, ordinances or resolutions of the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 2-22)
   (D)   Pro tem. At the first meeting after the election, the governing body
shall select one of its body to act as Mayor pro tempore for the duration of
the term, who shall, in the absence of the Mayor, perform all the duties of the
Mayor and shall be compensated for services as prescribed by the governing
body.
(Prior Code, § 2-23)
Statutory reference:
   Mayor pro tempore, see G.S. § 160A-70
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-69
§ 31.03 OATH.
   The Mayor-elect and each member-elect of the governing body shall, before
entering upon the duties of office, take and subscribe, before some person
lawfully entitled to administer oaths, an oath or affirmation to support the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the state and the
laws made pursuant thereto; and to faithfully perform the duties of the office;
which oath or affirmation shall be entered upon the minutes of the governing
body subscribed as aforesaid and attested by the officer administering the
same.
(Prior Code, § 2-24)
§ 31.04 PLACE, DATE AND TIME OF REGULAR MEETINGS.
   City Council will hold a regular meeting on the second and fourth Tuesdays
of every month except as indicated on the schedule attached to Res. 25-07.
Regular meetings will being at 6:00 p.m. in Council Chambers at city hall, 101
West Gold Street. The City Clerk shall cause a copy of the amended schedule to
be posted on the bulletin board at city hall, as well as publication on the
city’s website and social media outlets.
(Prior Code, § 2-25) (Motion passed 12-15-1987; Res. passed 7-25-1989; Ord. 09-
05, passed 6-30-2009; Res. 25-07, passed 2-25-2025)
§ 31.05 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   A special meeting of the governing body may be called by the Mayor, or by a
majority of the members, to meet at a time and place as may be specified, and
each member of the governing body shall be duly notified of the meeting and its
objective. No other business shall be transacted at the meeting except that for
which it was called unless by unanimous consent.
(Prior Code, § 2-26)
§ 31.06 ADJOURNED MEETINGS.
   If a quorum shall fail to attend any regular or special meeting of the
governing body or, if for any reason, the meeting shall fail to complete
transaction of the business before the meeting, the meeting may be adjourned to
any date agreed upon prior to the next regular meeting.
(Prior Code, § 2-27)
§ 31.07 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   The Mayor, when present, shall preside at all meetings of the governing
body. In the Mayor’s absence, the Mayor pro tempore shall preside.
(Prior Code, § 2-28)
§ 31.08 QUORUM AND VOTING.
   The determination of a quorum shall be made as required by G.S. § 160A-74.
Voting shall be governed by the provisions of G.S. § 160A-75.
(Prior Code, § 2-29) (Ord. passed 5-14-1991)
§ 31.09 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   Except as otherwise provided by any provisions of this code, the city
charter or any ordinance, the procedure of the governing body shall be governed
by Rules of Procedure of City Councils, by David M. Lawrence, as amended.
(Prior Code, § 2-30)
CHAPTER 32: EMPLOYEES AND ORGANIZATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
32.01   City Attorney
   
32.02   City Clerk
   
32.03   Deputy Clerk
City Manager
   
32.20   Appointment
   
32.21   Duties
   
32.22   Acting
   
32.23   Interim
   
32.24   Mayor and governing body members ineligible to serve
Planning and Zoning Board
   
32.35   Created; duties
   
32.36   Composition; terms of members
   
32.37   Vacancies
   
32.38   Organization
   
32.39   Meetings
   
32.40   Expenditures; appropriations; acceptance of donations
   
32.41   Powers and duties; studies, plans and regulations
   
32.42   Powers of review
   
32.43   Annual report
Cross-reference:
   Library Board of Trustees, see
Ch. 94
Statutory reference:
   Creation, consolidation and the like of offices, see G.S. § 160A-146
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 32.01 CITY ATTORNEY.
   At the first meeting of the governing body after the members’ election and
qualification, or as soon thereafter as possible, it shall appoint a City
Attorney, to serve at its pleasure, and to be its legal advisor.
(Prior Code, § 2-31)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-173
§ 32.02 CITY CLERK.
   There shall be a City Clerk who shall give notice of meetings of the
governing body, keep a journal of the proceedings of the governing body, be the
custodian of all city records and shall perform any other duties that may be
required by law or the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 2-45)
Statutory reference:
   City Clerk, duties, see G.S. § 160A-171
   Finance Officer, see G.S. § 159-24
§ 32.03 DEPUTY CLERK.
   The governing body may provide for a Deputy City Clerk who shall have full
authority to exercise and perform any of the powers and duties of the City
Clerk that may be specified by the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 2-46)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-172
CITY MANAGER
§ 32.20 APPOINTMENT.
   The governing body shall appoint a City Manager, who shall serve at its
pleasure. There is no residency requirement.
(Prior Code, § 2-40) (Ord. 96-16, passed 8-27-1996)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-147
§ 32.21 DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Manager shall be the chief administrator of the city.
   (B)   The City Manager shall be responsible to the governing body for
administering all municipal affairs placed in the Manager’s charge by it and
shall have the following powers and duties:
      (1)   Shall appoint, suspend or remove all city officers and employees
not elected by the people, and whose appointment or removal is not otherwise
provided for by law or pursuant to this code of ordinances, except the City
Attorney, in accordance with the general personnel rules, regulations, policies
or ordinances as the governing body may adopt;
      (2)   Shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments,
offices and agencies of the city, subject to the general direction and control
of the governing body, except as otherwise provided by law or this code of
ordinances;
      (3)   Shall attend all meetings of the governing body and recommend any
measures that the Manager deems expedient;
      (4)   Shall see that all of the laws of the state, the city charter and
the ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the governing body are
faithfully executed within the city;
      (5)   Shall prepare and submit the annual budget and capital program to
the governing body;
      (6)   Shall annually submit to the governing body and make available to
the public, a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of
the city as of the end of the fiscal year;
      (7)   Shall make any other reports that the Commissioners may require
concerning the operations of city departments, offices and agencies, subject to
his or her direction and control; and
      (8)   Shall perform any other duties that may be required or authorized
by the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 2-41)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-148
§ 32.22 ACTING.
   By letter filed with the City Clerk, the City Manager may designate, subject
to the approval of the governing body, a qualified person to exercise the
powers and perform the duties of City Manager during the City Manager’s
temporary absence or disability. During this absence or disability, the
governing body may revoke that designation at any time and appoint another to
serve until the City Manager returns or the City Manager’s disability ceases.
(Prior Code, § 2-42)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-149
§ 32.23 INTERIM.
   When the position of City Manager is vacant, the governing body shall
designate a qualified person to exercise the powers and perform the duties of
Manager until the vacancy is filled.
(Prior Code, § 2-43)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-150
§ 32.24 MAYOR AND GOVERNING BODY MEMBERS INELIGIBLE TO SERVE.
   Neither the Mayor, nor any member of the governing body, shall be eligible
for appointment as City Manager or acting or interim City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 2-44)
Statutory reference:
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-151
PLANNING AND ZONING BOARD
§ 32.35 CREATED; DUTIES.
   Pursuant to the authority contained in G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 19, being G.S. §§
160A-360 et seq., there is hereby created a Planning and Zoning Board for the
city, with the following powers and authority:
   (A)   Make studies of the area within its jurisdiction and surrounding
areas;
   (B)   Determine objectives to be sought in the development of the study
area;
   (C)   Prepare and adopt plans for achieving these objectives;
   (D)   Develop and recommend policies, ordinances, administrative procedures
and other means for carrying out plans in a coordinated and efficient manner;
   (E)   Advise the Council concerning the use and amendment of means for
carrying out plans;
   (F)   Exercise any functions in the administration and enforcement of
various means for carrying out plans that the Council may direct; and
   (G)   Perform any other related duties that the Council may direct.
(Prior Code, § 2-60) (Ord. passed 11-28-1989)
§ 32.36 COMPOSITION; TERMS OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   Membership criteria. The Board shall consist of 11 members, with seven
of the members being residents of the city, three of the members being
residents of the extraterritorial area lying in Cleveland County, and one a
resident of the extraterritorial area lying in Gaston County.
   (B)   Terms.
      (1)   City residents. The seven members residing within the city shall be
appointed by the City Council in accordance with the policy for City Council
appointments to authorities, boards, commissions and committees (appointments
policy). The City Council shall initially designate terms of one year for three
members, two years for three members, and three years for one member, in order
to provide staggered terms. Thereafter, all members shall serve three-year
terms unless removed by a majority vote of the City Council.
      (2)   Extraterritorial members. The extraterritorial members shall be
appointed for three-year terms, with one member being appointed by the Board of
Commissioners for Gaston County, and three members being appointed by the Board
of Commissioners for Cleveland County, in accordance with G.S. §160A-362. The
extraterritorial members shall sit as voting members concerning all matters
with both the extraterritorial jurisdiction and the corporate limits of the
city.
      (3)   Limitation. Term limits shall be in accordance with the
appointments policy.
(Prior Code, §2-61) (Ord. passed 11-28-1989; Ord. 93-28, passed 10-26-1993;
Ord. 06-02, passed 1-31-2006; Ord. 19-01, passed 2-26-2019; Ord. 19-21, passed
11-26-2019; Ord. passed 3-20-2023)
§ 32.37 VACANCIES.
   Vacancies of city members occurring for reasons other than expiration of
terms shall be filled by appointment of the City Council for the period of the
unexpired term. Vacancies of extraterritorial members occurring for reasons
other than expiration of terms shall be filled by appointment of the Board of
County Commissioners having jurisdiction over the extraterritorial area
represented.
(Prior Code, § 2-62) (Ord. passed 11-28-1989)
§ 32.38 ORGANIZATION.
   The Board shall elect each year at its July meeting a Chairperson and other
officers deemed necessary. The term of the Chairperson and other officers shall
be one year. The Board shall adopt bylaws and rules for transaction of business
and shall keep a record of its members’ attendance and of its resolutions,
discussions, findings and recommendations, which record shall be a public
record.
(Prior Code, § 2-63) (Ord. passed 11-28-1989)
§ 32.39 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Records; frequency; open status. The Director of Planning and
Community Development or another person as the Council may designate shall keep
a record of the proceedings and attendance of members. The Board shall hold at
least one meeting monthly and all meetings shall comply with G.S. §§ 143-318.9
et seq., having to do with open meetings. All meetings are deemed to be open
meetings and only those items of business meeting the statutory exemptions
shall be discussed in executive session.
   (B)   Absences. Any member failing to attend at least 60% of all meetings of
the Board in any calendar year shall be subject to dismissal by the City
Council.
(Prior Code, § 2-64) (Ord. passed 11-28-1989)
§ 32.40 EXPENDITURES; APPROPRIATIONS; ACCEPTANCE OF DONATIONS.
   (A)   The expenditures of the Board, exclusive of gifts or grants, shall be
within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the governing body, and no
indebtedness for which the city shall be liable shall be contracted or incurred
by the Board unless an appropriation is made by the governing body for such
purpose, as authorized by law, and then only to the extent of the
appropriation.
   (B)   The Board shall have the right to accept gifts and donations for the
exercises of its functions and may expend the money received from the gifts and
donations in a manner which, in the judgment of the Board, is consistent with
the best interest of the planning program.
(Prior Code, § 2-65) (Ord. passed 11-28-1989)
§ 32.41 POWERS AND DUTIES; STUDIES, PLANS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Board shall make careful studies of present conditions and the
probable future development of the city and its environs. The studies may
include, but not be limited to: land-use surveys; population studies; economic
base studies; schools, park and recreation studies; traffic and parking
studies; and urban renewal studies.
(Prior Code, § 2-66)
   (B)   The Board shall formulate and maintain a comprehensive plan of the
city and its environs for the purpose of achieving a coordinated, adjusted and
harmonious development of the city which would promote, in accordance with
present and future needs, the safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity
and general welfare of its citizens; efficiency and economy in the process of
development, convenience of traffic, safety from fire and other dangers;
adequate light and air; healthful and convenient distribution of population;
provision of adequate open spaces; good civic design and arrangement; wise and
efficient expenditures of public funds; adequate provision for public
utilities; and for other matters pertaining to the public requirements. The
comprehensive plan shall consist of a number of parts which may include, but
not be limited to, the following: a land-use plan, a major thoroughfare plan, a
utilities plan, a plan for economic development, a recreation plan, a school
plan, a community facilities plan.
(Prior Code, § 2-67)
   (C)   The Board may prepare subdivision regulations governing the
subdivision of land within the city and its environs to be submitted to the
governing body for its consideration and possible adoption.
(Prior Code, § 2-68)
(Ord. passed 11-28-1989)
§ 32.42 POWERS OF REVIEW.
   The Board shall review and make recommendations to the governing body upon
the extent, location and design of all public structures and facilities, on the
acquisition and disposal of public properties, on the opening, abandonment,
widening, extension, narrowing or other change to streets and other public
ways, on the construction, extension, expansion or abandonment of utilities
whether publicly or privately owned. However, in the absence of a
recommendation from the Board after the expiration of 30 days from the date on
which the question has been submitted in writing to the Board, the governing
body may, if it deems wise, take final action.
(Prior Code, § 2-69)
§ 32.43 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Board shall, in May of each year, submit to the governing body a report
of its activities, an analysis of the expenditures to date for the current
fiscal year, proposed planning program for the next fiscal year and a proposed
budget for the next fiscal year.
(Prior Code, § 2-70)
CHAPTER 33: PERSONNEL POLICY
Section
   
33.01   Regulations adopted by reference
§ 33.01 REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The personnel policies of the city are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Prior Code, § 15-1) (Ord. passed 3-28-1989; Ord. 90-03, passed 2-27-1990; Ord.
90-15, passed 7-31-1990; Ord. 92-04, passed 2-25-1992; Ord. 94-22, passed 11-
29-1994; Ord. 95-13, passed 11-28-1995; Ord. 96-23, passed 10-29-1996; Ord. 97-
03, passed 1-28-1997; Ord. 97-29, passed 9-30-1997; Ord. 03-33, passed 12-16-
2003; Ord. 04-01, passed 2-24-2004; Ord. 05-01, passed 1-25-2005; Ord. 05-02,
passed 3-29-2005; Ord. 06-30, passed 7-25-2006; Ord. 06-34, passed 8-29-2006;
Ord. 09-21, passed 6-30-2009; Ord. 10-16, passed 6-29-2010)
CHAPTER 34: FINANCE AND TAXATION
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   City depositories
   
34.02   Checks payable to city
Ad Valorem Taxes
   
34.15   Generally
Cross-reference:
   Occupational license taxes, see
Ch. 110
Statutory reference:
   Local Government Budget and Fiscal Control Act, see G.S. §§ 159-7 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 CITY DEPOSITORIES.
   The depositories for the city shall be those designated by motion of the
governing body every two years as soon as possible after taking office by
members.
(Prior Code, § 6-1)
§ 34.02 CHECKS PAYABLE TO CITY.
   (A)   Condition of acceptance. Whenever a check is given to the city in
payment of a license or permit fee or a service charge, or in payment for any
other liability to the city, the check is accepted by the city upon the express
condition that the maker covenants that the same is regular on its face, upon
the account on which drawn, with sufficient funds for the payment thereof.
(Prior Code, § 6-2)
   (B)   Service charges upon dishonor. The issuance of a municipal license or
permit or rendering a municipal service is conditioned upon an additional
charge for any check given therefor which is dishonored by the bank upon which
it is drawn for being irregular as to signature or otherwise, for lack of an
account there as or for insufficient funds for payment, the amount of the
charge shall be $25 for any one check.
(Prior Code, § 6-3)
   (C)   Invalidation of license upon dishonor. When a check is returned to the
city, any license or permit issued to the maker or endorser thereof shall be
void and, if for a service, the service shall be discontinued until the amount
of the check, plus the charges, shall be paid to the city.
(Prior Code, § 6-4)
   (D)   Redemption of check at treasurer’s office. All checks for a license or
permit fee or municipal service which are dishonored by the bank upon which the
same were drawn shall be redeemed by the maker or endorser thereof at the
office of the City Treasurer.
(Prior Code, § 6-5)
(Ord. passed 4-29-1991)
AD VALOREM TAXES
§ 34.15 GENERALLY.
   The city shall levy taxes as are provided by law, with the collection of
those taxes by the tax collectors of Cleveland and Gaston County as is
appropriate based upon the location of the property to be levied as taxes. The
Tax Collector shall use such procedures and regulations as are adopted by them
for the collection of taxes due the city.
TITLE V: UTILITIES
   Chapter
      
50.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
51.   ELECTRICITY SERVICE
      
52.   GAS SERVICE
      
53.   WATER AND SEWERS
      
54.   STORMWATER
CHAPTER 50: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
50.01   Definition
   
50.02   Scope
   
50.03   Application for service
   
50.04   Connections/disconnections to be made by city only
   
50.05   Climbing poles, tanks or other structures
   
50.06   Utilities Department not to loan materials or equipment, except to
other municipalities and approved contractors
   
50.07   Agreement
   
50.08   Notice of vacating premises; payment of amounts due
   
50.09   Deposits
   
50.10   Access to customer’s premises
   
50.11   Attachment to structures
   
50.12   Meters
   
50.13   Payment of utility bills and theft of service
 
   
50.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Use of raw water from the John H. Moss Reservoir, see §§
92.55 through
92.58
   Utility poles regulated, see §
93.01 through
93.04
§ 50.01 DEFINITION.
   The user and prospective user of the service is referred to herein as the
“customer” or “consumer”, these terms to be considered as synonymous.
(Prior Code, § 11-1)
§ 50.02 SCOPE.
   All pertinent provisions of this chapter are hereby made a part of the terms
and conditions whereby the city furnishes utility services to any person, or
whereby the city makes any utility connections or performs any work of any kind
in connection with the furnishing of utility services.
(Prior Code, § 11-2)
§ 50.03 APPLICATION FOR SERVICE.
   Written application shall be made for water, sewer, electricity, garbage
collection or any other utility service that may be furnished by the city, or
for any modification or alteration thereof, to the city upon forms furnished
therefor. The application shall state the name and address of the applicant,
the type of utility service desired, the purposes for which the application is
made and other information as the city may request.
(Prior Code, § 11-3)
§ 50.04 CONNECTIONS/DISCONNECTIONS TO BE MADE BY CITY ONLY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, except an authorized employee of the
city to turn on any product or service of any utility owned or operated by the
city to any building or premises in the city. In special circumstances only,
the respective Director may grant permission to a third party to connect or
disconnect a service.
(Prior Code, § 11-4) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.05 CLIMBING POLES, TANKS OR OTHER STRUCTURES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person except an authorized and qualified
employee of the city to climb any utility light pole, tank or any other
structure owned or operated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-5) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.06 UTILITIES DEPARTMENT NOT TO LOAN MATERIALS OR EQUIPMENT, EXCEPT TO
OTHER MUNICIPALITIES AND APPROVED CONTRACTORS.
   No tools, equipment, materials or other items belonging to any utility owned
or operated by the city are to be loaned out to anyone, except other
municipalities and approved contractors. Any item loaned out must be signed for
and pre-approved by the respective Director.
(Prior Code, § 11-6) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.07 AGREEMENT.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   Utility services owned or operated by the city will be supplied
under:
         (a)   The city’s standard form of application (service agreement) or
contract;
         (b)   The applicable rate schedules; and
         (c)   These service regulations.
      (2)   The city shall not be required to supply service unless and until
the agreement is executed by the customer and the city, it being understood and
agreed that no promise, statement or representation by an agent, employee or
other person shall be binding upon the city unless same be in writing and
attached to and made a part of the agreement; notwithstanding the foregoing,
when the requested supply of utility product or service is for residential use,
the customer’s application and the city’s acceptance thereof may be verbal and,
in that event, the city’s applicable rate schedules and these service
regulations shall be effective in the same manner as if the city’s standard
form of application for service had been signed by the customer and accepted by
the city. A verbal service agreement shall be conclusively presumed, when there
is no written application by a customer accepted in writing by the city, if the
utility product or service supplied by the city is used by the customer or on
the customer’s premises.
(Prior Code, § 11-7)
   (B)   Agreement personal. The rights which accrue to the customer under the
agreement are personal and shall not be transferred or assigned by the customer
without the written consent of the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-8)
§ 50.08 NOTICE OF VACATING PREMISES; PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS DUE.
   (A)   The customer shall notify the city before vacating the premises served
under the agreement as herein provided and shall pay, upon presentation, all
bills due under all agreements or contracts.
   (B)   If any deposits are being held by the city for the account being
vacated, the deposits shall be refunded by check or deducted from the final
billing statement. However, no refund shall be made by check unless the final
billing has been paid in full.
(Prior Code, § 11-9) (Ord. passed 4-29-1991)
§ 50.09 DEPOSITS.
   (A)   Since an accumulation of unpaid bills would tend toward higher utility
rates for all customers, the city shall, before commencement of service,
require a deposit for each type of utility service desired. The amount of the
deposits shall be established by resolution by the City Council. The city shall
refund the deposits of any customer whose account has not been delinquent for a
period of 12 consecutive months. The deposit refund will be credited to the
account. However, any customer whose deposit has been refunded, who shall
subsequently have a delinquent account, may be required by the Billing Director
to post deposits before utility services are reconnected or continued. The
deposits shall be refunded if the customer’s account subsequently has not been
delinquent for the required 12 consecutive months.
   (B)   In lieu of full deposits for each type of utility service, the city
may accept written letters from other utility companies or municipalities which
indicate that the customer was a good customer of the utility company or
municipality for at least one year.
   (C)   The city shall require the maximum deposit before commencement of
service for any request of service that does not meet all of the requirements
for the application of service. The city shall refund the deposit if the
account has not been delinquent for a period of 24 consecutive months or when
all service application requirements have been met and account history is good.
The deposit refund will be credited to the account.
(Prior Code, § 11-10) (Ord. passed 4-29-1991; Ord. 17-03, passed 1-31-2017)
§ 50.10 ACCESS TO CUSTOMER’S PREMISES.
   The city shall, at all reasonable times, have the right of ingress to and
egress from the premises of the customer, for all purposes connected with the
delivery of service, or the exercise of any rights under the agreement.
(Prior Code, § 11-11)
§ 50.11 ATTACHMENT TO STRUCTURES.
   No equipment or facilities owned by the customer or others may be attached
to poles or other structures owned by the city, except where the attachments
are part of another utility system and are subject to the terms of a joint-use
agreement or except where the attachment has been otherwise approved by the
respective Director or the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 11-12) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.12 METERS.
   (A)   To be furnished by city; rights of city. The city will furnish all
necessary meters. When a meter is moved from one location to another, all
expense in connection with the removal shall be borne by the city, except where
the removal is at the request of the customer, in which case, the expense will
be borne by the customer. The city shall have the right, at its option, to
place demand meters, volt meters or other instruments on the premises of the
customer for the purpose of making tests with respect to the customer’s
service.
(Prior Code, § 11-13)
   (B)   Location.
      (1)   Meters for all residential utility service, and for all other
service to the extent practicable, shall be located out-of-doors on the
customer’s structure at a place or point which is mutually acceptable to the
customer and the city, and which meets all the city’s requirements for reading,
testing, servicing accessibility and safety.
      (2)   Where it is not practicable, in the city’s opinion, to locate the
meter and its associated apparatus, if any, out-of-doors, the customers shall
provide a suitable indoor location which meets all of the city’s requirements
for reading, testing, servicing accessibility and safety.
(Prior Code, § 11-14)
   (C)   Inaccuracy. In case of the inaccuracy of a meter, the customer’s bill
for the period of such inaccuracy, not to exceed 60 days prior to the last
meter reading by the city, the meter readings, shall be adjusted up or down as
required to compensate for any meter inaccuracy exceeding acceptable
performance per each utility. Electric standard is as follows: (ANSI
STANDARDS). The performance of a watt-hour meter is considered to be acceptable
when the meter disk does not creep, and when the percentage registration is not
more than 102% or less than 98%, calculated in accordance with one of the
methods described in 6.1.8. Tested with standards whose accuracy is directly
traceable to the National Institute of Standards and Technology (N.I.S.T.)
formerly by the National Bureau of Standards.
(Prior Code, § 11-15)
§ 50.13 PAYMENT OF UTILITY BILLS AND THEFT OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Utility bills are usually dated and mailed the fifth business day of
the month. All utility payments are due and payable not later than the
twentieth day of the same month. Failure to receive a bill which has been
properly mailed or hand-delivered will not entitle the customer to any delay in
paying the amount due beyond the date when the bill is due and payable. The
Billing Director shall have delinquent notices mailed to all delinquent
accounts by the twenty-first day of the month. If payment is not received by
the twentieth day of the month, the account is delinquent and a late payment
fee will be added to the bill on the twentieth day of the month. The late
payment fee shall be $10 for all bill amounts up to $1,000, plus 1% of any
amount over the first $1,000. If the bill is not paid in full, including any
late payment fees, by 5:00 p.m. on the last business day of the month, utility
service will be disconnected, subject to the provisions of division (F) of this
section. All accounts not paid in full on the last business day of the month
also will be charged a $50 processing fee. All delinquent service charges, late
payment fees and processing fees must be paid in full before utility service
can be restored or continued. Any unpaid bills will be collected using all
collection methods available. Utility billing, delinquent, and disconnection
for non-payment dates are subject to change upon the City Manager’s approval.
   (B)   (1)   The Billing Director is authorized to make one agreement within
a 12-month period with any customer to extend the time for payment; providing,
the following conditions are met:
         (a)   No agreement can exceed two months in length;
         (b)   Any agreement must be in writing, signed by the customer and the
Billing Director; and
         (c)   The customer must show unusual circumstances that impact his or
her ability to pay; and the circumstances must be of a temporary nature so that
the city is reasonably assured that future bills will be paid in a timely
manner.
      (2)   In highly unusual circumstances, the City Manager may authorize
either a further extension of time, or more than one agreement in a 12-month
period. Any agreement must be in writing, and signed by the customer, the
Billing Director and the City Manager.
      (3)   Failure of the customer to abide by any of the terms of the written
agreement for extension of payments shall result in immediate disconnection of
utility services. No utility services can be reconnected or continued without
full payment of all delinquent service charges, late payment fees and
processing fees.
   (C)   (1)   Payment by a check returned for non-sufficient funds shall
constitute non-payment of the bill. Any customer that writes a check which is
returned by any financial institution for non-sufficient funds in the
customer’s account, must pay all bills in cash or by cashier’s check for a
period of one year in which no reoccurrence takes place. In addition, all
checks returned for non-sufficient funds (bad checks) shall be charged a $25
fee, as authorized by G.S. § 25-3-506, as amended.
      (2)   If the customer presents written evidence that the returned check
was the result of an error by the financial institution upon which it was
drawn, the Billing Director shall waive the requirements of this section, but
not the $25 fee.
   (D)   Where a meter for any reason is not read at the regular reading time,
the city may calculate the amount of service used with reference to the
customer’s normal consumption, and make any adjustment which may be necessary
in the bill rendered when the meter is next read; or the city may, in that
event, render the customer a bill for the minimum charge, the charge to be
credited to the customer when the meter is read and bills computed for the
normal billing cycle. The minimum charge for residential water and sewer
consumption when the meter is broken or does not exist, shall be based upon
3,000 gallons per month for each person residing in the dwelling. The minimum
charge for commercial or industrial water and sewer consumption shall be based
on average prior consumption for three months if metered; and shall be
negotiated by the City Manager based upon estimated usage where no meter will
exist (i.e., sewer service only).
   (E)   No claim or demand which the customer may have against the city shall
be set off or counterclaimed against the payment of any sum of money due the
city by the customer for services rendered, and all sums shall be paid in
accordance with the utility service agreement regardless of the claim or
demand.
   (F)   Disconnection for late payment.
      (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set
forth on the bill;
         (b)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second
bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid
within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued
for nonpayment; and
         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event
until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid, along with a turn-on
charge.
(Prior Code, § 11-16) (Ord. passed 4-29-1991; Ord. 93-10, passed 5-18-1993;
Ord. 14-16, passed 9-30-2014) Penalty, see §
50.99
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Use of water, sewer, electric or natural gas service after
disconnection by the city, whether reconnected by the customer or anyone other
than an authorized employee of the city, shall constitute theft of the utility
service by the customer. The usage shall be a violation of the municipal code
of the city and punishable by any means delineated in §
10.99. The civil penalty for the violation, as authorized by §
10.99(B), shall be $300 for each and every offense. Every day that the
violation continues shall be a separate and distinct offense (see tampering
policy).
   (B)   The civil penalties shall be recovered by the city in a civil action
in the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the civil penalty within
seven days of written notification of the penalty by the Billing Director,
either delivered by a police officer or by registered or certified mail to the
customer’s billing address. The seven days shall begin either upon actual
delivery by the police officer or upon the date upon which the registered or
certified letter was mailed.
(Prior Code, § 11-16) (Ord. passed 4-29-1991)
CHAPTER 51: ELECTRICITY SERVICE
Section
   
51.01   Distribution and service facilities; installation; making connections
   
51.02   Right-of-way for electric lines
   
51.03   Customer’s wiring and equipment
   
51.04   Ownership of equipment
   
51.05   Overcharge or undercharge
   
51.06   Billed services due
   
51.07   Responsibility beyond delivery point
   
51.08   Interference with city property
   
51.09   Resale service
   
51.10   Foreign electricity
   
51.11   Service interruptions
   
51.12   Discontinuance of service
   
51.13   Removal of equipment
   
51.14   Waiver of default
   
51.15   Reconnect fee
   
51.16   Copies of agreement, schedules and the like
   
51.17   Types of service
   
51.18   Unlawful use of current
   
51.19   Unlawful attachments
§ 51.01 DISTRIBUTION AND SERVICE FACILITIES; INSTALLATION; MAKING CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   The city’s distribution and service facilities will be installed above
ground on poles, towers or other fixtures; however, underground facilities may
be provided when requested by the customer, in accordance with the city’s
underground installation policy.
   (B)   The city may require the customer to perform any excavation conduits
and backfill necessary for the installation of underground electric service and
may require the customer to provide concrete foundation pads for transformers
or other pad-mounted equipment associated with underground service. All work
shall be in accordance with the city’s specifications.
   (C)   Service connections will be made as follows.
      (1)   Where both the city’s lines and the customer’s entrance conductors
are above ground, and where the service agreement between the city and the
customer is not to be made on one of the city’s electric service agreements.
The city will extend its service conductors to the customer’s building,
terminating them on the outside of the building at an attachment point provided
by the customer at a location and route provided by the customer and
satisfactory to the city for this purpose. As to electricity, the attachment
point must be of sufficient height to satisfy the requirements of the National
Electrical Safety Code and of applicable local and state codes, and the
strength of the structure at the point of connections must be satisfactory to
the city. The customer will provide and own all meter sockets or enclosures per
city specifications, with the exception of 13 terminal meter bases. The
customer will install all meter bases and enclosures. The city will make the
necessary connections from its service conductors to the customer’s entrance
conductors.
      (2)   Where both the city’s lines and the customer’s entrance conductors
are below ground, or when one is above ground and the other is below ground, or
where the size of the customer’s demand or any unusual character of the
customer’s location requires the service agreement between the city and the
customer to be made on one of the city’s electric service agreement, the city
will make the necessary connections from its service conductors to the
customer’s entrance conductors as in division (D)(1) above, if applicable, or
as in division (D)(3) below, if applicable. If neither divisions (D)(1) above
nor (D)(3) below is applicable, the connection shall be at a point to be agreed
upon by the city and the customer.
      (3)   (a)   When, in the city’s opinion, an individual transformer
installation is necessary to serve the customer’s demand and the demand exceeds
the capacity of a pole-type transformer installation, the city will require the
customer to provide suitable outdoor space on the customer’s premises to
accommodate a ground-type transformer installation, or substation.
         (b)   When the incoming service is overhead and the customer provides
space for a ground-type transformer installation, or substation, the city will
erect a structure outside of and immediately adjacent to the fence surrounding
the installation, and will connect to the customer’s entrance conductors at
that point. The city may require the customer to provide main disconnecting
switches at the point of connection, which switches shall control all of the
customer’s load other than the fire pump circuit, if any. In the event the
space agreed upon for the installation is adjacent to one or more of the
customer’s building walls, the city will connect to the customer’s entrance
conductors on the outside of one of the walls.
      (4)   With respect to any service, after a service connection has been
made it may be changed by the city upon request of the customer, but the
customer must bear the expense of the change and the change will not be made
where it will interfere with or jeopardize the city’s service either to the
customer desiring the change or to any other customer or customers.
(Prior Code, § 11-20)
§ 51.02 RIGHT-OF-WAY FOR ELECTRIC LINES.
   (A)   The customer shall, at all times, furnish the city a satisfactory and
lawful right-of-way over the customer’s premises for the city’s electric lines
and apparatus necessary or incidental to the furnishing of electric service and
shall also provide satisfactory outdoor locations for metering equipment.
   (B)   The city may change the location of the right-of-way upon request of
the customer and may require the customer to bear the expense of the change;
the change will not be made where it will interfere with or jeopardize the
city’s service, either to the customer requesting the change, or to any other
customer. All privileges of the city incident to the original location shall
apply to the new location.
   (C)   The obligation of the city to supply service is dependent upon the
city securing and retaining all necessary rights-of-way, privileges, franchises
or permits, for the delivery of the service, and the city shall not be liable
to the customer for any failure to deliver service because of the city’s
inability to secure or retain the rights-of-way, privileges, franchises or
permits.
(Prior Code, § 11-21)
§ 51.03 CUSTOMER’S WIRING AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Notice to city required; installation and maintenance.
      (1)   Equipment which will operate in one locality may be useless in
another due to difference in voltage, phase or frequency of electric service;
therefore, before wiring a premises or purchasing equipment, the customer shall
give the city notice and shall ascertain the character of service available at
the premises. The city may specify the voltage and type of electric service to
be furnished, also the location of the meter and the point where the service
connection shall be made.
      (2)   All the customer’s wiring and equipment must be installed and
maintained in accordance with the requirements of the city; otherwise, the city
may refuse to connect service to the customer or may discontinue service to
same. The customer shall keep in repair all wiring and equipment to the point
of connection with the facilities of the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-22)
   (B)   Changes.
      (1)   The customer shall not employ or utilize, without the written
consent of the city, any equipment, appliance or device, or permit the
continuation of any condition, which tends to create any hazard or otherwise to
affect adversely the city’s service to the customer or to others. When
polyphase electric service is used by any customer, the customer shall control
the use of service so that the load will be maintained in reasonable electrical
balance between the phases at the point of delivery.
      (2)   The customer shall give the city reasonable notice in writing of
any anticipated increase in demand exceeding 20 kilowatts or 10% of former
demand, whichever is greater, and stating the approximate excess and date
required. If, in the opinion of the city, the unexpired term of the agreement
is sufficient to justify the additional investment required, the city will
endeavor to provide additional capacity for any increase so requested by the
customer within reasonable notice.
      (3)   The city will extend its facilities and change the point of
delivery only when the investment required is warranted by the anticipated
revenue and when the extension is permissible and feasible.
(Prior Code, § 11-23)
§ 51.04 OWNERSHIP OF EQUIPMENT.
   All electric conductors and conduits, inside work and equipment, switches,
fuses and circuit breakers, from the point of connection with the city’s
service shall be installed and maintained by and at the expense of the
customer. All equipment furnished by the city shall be and remain the property
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-24)
§ 51.05 OVERCHARGE OR UNDERCHARGE.
   If the city has inadvertently overcharged or undercharged a customer as a
result of a misapplied schedule, an error in meter reading, a skipped meter
reading or other human or machine error, except meter inaccuracy, or if the
customer has bypassed or otherwise tampered with the meter, has otherwise acted
in a fraudulent or willfully misleading manner, or has knowledge of being
undercharged without notifying the city, the city shall adjust its charges to
refund the overcharge or to recover the undercharge in accordance with the
following.
   (A)   In the event of undercharge through customer fraud or overcharge, the
entire amount of the undercharge or overcharge shall be collected or refunded
respectively for the entire interval of the undercharge or overcharge, based
upon applicable state statute of limitations.
   (B)   In the event of undercharge through city error, the amount of the
undercharge shall be collected for the entire interval involved, based upon the
applicable state statute of limitations. The customer shall be allowed to pay
the deficient amount in equal installments added to the monthly bills over the
same number of billing periods which occurred during the interval of the
deficiency.
(Prior Code, § 11-25) (Ord. 98-04, passed 2-23-1998)
§ 51.06 BILLED SERVICES DUE.
   (A)   All meters are read monthly and all bills are due and payable on the
date of the bill, during regular business hours, at the office of the city.
   (B)   The word MONTH, as used herein, and as used in the rate schedules of
the city, shall be construed to mean the period of time between the regular
meter readings by the city. Meters with a constant of one may be read to the
nearest ten kilowatt-hours except in case of initial or final bill. For
purposes of establishing billing demand and minimum bills, the nearest whole
kilowatt shall be used.
(Prior Code, § 11-26) (Ord. passed 4-29-1991)
§ 51.07 RESPONSIBILITY BEYOND DELIVERY POINT.
   It is understood and agreed that the city is merely a furnisher of
electricity, deliverable at the point where it passes from the city’s wires to
the service wires of the customer, or through the divisional switch separating
the customer’s wires and equipment from the city’s wires and equipment, where a
switch is installed and the city shall not be responsible for any damage or
injury to the buildings, motors, apparatus or other property of the customer
due to lightning, defects in wiring or other electrical installations,
defective equipment or other cause not due to the negligence of the city. The
city shall not be, in any way, responsible for the transmission, use or control
of the electricity beyond the delivery point, and shall not be liable for any
damage or injury to any person or property whatsoever, or death of any person
or persons arising, accruing or resulting in any manner, from the receiving or
use of the electricity.
(Prior Code, § 11-29)
§ 51.08 INTERFERENCE WITH CITY PROPERTY.
   The customer shall not interfere with, or alter, the city’s meters, seals or
other property, or permit the same to be done by others than the city’s
authorized agent or employee. Damage caused or permitted by the customer to the
property shall be paid for by the customer.
(Prior Code, § 11-30)
§ 51.09 RESALE SERVICE.
   (A)   The contract is made and electricity is sold and delivered upon the
express condition that the customer shall not directly or indirectly sell or
resell, assign or otherwise dispose of the electricity or any part thereof, to
any person, except where service is supplied under a contract specifically
providing for resale.
   (B)   Under no circumstances will the city supply electricity for resale in
competition with the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-31)
§ 51.10 FOREIGN ELECTRICITY.
   The customer shall not use the city’s electric service in parallel with
other electric service, nor shall other electric service be introduced on the
premises of the customer for use in conjunction with or as a supplement to the
city’s electric service, without the written consent of the city.
(Prior Code, § 11-32)
§ 51.11 SERVICE INTERRUPTIONS.
   The city does not guarantee continuous service. It shall use reasonable
diligence at all times to provide uninterrupted service, and to remove the
cause or causes in the event of failure, interruption, reduction or suspension
of service, but the city shall not be liable for any loss or damage to a
customer or customers resulting from the failure, interruption, reduction or
suspension of service which is due to any accident or other cause beyond its
control, or to any of the following:
   (A)   An emergency action due to an adverse condition or disturbance on the
system of the city, or on any other system directly or indirectly
interconnected with it, which requires automatic or manual interruption of the
supply of electricity to some customers or areas in order to limit the extent
or damage of the adverse condition or disturbance or to expedite restoration of
service, or to effect a reduction in service to compensate for an emergency
condition on an interconnected system;
   (B)   An act of God, or the public enemy, or insurrection, riot, civil
disorder, fire or earthquake, or an order from federal, state, county or other
public authority;
   (C)   Making necessary adjustments to, changes in or repairs on its lines,
substations and facilities, and in cases where, in its opinion, the continuance
of service to customers’ premises would endanger persons or property; and
   (D)   It is expressly understood and agreed that the city does not contract
to furnish power for pumping water for extinguishing fires and, that in the
event that the consumer shall use the electric power, or any part thereof, for
pumping water to be used for extinguishing fires, the consumer shall, at all
times, keep on hand, or otherwise provide for, an adequate reserve supply of
water so that it shall not be necessary to pump water by means of the electric
power during a fire; and it is expressly understood and agreed that the city
shall not, in any event, be liable to the consumer, nor to any person, firm or
corporation for any loss or injury of or to property or person by fire or fires
occasioned by, or resulting directly or indirectly from the failure of any
pump, pumping apparatus or appliances to operate, whether the failure shall be
due to the act or omission of the city or otherwise, it being the intention of
the parties hereto that the city shall not, in any event, be liable for any
loss or damage occasioned by fire which may be caused by or result from the
failure of the city to supply electric power to operate it or any pump or
pumping apparatus or appliances.
(Prior Code, § 11-33)
§ 51.12 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   Subject to the provisions of §
50.13, the city shall have the right to suspend its service for repairs or
other necessary work on its lines, or systems, or to suspend or discontinue its
service for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   For any misrepresentation as to the identity of the consumer entering
the contract for service;
   (B)   For violation by the customer of any terms or conditions of the
agreement between the city and the customer or violation of any of these
service regulations which are a part of the agreement;
   (C)   For the reason that the customer’s use of the city’s service is
detrimental to the service of other customers;
   (D)   For the reason that the customer’s use of the city’s service conflicts
with, or violates laws of the state or any subdivision thereof;
   (E)   For the reason that wiring, equipment, appliance or device is
installed or in use on the customer’s premises, which permits the electricity
to be used without passing through the city’s meter, or which prevents, or
interferes with the measuring of the electricity by the city’s meter;
   (F)   For the non-payment of any bill, when due, for service rendered either
at the existing location of the customer or at any former location; and
   (G)   Upon failure or refusal of the customer to make, restore or increase
the customer’s deposit as required.
   (H)   For the reason that an unsafe condition has been encountered or
discovered that poses a unsafe condition to the customer and or its facility
and or premises or to city personnel or the city’s electric system.
(Prior Code, § 11-34)
§ 51.13 REMOVAL OF EQUIPMENT.
   In the event of discontinuation of service or expiration of contract, it
shall be lawful for the city to remove its meters, apparatus, appliances,
fixtures or other property.
(Prior Code, § 11-35) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.14 WAIVER OF DEFAULT.
   Any delay or omission on the part of the city to exercise its right to
discontinue or suspend service, or the acceptance of a part of any amount due,
shall not be deemed a waiver by the city of the right so long as any default in
whole or in part or breach of contract on the part of the customer shall
continue, and whenever and as often as any default or breach of contract shall
occur.
(Prior Code, § 11-36)
§ 51.15 RECONNECT FEE.
   (A)   In case of discontinuance of service for any reason except repairs or
other necessary work by the city, the customer shall pay the city a reconnect
charge before service will be restored.
   (B)   Where the service has been discontinued for any reason, except for
repairs or other necessary work by the city, the city shall have the right to
refuse service at the same premises to any other applicant who is a member of
the family of the former customer or who resides with the former customer on
the premises.
(Prior Code, § 11-37)
§ 51.16 COPIES OF AGREEMENT, SCHEDULES AND THE LIKE.
   Forms of application (service agreement) or contract, schedules of rates and
copies of service regulations are available at the office of the city and will
be furnished to the customer on request.
(Prior Code, § 11-38)
§ 51.17 TYPES OF SERVICE.
   The types of electric service supplied and the charges applicable thereto
are as prescribed from time to time by the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 11-39)
§ 51.18 UNLAWFUL USE OF CURRENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to extend electric wires or electric
service in or outside of any house, by attaching thereto additional wires,
burners or lights at a point on the connection leading from the main line to
the meters.
(Prior Code, § 11-40) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 51.19 UNLAWFUL ATTACHMENTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to mar, deface or weaken or guy to or
attach any radio antenna or hang any radio antenna or any other wires above or
below any electric lines or to tack or in any manner attach or nail any signs
or braces or devices of any sort to any electric light poles, or to otherwise
make use of any jumper or other device adopted to interference with the proper
operation of the meter or by connecting a wire to a power line for lighting
purposes where a lower rate is charged than for normal lighting.
(Prior Code, § 11-41) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 52: GAS SERVICE
Section
   
52.01   New service connections
   
52.02   Existing service connections
   
52.03   Line extensions for existing subdivisions and commercial establishments
   
52.04   Line extension for proposed subdivisions and commercial and industrial
establishments
§ 52.01 NEW SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   All taps for natural gas service shall be made by the city, unless
specifically authorized in writing by the Superintendent of Gas and Electric
Utilities. No tap fee shall be required for a residential or commercial service
tap provided the length of service line does not exceed 100 feet. The city
shall be reimbursed the full cost of that portion of service line exceeding 100
feet, the cost to be determined by the Superintendent, taking into account
labor, equipment and material costs.
(Prior Code, § 11-130) (Ord. 88-17, passed 8-9-1988) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 52.02 EXISTING SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   The city shall be reimbursed the full cost of the relocation of an existing
natural gas service line. The cost shall be determined by the Superintendent,
taking into account labor, equipment and material costs.
(Prior Code, § 11-131) (Ord. 88-17, passed 8-9-1988)
§ 52.03 LINE EXTENSIONS FOR EXISTING SUBDIVISIONS AND COMMERCIAL
ESTABLISHMENTS.
   Natural gas line extensions to existing residential subdivisions and
commercial establishments may be approved by the Superintendent and the City
Manager; provided that, the cost/benefit ratio is deemed favorable to the city.
Any extension must be reported to the City Council at its next regularly
scheduled meeting.
(Prior Code, § 11-132) (Ord. 88-17, passed 8-9-1988)
§ 52.04 LINE EXTENSION FOR PROPOSED SUBDIVISIONS AND COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL
ESTABLISHMENTS.
   Natural gas line extensions to proposed residential subdivisions, and
commercial and industrial establishments may be approved by the City Council;
provided that, the cost/benefit ratio is deemed favorable to the city. In
considering proposed commercial and industrial establishments, the City Council
may consider the economic impact of an establishment upon the city in its cost/
benefit analysis.
(Prior Code, § 11-133) (Ord. 88-17, passed 8-9-1988)
CHAPTER 53: WATER AND SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
53.001   Definitions
   
53.002   Abbreviations
   
53.003   Severability
   
53.004   Conflict
   
53.005   Effective date
   
53.006   Watershed protection
Connections
   
53.020   Required
   
53.021   Connections to be separate
   
53.022   Connection charge
   
53.023   Where to be made
   
53.024   Sewer not to connect to storm sewer
   
53.025   Construction
   
53.026   Outside city limits
   
53.027   Authority to discontinue connection
   
53.028   Charges for service
   
53.029   Swimming pool water
Extensions
   
53.040   Application for extensions
   
53.041   Extension requirements
   
53.042   Financing extensions
   
53.043   Specifications, ownership
Use of Public Sewers Required
   
53.055   Depositing objectionable wastes on public or private property
prohibited
   
53.056   Construction or maintenance of privies, septic tanks, cesspools and
the like prohibited
   
53.057   Owner to furnish, install and connect toilet facilities
Private Sewage Disposal
   
53.070   Connection to private system permitted
   
53.071   Construction of private system; permit required
   
53.072   When permit effective; inspection required
   
53.073   Compliance with state regulations required; denial of permit
   
53.074   Owner to operate private systems in sanitary manner
   
53.075   Connection to public sewer when available required; filling of septic
tanks and private systems required
   
53.076   Requirements not to interfere with requirements imposed by Health
Officer
Building Sewers and Connections
   
53.090   Uncovering of connection to or opening into public sewer by
unauthorized person prohibited
   
53.091   Building sewer permits; classes, application
   
53.092   Costs to be borne by owner; indemnification of city for loss or damage
   
53.093   Separate connections for each building required, with exception
   
53.094   When old building sewers may be used
   
53.095   Material to be used in constructing building sewer; specifications
   
53.096   Size and slope of building sewer subject to Director’s approval
   
53.097   Location and entrance of building sewer
   
53.098   Excavations, pipe laying and backfill
   
53.099   Joints and connections
   
53.100   Lifting sanitary sewage by artificial means permitted
Restrictions on Use of Public Sewers
   
53.115   Prohibitions; limitations
   
53.116   Hauled wastewater
Pretreatment
   
53.130   Purpose and policy
   
53.131   Definitions and abbreviations
   
53.132   Prohibited discharge standards
   
53.133   National categorical pretreatment standards
   
53.134   Local limits
   
53.135   State requirements
   
53.136   Right of revision
   
53.137   Dilution
   
53.138   Pretreatment of wastewater
   
53.139   Accidental discharge/slug control plans
   
53.140   Hauled wastewater
   
53.141   Fees
   
53.142   Pretreatment program administration charges
   
53.143   Wastewater discharge permit
   
53.144   Baseline monitoring reports
   
53.145   Compliance schedule progress reports
   
53.146   Reports on compliance with categorical standards; deadline
   
53.147   Periodic compliance reports
   
53.148   Reports of changed conditions
   
53.149   Reports of potential problems
   
53.150   Reports from unpermitted users
   
53.151   Notice of violation
   
53.152   Analytical requirements
   
53.153   Compliance monitoring
   
53.154   Confidential information
Enforcement
   
53.165   Administrative remedies
   
53.166   Civil penalties
   
53.167   Other available remedies
   
53.168   Remedies non-exclusive
   
53.169   Publication of significant non-compliance
   
53.170   Adjudicatory hearings
   
53.171   Affirmative defenses to discharge violations
Water Shortage Response Plan
   
53.185   Authorization
   
53.186   Notification
   
53.187   Levels of response
   
53.188   Triggers
   
53.189   Enforcement
   
53.190   Public comment
   
53.191   Variance protocols
   
53.192   Effectiveness
   
53.193   Revision
Cross-Connection Control
   
53.205   Introduction
   
53.206   Intent
   
53.207   Definitions
   
53.208   Cross-Connection Control Inspector
   
53.209   Authorized installers
   
53.210   Facilities and applications requiring backflow prevention
   
53.211   Permit required
   
53.212   Annual testing required
   
53.213   Testing, inspecting required
   
53.214   Non-residential construction outside the city and extraterritorial
area
   
53.215   Intrasystem protection
   
53.216   Fireline
   
53.217   Flushing tanks
   
53.218   Carbonation equipment
   
53.219   Tank trucks
   
53.220   Private wells
   
53.221   Device protection
   
53.222   Bypass loops
   
53.223   Additional protection required
   
53.224   Discontinuance of service
   
53.225   Order to remove
   
53.226   Violation of subchapter
 
   
53.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 53.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five days at 20°C, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
   BUILDING SEWER. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user to
the POTW.
   BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a
user’s treatment facility.
   CITY. The City of Kings Mountain or the City Council of Kings Mountain.
   CODES DIRECTOR. That officer of the city who is charged with the enforcement
of building standards, zoning regulations and the like, regardless of changes
in title.
   COOLING WATER. The water discharged from any use such as air conditioning,
cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat.
   DAILY FLOW, HOW CALCULATED. Daily flow may be based on water usage as
metered by city’s water meter; or by sewage meter should the user decide, or
the city direct, to install such. In either case, the sewage meter shall be
maintained and calibrated at the owners expense, to the city’s satisfaction.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Kings Mountain Water and Sewer Department.
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the
Administrator or other duly authorized official of the Agency.
   HEALTH OFFICER. An officer of the Health Department of the respective
county, or of the Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources of
the state.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food, that have been shredded to a degree that all particles will
be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal
rights and which is controlled by public authority.
   PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW). A treatment works as defined by § 212
of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned in this instance by the city.
This definition includes sewers that convey wastewater to the POTW treatment
plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to
a facility providing treatment. For the purpose of this chapter, POTW shall
also include all pump stations, manholes, force mains and other units of the
city system.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer which carries sewage and to which storm waters,
surface waters and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE. A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business
buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with ground
waters, surface and storm, waters as may be present.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   STATE. State of North Carolina.
   STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
   SUPERINTENDENT. See DIRECTOR.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on, or is suspended
in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory
filtering.
   USER. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of
wastewater into the city’s POTW.
   WASTEWATER. The liquid- and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions,
whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or permitted to enter
the POTW.
   WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT. As set forth herein.
   WATER METER ACCURACY.
      (1)   Questions of accuracy of city water meters shall be settled as
follows: meters smaller than one inch shall be tested in place by city. One
inch or larger meters shall be tested by private testing concern either in
place or by other means as necessary.
      (2)   Meters found to be within ACCURACY LIMITS shall be left in or
reinstalled and test shall be paid for by user at city’s cost, plus 10%.
ACCURACY LIMITS shall be +/-3%.
      (3)   Acts of vandalism, tampering or other attempts to defeat the
purpose of water meter shall be cause for action, the least of which shall be
billing for new meter and maximum prior bill.
   WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.002 ABBREVIATIONS.
   The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings.
   BOD. Biochemical oxygen demand.
   C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
   COD. Chemical oxygen demand.
   EPA. Environmental Protection Agency.
   gpd. Gallons per day.
   G.S. North Carolina General Statutes.
   l. Liter.
   mg. Milligrams.
   mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
   NCDEHNR. North Carolina Department of Environment, Health and Natural
Resources.
   NPDES. National pollutant discharge elimination system.
   POTW. Publicly owned treatment works.
   SIC. Standard industrial classification.
   U.S.C. United States Code.
   TSS. Total suspended solids.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.003 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision, paragraph, word, section or subchapter of this chapter is
invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions,
paragraphs, words, sections and subchapters shall not be affected and shall
continue in full force and effect.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.004 CONFLICT.
   All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or
conflicting with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of
the inconsistency or conflict.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.005 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication, as provided by law.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.006 WATERSHED PROTECTION.
   The ordinance entitled “Water Supply Watershed Protection Ordinance, Gaston
County, North Carolina”, attached to the ordinance codified herein and
incorporated by reference in this section as if fully stated herein, and as may
be amended from time to time by the Gaston County Board of Commissioners, is
hereby adopted by the city as the water supply watershed protection ordinance
for all areas of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction lying and
situated within Gaston County; and it is hereby reaffirmed that enforcement of
the ordinance has by written agreement been delegated to the County of Gaston.
(Ord. 94-02, passed 1-25-1994)
CONNECTIONS
§ 53.020 REQUIRED.
   Within 90 days after the time when any water main or sanitary sewer main in
any street is completed and the owners of all abutting lots have been notified,
in writing by the city, owners of all abutting properties having thereon
structures for human occupancy shall cause same to be connected with the main.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.021 CONNECTIONS TO BE SEPARATE.
   (A)   Every structure requiring a water or sewer connection shall be
separately and independently connected, except as herein provided.
   (B)   Connections to the city water system, for which the user desires to be
relieved of obligation for sewer charges due to the use for which the water is
purchased resulting in water not being returned to the city’s sewer system,
shall be separate from, and not connected to, the tap intended for household
use.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.022 CONNECTION CHARGE.
   Any person desiring connection to the water or sewer systems of the city
shall, upon application therefore, and approval thereof, pay the charge as
adopted by the latest action of the City Council, including, if applicable,
acreage charges for lines previously installed by Cleveland or Gaston County,
and for which the charges are specified.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.023 WHERE TO BE MADE.
   (A)   Every sewer connection shall be made at the “Y” or “T” provided for
the lot to be served. If no “Y” or “T” has been provided for the lot, then the
connection will be made at a point selected by the Director to best serve that
lot, unless a location is chosen by the owner and is acceptable to the
Director.
   (B)   No sanitary sewer shall be connected to a storm water sewer, nor shall
any storm water, of any description, to be added to any sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.024 SEWER NOT TO CONNECT TO STORM SEWER.
   A house sewer shall not be connected to a storm water sewer or roof runoff;
nor shall surface water, ground water, condensate, de-ionized water, non-
contact cooling water, unpolluted industrial wastewater or storm water be
introduced into any sanitary sewer, unless specifically authorized by the
Director.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.025 CONSTRUCTION.
   Upon the filing of an application, approval and payment of charges, the city
shall make all connections, furnish and lay all pipe, including a “clean-out”,
if sewer, to the property line. The water meter, if water, will only be
installed after notification of payment of deposit.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.026 OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   No connection of any water or sewer line or system outside the city shall be
made to any part of the city’s water or sewer system without meeting the
requirements as adopted by the City Council.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.027 AUTHORITY TO DISCONTINUE CONNECTION.
   The city shall have the power to discontinue any connection with the public
sewer in cases where the system, the public, or city personnel are being
harmed, and where good-faith efforts have failed to correct the condition.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.028 CHARGES FOR SERVICE.
   Charges for water and/or sewer service shall be based on the latest per-unit
charge adopted by the City Council. Bills shall be submitted monthly, on a date
as adopted, and payment shall be due as stated.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.029 SWIMMING POOL WATER.
   Water used in swimming pools shall be billed at the same unit charge as
other water. Customers should contact the Billing Department after filling
their pool and the Billing Department will deduct the sewer service charge for
swimming pool fill-up consumption only. Water haulers should contact the Water
Department for all water taken from fire hydrants prior to filling up.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
EXTENSIONS
§ 53.040 APPLICATION FOR EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   When a property owner, owners or developer desires to have water or
sanitary sewer services extended to and along any public street or other public
way where no water or sanitary sewer main exists, the property owner, owners or
developer shall apply in writing to the City Engineer or other person
designated by the City Council, requesting the water and/or sewer service.
   (B)   When application is made for water and sewer extensions to serve an
area or development project that is planned as a part of a larger project all
of which is not to be developed at the time application is made, the owner,
owners or developer shall submit plans in sufficient detail to the City
Engineer or other persons designated by the City Council, in order that
adequate size facilities can be determined and plans for the orderly extension
of services can be made.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.041 EXTENSION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The extension of either water or sanitary sewer service to properties
not previously served and for which application is required by §
53.040 shall be made only in accordance with the requirements of this
subchapter.
   (B)   The minimum distance for any extension of a water or sewer main shall
be determined by the city. In general, the minimum distance for extensions
shall be one platted block.
   (C)   The size of water mains and sanitary sewer mains to be installed and
the other required system facilities shall be determined by the City Engineer
or other person designated by the City Council. No application shall be
approved and no connection to the city systems shall be authorized unless the
size of facilities and other requirements of the city and State Department of
Environment, Health and Natural Resources (NCDEHNR) are complied with.
   (D)   Upon completion of the work, record drawings shall be provided prior
to acceptance by the city. The record drawings shall show the true position of
all connections by a means which shall make possible the future location of
each connection, in addition to all other requirements of record drawings.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.042 FINANCING EXTENSIONS.
   (A)   For considerations of financing extensions, either within or outside
corporate limits, the applicant is referred to the latest policy adopted by the
City Council and filed with the City Clerk.
   (B)   No financial agreement not within the outlines of this policy, or not
approved by the City Council at open public meeting, shall have the effect of
the city policy.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 01-47, passed 10-30-2001)
§ 53.043 SPECIFICATIONS, OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   (1)   Any water mains or sanitary sewer mains extended under the
provisions of this subchapter shall be installed and constructed in accordance
with the approved plans, specifications and requirements of the city.
      (2)   All facilities installed under the provisions of this subchapter,
whether within or outside the corporate limits, shall become the property of
the city and under its jurisdiction and control for any and all purposes
whatsoever at the time the facilities are connected to the city systems.
   (B)   In addition, a deed to the city for water or sewer facilities which
are located outside the corporate limits, along with all necessary easements,
the cost of which is borne by individual property owners, shall be executed
prior to the time any extension provided for in this subchapter is connected to
the city systems.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED
§ 53.055 DEPOSITING OBJECTIONABLE WASTES ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY
PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the
city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.056 CONSTRUCTION OR MAINTENANCE OF PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS, CESSPOOLS AND
THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used
for the disposal of sewage.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.057 OWNER TO FURNISH, INSTALL AND CONNECT TOILET FACILITIES.
   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purpose, situated within the city, is hereby
required, at his or her expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein
and to connect the facilities directly with the proper sewer in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter prior to occupancy of the building, house or
property.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001) Penalty, see §
53.999
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 53.070 CONNECTION TO PRIVATE SYSTEM PERMITTED.
   A private sewage disposal system may be permitted pursuant to Vol. II or
Vol. VII of the State Building Code; provided, the Director has determined
connection to public sewer is unavailable or is not feasible and all other
provisions of this subchapter are complied with.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.071 CONSTRUCTION OF PRIVATE SYSTEM; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system, the
owner shall first obtain a written permit from the State Department of
Environment, Health and Natural Resources in the county of installation.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.072 WHEN PERMIT EFFECTIVE; INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the NCDEHNR. A
representative of the NCDEHNR shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage
of construction and in any event, the applicant for permit shall notify the
NCDEHNR when the system is ready for final inspection, and before any concealed
portion of the system is covered.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.073 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE REGULATIONS REQUIRED; DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all requirements of the NCDEHNR and the respective
county. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system
employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is
less than 15,000 square feet. No private system shall be permitted to discharge
to any natural outlet without a state permit.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.074 OWNER TO OPERATE PRIVATE SYSTEMS IN SANITARY MANNER.
   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner and in compliance with NCDEHNR rules at all times, at no
expense to the city.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.075 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER WHEN AVAILABLE REQUIRED; FILLING OF SEPTIC
TANKS AND PRIVATE SYSTEMS REQUIRED.
   At a time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in §§
53.020 through
53.029, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance
with this subchapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private
sewage disposal facilities shall be emptied, abandoned and filled with suitable
material.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.076 REQUIREMENTS NOT TO INTERFERE WITH REQUIREMENTS IMPOSED BY HEALTH
OFFICER.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the Health Officer.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS
§ 53.090 UNCOVERING OF CONNECTION TO OR OPENING INTO PUBLIC SEWER BY
UNAUTHORIZED PERSON PROHIBITED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening
into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.091 BUILDING SEWER PERMITS; CLASSES, APPLICATION.
   (A)   There shall be two classes of building sewer permits:
      (1)   For residential and commercial service; and
      (2)   For service to establishments producing industrial waste.
   (B)   In either case, the owner or his or her agent shall make application
on a special form furnished by the city. The application shall be supplemented
by any plans, specifications or other information considered pertinent in the
judgement of the city. A permit and inspection fee of an amount as adopted by
the City Council shall be paid to the City Treasurer at the time the
application is filed.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.092 COSTS TO BE BORNE BY OWNER; INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY FOR LOSS OR
DAMAGE.
   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city
from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the
installation of the building sewer.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.093 SEPARATE CONNECTIONS FOR EACH BUILDING REQUIRED, WITH EXCEPTION.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building; except where one building stands at the rear of another and no sewer
is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining
alley, court, yard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may
be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building
sewer.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.094 WHEN OLD BUILDING SEWERS MAY BE USED.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the Director, to meet all
requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.095 MATERIAL TO BE USED IN CONSTRUCTING BUILDING SEWER; SPECIFICATIONS.
   The building sewer shall be of material approved for the application and
listed for the purpose by an approved testing laboratory pursuant to the latest
adopted edition of Vol. II or Vol. VII of the State Building Code.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.096 SIZE AND SLOPE OF BUILDING SEWER SUBJECT TO DIRECTOR’S APPROVAL.
   The size and slope of the building sewer shall conform to the requirements
set forth in the latest adopted edition of Vol. II or Vol. VII of the State
Building Code. The building sewer shall not be covered until it has been
inspected and approved by the Codes Director or his or her authorized agent.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.097 LOCATION AND ENTRANCE OF BUILDING SEWER.
   Whenever possible the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the lowest floor. Building sewers laid parallel to any load
bearing or foundation wall shall conform to the latest adopted edition of the
State Building Code. The building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and in
straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be subject
to the requirements set forth in the latest adopted edition of the State
Building Code.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.098 EXCAVATIONS, PIPE LAYING AND BACKFILL.
   All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be
open trench work unless otherwise approved by the Director. Pipe laying and
backfill shall be performed in accordance with ASTM and OSHA specifications;
except that, no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.099 JOINTS AND CONNECTIONS.
   All joints and connections shall be made in accordance with provisions of
the latest adopted edition of the State Building Code.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001) Penalty, see §
53.999
§ 53.100 LIFTING SANITARY SEWAGE BY ARTIFICIAL MEANS PERMITTED.
   In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity
flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by the drain shall be lifted
by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer, at the sole
expense of the owner.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 53.115 PROHIBITIONS; LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Discharge of certain materials to sanitary sewer prohibited. No person
shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water,
ground water, roof runoff or sub-surface drainage to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Discharge of storm water, roof runoff and unpolluted drainage. Storm
water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to the sewers as
are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by
the Director.
   (C)   Structures required. Discharge of fats, oils or greases of animal or
vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 50 mg/l are prohibited.
Therefore:
      (1)   Grease, oil and/or sand interceptors shall be required for any new
or remodeled facilities from which there is reasonable expectation that these
pollutants will be discharged in volume greater than from residential dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Codes
Director and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of
impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in
temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, water-tight and
equipped with easily removable, gas-tight and water-tight covers.
      (2)   Where installed, all grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be
maintained by the owner, at his or her expense, in continuously efficient
operation at all times.
      (3)   (a)   The discharge into the public sewers of any waters or wastes
having:
            1.   A five-day biochemical oxygen demand greater than 300 parts
per million; or
            2.   Containing more than 250 parts per million of suspended
solids, shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director.
         (b)   When the Director makes a determination that it is necessary,
the owner shall provide, at his or her expense, the preliminary treatment as
required herein.
      (4)   (a)   Storage tanks. In order to promote equalization of flows, any
user discharging more than 100,000 gallon per day to the city sewer may be
required by the Director to construct and maintain, at his or her own expense,
a suitable storage tank, reservoir or pond of the corresponding minimum
volumes:
 
Volume of Waste Discharged Minimum Average Gallons/day (Discharged) in
Volume of Storage Tank             Percentage of Daily Volume of Discharged
0 to 100,000                       0%
100,001 to 200,000                 50%
200,001 to 400,000                 100%
400,001 to 750,000                 150%
750,001 or above                   200%
 
         (b)   The storage tank shall have its outlet to the sewer controlled
by an approved device, the setting of flow rates being as directed by Director.
      (5)   Plans for the construction of the storage tank, interceptors and
controlling devices shall be approved by the Director prior to the beginning of
construction.
   (D)   Wavier of requirements; approval; certificate; review; revocation. In
the event that any new sewer user is unable to comply with any provision
contained in this subchapter, whether because of the physical location of his
or her premises, the nature of his or her operations, conditions beyond his or
her control, or circumstances which would render compliance unreasonable, or
impractical, or would result in an arbitrary and unreasonable taking of
property, or in the closing and elimination of any lawful business occupation
or activity, he or she may apply to the Director for a certificate of waiver,
specifying the requirement sought to be waived and the reason underlying the
request. Upon receipt of the request, the Director shall examine the premises
and operations in question to determine whether adequate justification exists.
If good cause is shown, the Director may thereafter issue a certificate of
waiver which sets forth the findings of fact as determined by the Director with
respect to the request, the grounds upon which the certificate is based, and
the specific conditions and restrictions to which the continued validity of the
certificate are subject, including without limitations, the payment by the
requesting party of the additional charges as are necessary, in the
determination of the Director, to compensate for the excess burden on the sewer
system occasioned by the waiver. The certificate of waiver may be conditioned
upon periodic review of the grounds upon which it is based, and any certificate
shall be revocable by the Director for good cause at any time upon 90 days
notice to the party who has been granted the waiver. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to modify or affect the application hereof as to the
requesting party. The Director shall maintain publicly at his or her office a
file containing copies of all current certificates of waiver issued.
   (E)   Prohibited discharge standards.
      (1)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation
or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all users of a
POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment
standards or any other national, state or local pretreatment standard or
requirement.
      (2)   No user may contribute the following substances to the POTW:
         (a)   Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction to the
flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the POTW but in no
case solids with particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension;
         (b)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
         (c)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding
pollutants, in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
pollutants, to cause interference with the POTW;
         (d)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which either
singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public
nuisance or hazard to life, or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers
for maintenance and repair;
         (e)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 131°F (55°C),
or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting
in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C);
         (f)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause worker health and/
or safety problems;
         (g)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW Director, and as covered in §
53.116;
         (h)   Any substance which may cause the POTWs effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludges or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case
shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in non-compliance
with any state or federal regulation or guideline;
         (i)   Any wastewater which imparts color which causes the treatment
plant effluent to violate the NPDES permit limit for color, if applicable;
         (j)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes,
except as specifically approved by the POTW Director in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
         (k)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by a
wastewater discharge permit; and
         (l)   Recognizable portions of human or animal anatomy.
      (3)   When the Director determines that a user(s) is contributing to the
POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in amounts as may cause or
contribute to interference of POTW operation, pass through or cause violation
of agreement with other governmental units, the Director shall:
         (a)   Advise the user(s) of the potential impact of the contribution
on the POTW in accordance herewith; and
         (b)   Take appropriate actions in accordance with §
53.147 for the user to protect the POTW from interference or pass through.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
§ 53.116 HAULED WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Applicability. The city will accept septic tank waste originating from
within Cleveland County, from haulers doing business in same. Septage will be
accepted from haulers/pumpers who show a current licence by the NCDEHNR.
   (B)   Location and schedule. Septage will be accepted at the Pilot Creek
Wastewater Treatment Plant from 9:30 a.m. until 3:00 p.m. Monday through
Friday, except holidays. No loads will be received prior to the stated time.
Unloading after the stated time will be by prior arrangement with the operator
on duty, only. Due to flow variations, no waste will be accepted during the
weeks chosen by the industries for holiday shut-down.
   (C)   Acceptable wastes. Only waste from residential type systems or
portable toilets, with a pH between 6.0 and 9.0 will be accepted.
   (D)   Unacceptable wastes. No grease-trap waste, cesspool waste, sediment
trap waste, industrial food processing waste, industrial oils or greases,
textile waste, skimmings or sludge from treatment or pretreatment processes,
nor any waste of unknown origin will be accepted.
   (E)   Access and discharge.
      (1)   Entrance to the site will be via Landfill Road. There will be one
designated point for discharge of septage at the plant.
      (2)   Haulers will be responsible for the necessary means of unloading,
by hose, at this point. Haulers will also be held responsible for clean-up of
spills, leaks and/or repair of any damage done in the discharge or other plant
area.
   (F)   Loss of privilege. The privilege of using the POTW for septage
disposal shall be forfeited for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Failure to pay charges and/or fees promptly;
      (2)   Falsification of documents;
      (3)   Failure to abide by regulations;
      (4)   Unloading of any waste prohibited by ordinance;
      (5)   Unloading of waste in violation of CCHD regulations;
      (6)   Interference with the duties of plant personnel; and
      (7)   Failure to maintain current approval forms.
   (G)   Disclaimer. The city will not be responsible for actions of haulers or
their employees, damage done to haulers equipment while on city property, nor
verbal commitments by city employees. The hauler’s decision to use this means
of disposal shall indicate his or her acceptance of all conditions as set
forth.
   (H)   Discontinuance. Should the acceptance of septage create problems with
the ability of the POTW to meet the limits of its NPDES permit, present or
future; or cause operational problems or expenses not recoverable from hauler
fees, the Director may, at any time, end the acceptance of septage.
PRETREATMENT
§ 53.130 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This subchapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and
indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for
the City of Kings Mountain, hereafter referred to as the city, and enables the
city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean
Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and the general pretreatment regulations
(40 C.F.R. part 403).
   (B)   The objectives of this subchapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal
wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated,
into any waters of the state or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
      (3)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludges
from the municipal system;
      (4)   To protect municipal personnel who may be affected by sewage,
sludge and effluent in the course of their employment as well as protecting the
general public;
      (5)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation,
maintenance and improvement of the municipal wastewater system; and
      (6)   To ensure that the municipality complies with its NPDES or non-
discharge permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other
federal or state laws to which the municipal wastewater system is subject.
   (C)   This subchapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the municipal wastewater system, through the issuance of
permits to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of general
requirements for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement
activities, requires user reporting and provides for the setting of fees for
the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established
herein.
   (D)   This subchapter shall apply to all users of the municipal wastewater
system, as authorized by G.S. §§ 160A-312 and/or 153A-275. The city shall
designate an administrator of the POTW and pretreatment program hereafter
referred to as the POTW Director. Except as otherwise provided herein, the POTW
Director shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
subchapter. Any powers granted to or imposed upon the POTW Director may be
delegated by the POTW Director to other city personnel. By discharging
wastewater into the city wastewater system, industrial users located outside
the city limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions established in
this subchapter, as well as any permits, enforcement actions or orders issued
thereunder. Users subject to this subchapter are also subject to receiving POTW
ordinance.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.131 DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
      APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Director of the Division of Water Resources of
the North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources or his or
her designee.
      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER. 
         (a)   If the industrial user is a corporation, AUTHORIZED
REPRESENTATIVE shall mean:
            1.   The president, secretary, or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision- making functions for the corporation; or
            2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual
sales or expenditures exceeding 25 million dollars (in second-quarter 1980
dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the
manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
         (b)   If the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship,
an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a general partner or the proprietor,
respectively.
         (c)   If the industrial user is a federal, state or local government
facility, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a director or highest
official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of
the activities of the government facility or their designee.
         (d)   The individuals described in divisions (a) through (c) above may
designate another AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to the city.
         (e)   If the designation of an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE is no longer
accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of
this section must be submitted to POTW Director prior to or together with any
reports to be signed by an authorized representative.
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration
(e.g. mg/l).
      BUILDING SEWER. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user
to the POTW.
      BYPASS. The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a
user’s treatment facility.
      CATEGORICAL STANDARDS. National categorical pretreatment standards or
pretreatment standard.
      CONTROL AUTHORITY. Refers to the POTW organization if the POTW
organization’s pretreatment program approval has not been withdrawn.
      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA. The United States Environmental
Protection Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a
designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of the
agency.
      GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time
basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time
not to exceed 15 minutes.
      HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks, including, but not
limited to, such holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers,
septic tanks and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction from
any non-domestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act, (33
U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the
system).
      INDUSTRIAL USER or USER. Any person which is a source of indirect
discharge.
      INTERFERENCE. The inhibition, or disruption of the POTW collection
system, treatment processes, operations or its sludge process, use or disposal,
which causes or contributes to a violation of any requirement of the Control
Authority’s (and/or POTW’s if different from the Control Authority) NPDES,
collection system or non-discharge permit or prevents sewage sludge use or
disposal in compliance with specified applicable state and federal statutes,
regulations or permits. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or
disposal by the POTW in accordance with § 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or
any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste
Disposal Act (SWDA) (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.) the Clean Air Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act, the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary Act
(MPRSA) or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any
state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable
to the method of disposal or use employed by the POTW.
      MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis
wastes.
      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which applies to
a specific category of industrial users, and which appears in 40 C.F.R. Ch. 1,
Subch. N, parts 405 through 471.
      NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR NPDES PERMIT. A permit
issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342), or pursuant to G.S. §
143-215.1 by the state under delegation from EPA.
      NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances;
these prohibitions appear herein and are developed under the authority of § 307
(b) of the Act and 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.
      NEW SOURCE.
         (a)   Any building, structure, facility or installation from which
there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under §
307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if the standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307(c), provided that:
            1.   The building, structure, facility or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located;
            2.   The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
            3.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria
of divisions (a)2. or (a)3. above, but otherwise alters, replaces or adds to
existing process or production equipment.
         (c)   For purposes of this definition, construction of a new source
has commenced if the owner or operator has:
            1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
               (i)   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
               (ii)   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures or facilities which is
necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities
or equipment; or
            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which is intended to be used in its operation within
a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or
modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering,
and design studies do no constitute a contractual obligation under this
definition.
      NON-CONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product
or finished product.
      NON-DISCHARGE PERMIT. A permit issued by the state pursuant to G.S. §
143-215.1(d) for a waste which is not discharged directly to surface waters of
the state or for a wastewater treatment works which does not discharge directly
to surface waters of the state.
      PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state
in quantities or concentrations which, alone or with discharges from other
sources, causes a violation, including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation, of the Control Authority’s (and/or POTW’s if different from the
Control Authority) NPDES, collection system, or non-discharge permit or a
downstream water quality standard even if not included in the permit.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local government
entities.
      pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed as
standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of
the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per titer of solution.
      POLLUTANT. Any “waste”, as defined in G.S. § 143-213(18) and dredged
spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal and agricultural waste and certain characteristics of
wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or
odor).
      POTW DIRECTOR. The chief administrative officer of the Control Authority
or his or her delegate.
      POTW TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.
      PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing the pollution into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be
obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or
other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless
allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
      PRETREATMENT PROGRAM. The program for the control of pollutants
introduced into the POTW from non-domestic sources which was developed by the
city in compliance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.8 and approved by the approval
authority as authorized by G.S. § 143-215.3(a)(14) in accordance with 40 C.F.R.
§ 403.11.
      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard.
      PRETREATMENT STANDARD. Any prohibited discharge standard, categorical
standard or local limit which applies to an industrial user.
      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) or MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM. A
treatment works as defined by § 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292) which is
owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any devices or
systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation
of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes
sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the POTW
treatment plant. For the purpose of this chapter, POTW shall also include any
sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the city who
are, by contract or agreement with the city or in any other way, users of the
POTW of the city.
      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property, damage
to the user’s treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER or SIU. An industrial user that discharges
wastewater into a publicly owned treatment works and that:
         (a)   Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of
process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and
boiler blow down wastewaters);
         (b)   Contributes process wastewater which makes up 5% or more of the
NPDES or non-discharge permitted flow limit or 5% or more of the maximum
allowable head works loading of the POTW treatment plant for any POTW pollutant
of concern;
         (c)   Is subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 C.F.R.
§ 403.6 and 40 C.F.R. Ch. I, Subch. N, parts 405 through 471;
         (d)   Is found by the city, the Division of Water Resources or the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have the potential for impact,
either singly or in combination with other contributing industrial users, on
the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge, the system’s effluent
quality or compliance with any pretreatment standards or requirements.
         (e)   Subject to Division approval under 15A NCAC 02H .9076(b), the
Control Authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in
divisions (a) and (b) above has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting
the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standards or requirement
or for contributing to violations of the POTW’s effluent limitations and
conditions in its NPDES or non-discharge permit or for limiting the POTW’s
sludge disposal options and thus is not a significant industrial user.
         (f)   Subject to division approval under 15A NCAC 02H .907(b), the
Control Authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in
division (c) above meets the requirements of 40 C.F.R. part 403.3(v)(2) and
this is a non-significant categorical industrial user.
         (g)   Subject to Division approval under 15A NCAC 02H .0907(b), the
Control Authority may determine that an industrial user meeting the criteria in
division (c) above meets the requirements of 40 C.F.R. part 403.12(e)(3) and
that is a middle tier significant industrial user. Sampling and inspection
requirements may be cut in half as per 40 C.F.R. parts 403.8(f)(2)(v)(C) and
403.12(e)(3).
      SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE or SNC. A status of non-compliance of a
significant industrial user when one or more of the following criteria are met.
Additionally, any industrial user which meets the criteria in this definition,
divisions (c), (d) or (h) below shall also be SNC.
         (a)   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here
at those in which 66% or more of all the measurements taken for the same
pollutant parameter (not including flow) during a six month period exceed (by
any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including
instantaneous limits as defined by 40 C.F.R. Part 403.3(1).
         (b)   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as
those in which 33% or more of all the measurements taken for the same pollutant
parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined
by 40 C.F.R. part 403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable TRC; (TRC = 1.4 for
BOD, TSS fats, oil and grease, 1.2 for all other pollutants (except flow and
pH)).
         (c)   Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as
defined by 40 C.F.R. part 403.3(1) (daily maximum, long-term average,
instantaneous limits or narrative standard) that the Control Authority and/or
POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges,
interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW
personnel or the general public).
         (d)   Any discharge of a pollutant or wastewater that has caused
imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has
resulted in either the Control Authority’s or the POTW’s, if different from the
Control Authority, exercise of its emergency authority under 40 C.F.R. part
403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) and § 8.1(e) of this SUO to halt or prevent such a
discharge.
         (e)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a
pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing
construction, and attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the
schedule date.
         (f)   Failure to provide reports for compliance schedule, self-
monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, and
compliance reports within 30 days from the due date.
         (g)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
         (h)   Any other violation or group of violations that the control
authority and/or POTW determine will adversely affect the operation or
implementation of the local pretreatment program.
      SLUG LOAD OR DISCHARGE. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration
which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass-through, or in
any other way violates the POTW’s regulations, local limits, or industrial user
permit conditions. This can include but is not limited to spills and other
accidental discharges; discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-
customary batch discharge; or other discharges that can cause a violation of
the prohibited discharge standards in §
53.132 of this chapter.
      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987.
      STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting there from.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is
removable by laboratory filtering.
      UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary non- compliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An UPSET does not include
non-compliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance or careless or improper operation.
      WASTEWATER. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes
from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile sources,
treatment facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water, and storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated which
are contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
      WASTEWATER PERMIT. As set forth in §
53.143.
      WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, rivers, brooks, swamps, sounds, tidal
estuaries, bays, creeks, lakes, waterways, reservoirs and all other bodies or
accumulation of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or
private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or
any portion thereof.
   (B)   This subchapter is gender neutral and the masculine gender shall
include the feminine and vice-versa.
   (C)   “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive or discretionary.
   (D)   The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and
the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the context of its use.
   (E)   The following abbreviations when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
      (1)   BOD. Biochemical Oxygen Demand.
      (2)   CFR. Code of Federal Regulations.
      (3)   COD. Chemical Oxygen Demand.
      (4)   EPA. Environmental Protection Agency.
      (5)   gpd. Gallons per day.
      (6)   l. Liter.
      (7)   mg. Milligrams.
      (8)   mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
      (9)   N.C.G.S. North Carolina General Statutes.
      (10)   NPDES. National Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
      (11)   O & M. Operation and Maintenance.
      (12)   POTW. Publicly Owned Treatment Works.
      (13)   RCRA. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
      (14)   SIC. Standard Industrial Classification.
      (15)   SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act.
      (16)   TSS. Total Suspended Solids.
      (17)   TKN. Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen.
      (18)   U.S.C. United States Code.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.132 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   (A)   General prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW, directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater
which causes interference or pass through. These general prohibitions apply to
all users of a POTW whether or not the user is a significant industrial user or
subject to any national, state, or local pretreatment standards or
requirements.
   (B)   Specific prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be
contributed into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater.
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of
less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21.
      (2)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference but in no case solids greater
than one half inch in any dimension.
      (3)   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
      (4)   Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more man 12.0 or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage to the
POTW or equipment.
      (5)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen-demanding
pollutants, (BOD, and the like) in sufficient quantity, (flow or concentration)
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to cause interference
with the POTW.
      (6)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150° F (66° C), or
which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104° F (40° C).
      (7)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems.
      (8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW Director in accordance with §
53.140 of this chapter.
      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
      (10)   Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludge, or scum, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case,
shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance
with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits issued under § 405 of the
Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being
used.
      (11)   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts sufficient color to the treatment
plant's effluent to render the waters injurious to public health or secondary
recreation or to aquatic life and wildlife or to adversely affect the
palatability of fish or aesthetic quality or impair the receiving waters for
any designated uses.
      (12)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
except as specifically approved by the POTW Director in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations.
      (13)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the POTW Director.
      (14)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than: 50 mg/1 unless authorized by the POTW Director.
      (15)   Any sludge, screenings or other residues from the pretreatment of
industrial wastes.
      (16)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the POTW
Director in a wastewater discharge permit.
      (17)   Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or other chelating
agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere with the municipal
wastewater system.
      (18)   Any material that would be identified as hazardous waste according
to 40 C.F.R. part 261 if not disposed of in a sewer except as may be
specifically authorized by the POTW Director.
      (19)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to violate
state water quality standards for toxic substances as described in 15A NCAC 2B
.0200.
      (20)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test.
      (21)   Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy.
      (22)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming in the municipal wastewater
system.
      (23)   At no time, shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard
meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the
system) be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive
limit (LEL) of the meter.
   (C)   Pollutants, substances, wastewater, or other wastes prohibited by this
section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the municipal wastewater system. All floor drains located in
process or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's
pretreatment facility before connecting with the system.
   (D)   When the POTW Director determines that a user(s) is contributing to
the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in such amounts which may
cause or contribute to interference of POTW operation or pass through, the POTW
Director shall:
      (1)   Advise the user(s) of the potential impact of the contribution on
the POTW in accordance with §
53.165; and
      (2)   Take appropriate actions in accordance with §§
53.143 and
53.144 for such user to protect the POTW from interference or pass through.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.133 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are required to comply
with applicable standards as set out in 40 C.F.R. Ch. 1, Subch. N, parts 405
through 471 and incorporated herein.
   (A)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms
of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the POTW
Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with
40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c).
   (B)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Director shall
impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 C.F.R.
§ 403.6(e).
   (C)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard
if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in
40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally
different from the actors considered by EPA when developing the categorical
pretreatment standard.
   (D)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in
accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.
   (E)   A user may request a removal credit adjustment to a categorical
standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.7.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.134 LOCAL LIMITS.
   (A)   An industrial waste survey is required prior to a user discharging
wastewater containing in excess of the following average discharge limits.
250 mg/l    BOD
250 mg/l    TSS
25 mg/l     NH3
0.003 mg/l  arsenic
0.003 mg/l  cadmium
0.05 mg/l   total chromium
0.061 mg/l  copper
0.015 mg/l  cyanide
0.049 mg/l  lead
0.0003 mg/l mercury
0.021 mg/l  nickel
0.005 mg/l  silver
0.175 mg/l  zinc
 
   (B)   Industrial waste survey information will be used to develop user-
specific local limits when necessary to ensure that the POTW’s maximum
allowable head works loading are not exceeded for particular pollutants of
concern. User-specific local limits for appropriate pollutants of concern shall
be included in wastewater permits. The POTW Director may impose mass based
limits in addition to, or in place of concentration based limits.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.135 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this chapter.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.136 RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The city reserves the right to establish limitations and requirements which
are more stringent than those required by either state or federal regulation if
deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in §
53.130 or the general and specific prohibitions in §
53.132 as is allowed by 40 C.F.R. § 403.4.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.137 DILUTION.
   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national
categorical pretreatment standards, unless expressly authorized by an
applicable pretreatment standard or in any other pollutant-specific limitation
developed by the city or state.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.138 PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as
necessary to comply with this chapter and wastewater permits issued under §
53.143 and shall achieve compliance with all national categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in §
53.132 within the time limitations as specified by EPA, the state or the POTW
Director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance
shall be provided, operated and maintained at the user’s expense. Detailed
plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be
submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the POTW Director
before construction of the facility. The review of the plans and operating
procedures shall, in no way, relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the
city under the provisions of this subchapter. Any subsequent changes in the
pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be
approved by the POTW Director prior to the user’s initiation of the changes.
   (B)   Additional pretreatment measures.
      (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW Director may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste
streams and other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and
determine the user’s compliance with the requirements of this subchapter.
      (2)   The POTW Director may require any person discharging into the POTW
to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
      (3)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the POTW Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that
such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception
units shall be of type and capacity approved by the POTW Director and shall be
so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such
interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by
the user at their expense.
      (4)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.139 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   The POTW Director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial
user needs a plan or other action to control and prevent slug discharges and
accidental discharges as defined in §
53.131. All SIUs must be evaluated within one year of being designated an SIU.
The POTW Director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and
implement such a plan or other specific action Alternatively, the POTW Director
may develop such a plan for any user.
   (B)   All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at
its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharge,
discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge,
or a slug load. Also see §§
53.148 and
53.149.
   (C)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum,
the following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or
slug discharge, as required by §
53.149; and
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. The procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.140 HAULED WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the POTW Director, and at such times as are established by the
POTW Director. Such waste shall not violate §§ 53.132 through 53.140 of this
chapter or any other requirements established by the city. The POTW Director
may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
   (B)   The POTW Director shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain
wastewater discharge permits. The POTW Director may require generators of
hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW
Director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The
discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of
this chapter.
   (C)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the POTW Director. No load may be discharged without prior
consent of the POTW Director. The POTW Director may collect samples of each
hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW Director
may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load
prior to discharge.
   (D)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the
industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and
addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The
form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
(Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.141 FEES.
   (A)   Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the recovery
of costs from users of the city’s wastewater disposal system for the
implementation of the program established herein. The applicable charges or
fees shall be as set forth in a schedule of sewer use charges and fees by the
POTW Director and approved by the City Council. A copy of these charges and
fees will be made available from the POTW Director.
   (B)   User charges. A user charge shall be levied on all users including,
but not limited to, persons, firms, corporations or governmental entities that
discharge, cause or permit the discharge of sewage into the POTW.
      (1)   The user charge shall reflect at least the cost of debt service,
operation and maintenance (including replacement) of the POTW.
      (2)   Each user shall pay its proportionate cost based on volume of flow.
      (3)   The City Manager shall review annually the sewage contributions of
users, the total costs of debt service, operation and maintenance of the POTW
and will make recommendations to the City Council or Board serving the city for
adjustments in the schedule of charges and fees as necessary.
      (4)   Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable to the users
shall be distributed among all users of the POTW based upon the volume of flow
of the users.
   (C)   Surcharges. The amount of the surcharges will be based upon the volume
of flow and the character and concentration of the constituents of the
wastewater.
      (1)   The volume of flow used in determining the total discharge of
wastewater for payment of user charges and surcharges shall be based on the
following:
         (a)   Metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter
readings maintained by the city; or
         (b)   If required by the city or at the individual dischargers option,
other flow monitoring devices which measure the actual volume of wastewater
discharged to the sewer. The devices shall be accessible and safely located,
and the measuring system shall be installed in accordance with plans approved
by the city. The metering system shall be installed and maintained at the users
expense according to arrangements that may be made within the city.
         (c)   Where any user procures all or part of his or her water supply
from sources other than the city, the user shall install and maintain at his or
her expense a flow measuring device of a type approved by the city.
      (2)   The character and concentration of the constituents of the
wastewater used in determining surcharges shall be determined by samples
collected and analyzed by the city. Samples shall be collected in such a
manner, as to be representative of the actual discharge and shall be analyzed
using procedures set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 136.
      (3)   The determination of the character and concentration of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge by the Director or his or her duly
appointed representatives shall be binding as a basis for charges.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.142 PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION CHARGES.
   The schedule of charges and fees adopted by the city may include charges and
fees for:
   (A)   Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment
program;
   (B)   Monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures;
   (C)   Reviewing slug control plans, including accidental and/or slug load
discharge procedures and construction plans and specifications;
   (D)   Permitting; and
   (E)   Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements of the pretreatment program.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.143 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT.
   (A)   Wastewater dischargers. It shall be unlawful for any person to connect
or discharge to the POTW without first obtaining the permission of the city.
When requested by the POTW Director, a user must submit information on the
nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 30 days of the request. The
Director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically
require users to update this information.
   (B)   Wastewater permits. All significant industrial users shall obtain a
significant industrial user permit prior to the commencement of discharge to
the POTW. Existing industrial users who are determined by the POTW Director to
be significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user
permit within 180 days of receiving notification of the POTW Director’s
determination. Industrial users who do not fit the significant industrial user
criteria may at the discretion of the Director be required to obtain a
wastewater discharge permit for non-significant industrial users.
      (1)   Significant industrial user determination. All persons proposing to
discharge non-domestic wastewater, or proposing to change the volume or
characteristics of an existing discharge of non-domestic wastewater shall
request from the POTW Director significant industrial user determination. If
the POTW Director determines or suspects that the proposed discharge fits the
significant industrial user criteria, he or she will require that a significant
industrial user permit application be filed.
      (2)   Significant industrial user permit application. Users required to
obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and file with the
city, an application in the form prescribed by the POTW Director and
accompanied by an application fee in the amount prescribed in the schedule of
charges and fees. Significant industrial users shall apply for a significant
industrial user permit within 90 days after notification of the POTW Director’s
determination in division (B)(1) above. The application shall include at a
minimum the information required by 15A NCAC 02H 0.0916(c)(1)(A-M). In support
of the application the user shall submit any other information deemed necessary
by the POTW Director to evaluate the permit application. This may include
reporting requirements under 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b) and § 53.144 of this
chapter.
      (3)   Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge
permit applications and user reports must be signed by the current authorized
representative of the user on file with the Control Authority and/or
municipality as defined in §
53.131 and contain the following certification statement: “I certify under
penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my
direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that
qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted.
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those
persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information
submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and
complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false
information, including the prepared under my direction or supervision in
accordance with a possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations.”
      (4)   Application review and evaluation. The POTW Director will evaluate
the data furnished by the user and may require additional information.
         (a)   The POTW Director is authorized to accept applications for the
city and shall refer all applications to the POTW staff for review and
evaluation.
         (b)   Within 30 days of receipt the POTW Director shall acknowledge
and accept the complete application; or if not complete, shall return the
application to the applicant with a statement of what additional information is
required.
      (5)   Tentative determination and draft permit.
         (a)   The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the application and an
on-site inspection of the significant industrial user, including any
pretreatment facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation and tentative
determination to issue or deny the significant industrial user permit.
         (b)   If the staff’s tentative determination in division (B)(5)(a)
above is to issue the permit, the following additional determinations shall be
made in writing:
            1.   Proposed discharge limitations for those pollutants proposed
to be limited;
            2.   A proposed schedule of compliance, including interim dates and
requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and
            3.   A brief description of any other proposed special conditions
which will have significant impact upon the discharge described in the
application.
         (c)   The staff shall organize the determinations made pursuant to
divisions (B)(5)(a) and (b) above and the city’s general permit conditions into
a significant industrial user permit.
      (6)   Permit supporting documentation. The Control Authority staff shall
prepare the following documents for all significant industrial user permits:
         (a)   An allocation table (AT) listing permit information for all
significant industrial users, including but not limited to permit limits,
permit effective and expiration dates, and a comparison of total permitted
flows and loads with Division approved maximum allowable loadings of the POTW,
including flow, on forms or in a format approved by the Division. The AT shall
be updated as permits are issued or renewed, and as permits are modified where
the permitted limits or other AT information is revised.
         (b)   The basis, or rationale, for the pretreatment limitations,
including the following:
            1.   Documentation of categorical determination, including
documentation of any calculations used in applying categorical pretreatment
standards; and
            2.   Documentation of the rationale of any parameters for which
monitoring has been waived under 40 C.F.R. part 403.12(e)(2).
      (7)   Final action on significant industrial user permit applications.
         (a)   The POTW Director shall take final action on all applications
not later than 90 days following receipt of a complete application.
         (b)   The POTW Director is authorized to:
            1.   Issue a significant industrial user permit containing such
conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter and G.S.
§ 143-215.1;
            2.   Issue a significant industrial user permit containing time
schedules for achieving compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements;
            3.   Modify any permit upon not less than 60 days notice and
pursuant to §
53.143;
            4.   Revoke any permit pursuant to §
53.165;
            5.   Suspend a permit pursuant to §
53.165; and
            6.   Deny a permit application when, in the opinion of the
Director, the discharge will cause or contribute to pass-through or
interference of the wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to effectuate
the purposes of G.S. § 143-215.1.
      (8)   Permit modification.
         (a)   Modifications of permits shall be subject to the same procedural
requirements as the issuance of permits except as listed below. Any changed or
new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance.
            1.   Changes in the ownership of the discharge when no other change
in the permit is indicated;
            2.   A single modification of any compliance schedule not in excess
of four months; and
            3.   Modification of compliance schedules (construction schedules)
in permits for new sources where the new source will not begin to discharge
until control facilities are operational.
         (b)   Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical
pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to the
standards shall be revised to require compliance with the standard within the
time frame prescribed by the standard. Where a user, subject to a national
categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application
for a wastewater discharge permit as required by §
53.143, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 180 days
after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment
standard.
         (c)   A request for a modification by the permittee shall constitute a
waiver of the 60-day notice required by G.S. § 143-215.1(b) for modifications.
      (9)   Permit conditions.
         (a)   The POTW Director shall have the authority to grant a permit
with conditions attached as he or she believes necessary to achieve the purpose
of this chapter and G.S. § 143-215.1. Wastewater permits shall contain, but are
not limited to, the following:
            1.   A statement of duration (in no case more than five years);
            2.   A statement of non-transferability;
            3.   Applicable effluent limits based on categorical standards and
local limits or both;
            4.   Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and
record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification
of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency and sample
type based on federal, state and local law;
            5.   Requirements for notifying the POTW in the event of an
accidental discharge or slug load as defined in §
53.131;
            6.   Requirements to implement a plan or other controls for
prevention of accidental discharge and/or slug loads as defined in §
53.131, if determined by the POTW Director to be necessary for the user;
            7.   Requirements for immediately notifying the POTW of and changes
at its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental
discharges, or slug load as defined in this chapter. Also see §§
53.148 and
53.149; and
            8.   A statement of applicable civil and/or criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable
compliance schedule.
         (b)   In addition, permits may contain, but are not limited to, the
following:
            1.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge and/or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
            2.   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or
maximum concentration, mass or other measure of identified wastewater
pollutants or properties;
            3.   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology
or construction of appropriate containment devices and the like designed to
reduce, eliminate or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment
works;
            4.   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the municipal wastewater system;
            5.   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the system;
            6.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling faculties and equipment;
            7.   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for
tests, and reporting schedules;
            8.   Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of non-
compliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within 30 days where
self-monitoring indicates a violations);
            9.   Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and
requirements;
            10.   Requirements for submission of periodic self-monitoring or
special notification reports;
            11.   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plans and records
relating to wastewater discharges as specified in §
53.152 and affording the Director, or his or her representatives, access
thereto;
            12.   Requirements for prior notification and approval by the POTW
Director of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of any significant
change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to introduction into
the system;
            13.   Requirements for the prior notification and approval by the
POTW Director of any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process
used by the permittee;
            14.   A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve
the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and
state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the
terms of the permit; and
            15.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW Director
to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules and
regulations.
      (10)   Permits duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than
a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date.
      (11)   Permit transfer. Wastewater permits are issued to a specific user
for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned
or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or
changed operation.
      (12)   Permit reissuance. A significant industrial user shall apply for
permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application in accordance §
53.143 a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.144 BASELINE MONITORING REPORT.
   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the information
listed in division (B) below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their
discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to
the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the
POTW Director a report which contains the information listed in division (B)
below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use
to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give
estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
   (B)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
      (1)   Identifying information. The name, address and location of the
facility, including the name of the operator and owner;
      (2)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility;
      (3)   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by the user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes;
      (4)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e);
      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.
         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process;
         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the POTW
Director of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass,
where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §
53.152; and
         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in §
53.152(B) and 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b) and (g), including 40 C.F.R. 403.12(g)(4).
      (6)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user’s current
authorized representative as defined in §
53.131 and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;
      (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide the additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for
the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this
section must meet the requirements set out in §
53.145; and
      (8)   Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must
be signed and certified in accordance with §
53.143(B)(3).
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.145 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.
   The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by
§
53.144(B)(7):
   (A)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction and beginning and
conducting routine operation);
   (B)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
   (C)   The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW Director no later
than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and
   (D)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between the progress
reports to the POTW Director.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.146 REPORTS ON COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL STANDARDS; DEADLINE.
   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to the pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the POTW
Director a report containing the information described in §
53.144(B)(4) through (6). For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration
limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c),
this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user’s long-term
production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user’s actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with §
53.143(B)(3).
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.147 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
   Municipalities may sample and analyze user discharges in lieu of requiring
the users to conduct sampling and analysis.
   (A)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by
the POTW Director, but in no case less than once every six months, submit a
report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge
which are limited by pretreatment standards and the applicable flows for the
reported period. Sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with
procedures set out in §
53.152 of this chapter. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with §
53.153(B)(3) of this chapter.
   (B)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW Director,
using the procedures prescribed in §
53.152, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.148 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   Each user must notify the POTW Director of any planned significant changes
to the user’s operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or
volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change. The permittee
shall not begin the changes until receiving written approval from the Control
Authority and/or municipality. See §
53.149 for other reporting requirements.
   (A)   The Director may require the user to submit information as may be
deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of
a wastewater discharge permit application under §
53.143.
   (B)   The Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under §
53.143 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
53.143 in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions.
   (C)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are
not limited to, flow increases of 20% or greater, and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants, increases or decreases to production;
increases in discharge of previously reported pollutants; discharge of
pollutants not previously reported to the Control Authority and/or
municipality; new or changed product lines; new or changed manufacturing
processes and/or chemicals; or new or changed customers.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.149 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-
customary batch discharge, or a slug load as defined in §
53.131, that may cause potential problems for the POTW Director, the user shall
immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. This notification
shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user.
   (B)   (1)   Within five days following the discharge, the user shall, unless
waived by the POTW Director, submit a detailed written report describing the
cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent
similar future occurrences.
      (2)   The notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, natural resources or any other damage to person or property; nor shall
the notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties or other liability
which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user’s bulletin board or
other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
discharge described in division (A) above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who may cause a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency
notification procedure.
   (D)   All SIUs are required to notify the POTW immediately of any changes at
its facility affecting the potential for spills and other accidental discharge,
discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge,
or a slug load as defined in §
53.131.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.150 REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.
   (A)   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall
provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director, as the POTW Director may
require.
   (B)   All users classified as non-significant categorical industrial users
under §
53.131 shall provide appropriate reports to the POTW Director as the POTW
Director may require. At a minimum, this shall include the annual certification
of continuing to meet the non-significant categorical industrial user criteria
as required under 40 C.F.R. 403.12(q).
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.151 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by a user
indicates a violation, the user must notify the POTW Director within 24 hours
of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and
analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the POTW Director
within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. If allowed by the POTW
Director, the user is not required to resample:
      (1)   If the POTW Director monitors at the user’s facility at least once
a month; or
      (2)   If the POTW Director samples between the users initial sampling and
when the user receives the results of this sampling.
   (B)   If the POTW Director has performed the sampling and analysis in lieu
of the industrial user and the POTW sampling of the user indicates a violation,
the POTW Director shall repeat the sampling and obtain the results of the
repeat analysis within 30 days after becoming aware of the violations, unless
sone of the following occurs:
      (1)   The POTW Director monitors at the user’s facility at least once a
month;
      (2)   The POTW Director samples the user between their initial sampling
and when the POTW receives the results of this initial sampling; or
      (3)   The POTW Director requires the user to perform sampling and submit
the results to the POTW Director within the 30 day deadline of the POTW
becoming aware of the violation.
   (C)   Notification of the intent to discharge hazardous waste. The city
prohibits the discharge of any hazardous wastes without notification to and
approval by the POTW Director.
      (1)   Any user who commences the discharge hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director and state
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
C.F.R. part 261. The notification must include the name of the hazardous waste
as set forth in 40 C.F.R. part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the
type of discharge (continuous, batch or other). If the user discharges more
than 100 kilograms of the waste per calendar month to the POTW, the
notification also shall contain the following information to the extent the
information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of
the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass
and concentration of the constituents in the waste stream discharge during any
calendar month, and an estimation of the mass and concentration of constituents
in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months.
All notifications must take place no later than 180 days before the discharge
commences. The user shall not begin the discharge until receiving written
approval from the city. Any notification under this division need be submitted
only once for each hazardous waste discharge. However, notifications of changed
conditions must be submitted under §
53.148. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to
pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under the self-monitoring requirements of §§
53.144,
53.146 and
53.147.
      (2)   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of division (1) above,
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of
hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specific in
40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of
nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires
a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges
more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional
notification.
      (3)   In the case of any new regulation under § 3001 of RCRA, being 42
U.S.C. 6921, identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or
listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
Director, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state
hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of the substance within 90 days of
the effective date of the regulations.
      (4)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
      (5)   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance
not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.152 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be
submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall
be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. part
136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment
standard. If 40 C.F.R. part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be
performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. Analyses must be
performed by a state certified lab for each parameter analyzed, if such
certification exists for that parameter.
   (B)   Grab and composite sample collection.
      (1)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working
order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
      (2)   Grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and
grease, sulfide, volatile organic compounds, and any other pollutants as
required by 40 C.F.R. 136. The POTW shall determine the number of grabs
necessary to be representative of the user's discharge. See 40 C.F.R. 403.12(g)
(5) for additional grab sample number requirements for BMR and 90-day
compliance reports. Additionally, the POTW Director may allow collection of
multiple grabs during a 24 hour period which are composited prior to analysis
as allowed under 40 C.F.R. 136.
      (3)   Composite samples. All wastewater composite samples shall be
collected with a minimum of hourly aliquots or grabs for each hour that there
is a discharge. All wastewater composite samples shall be collected using flow
proportional composite collection techniques, unless time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by the POTW Director. When
authorizing time-proportional composites or grabs, the samples must be
representative and the decision to allow the alternative sampling must be
documented.
   (C)   Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the
date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
   (D)   Record keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this
chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all
records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required
by this subchapter and any additional records of information obtained pursuant
to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of the
requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method and time of
sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses
were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or
methods used; and the results of the analyses. These records shall remain
available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user
or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the POTW Director.
   (E)   Electronic reporting. The POTW Director may develop procedures for
receipt of electronic reports for any reporting requirements of this chapter.
Such procedures shall comply with 40 C.F.R. part 3. These procedures shall be
enforceable under§
53.165 through
53.168 of this chapter.
   (F)   Special reporting requirements for Ius in satellite POTW. In the case
of industrial user located in a satellite POTW organization’s jurisdiction, all
information required to be reported to the industrial user’s pretreatment
program Control Authority by this chapter shall also be reported to the POTW
treatment plant organization.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.153 COMPLIANCE MONITORING.
   (A)   Monitoring facilities.
      (1)   The city may require the user to provide and operate at the user’s
own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user’s premises, but the
city may, when a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the
user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk
area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked
vehicles.
      (2)   There shall be ample room in or near the sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis.
The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all
times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
      (3)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and
monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city’s
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications. Construction shall be completed within 90 days following
written notification by the city.
   (B)   Inspection of facilities. The city will inspect the facilities of any
user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all
requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where
wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the city, approval authority
and EPA or their representative ready access at all reasonable times to all
parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records
examination and copying or in the performance of any of their duties. The city,
approval authority and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user’s
property the devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection,
compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security
measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance
before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements
with his or her security guards so that upon presentation of suitable
identification, personnel from the city, approval authority and EPA will be
permitted to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their
specific responsibilities. Denial of the city’s, approval authority’s or EPA’s
access to the user’s premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
Unreasonable delays may constitute denial of access.
   (C)   Search warrants. If the city, approval authority or EPA has been
refused access to a building, structure or property, or any part thereof, and
is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation
of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a
routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify
compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued thereunder, or to
protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then
the city, approval authority or EPA may seek issuance of a search warrant from
the court having jurisdiction within the city.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.154 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Information and data provided by an industrial user to the POTW
Director pursuant to this chapter identifying the nature and frequency of a
discharge, shall be available to the public without restriction. All other
information which may be so submitted by an industrial user to the POTW
Director in connection with any required reports shall also be available to the
public unless the industrial user or other interested person specifically
identifies the information as confidential upon submission and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW Director that the disclosure of
such information or a particular part thereof to the general public would
divulge methods or processes entitled to protection as trade secrets.
   (B)   Information provided by an industrial user to the POTW Director that
is determined to be entitled to confidential treatment shall be made available
upon written request to the Division of Water Resources or any state agency for
uses related to the Pretreatment Program, the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) Permit, collection system permit, stormwater permit,
and/or non-discharge permit, and for uses related to judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report.
   (C)   Information and data received by the Division or other state agency
under division (B) above shall be subject to the processes set forth in G.S. §
143-215.3C.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 53.165 ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES.
   (A)   Notification of violation. Whenever the POTW Director finds that any
industrial user has violated or is violating this chapter, wastewater permit,
or any prohibition, limitation or requirements contained therein or any other
pretreatment requirement the POTW Director may serve upon a person a written
notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days from the date of
this notice, an explanation for the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction thereof shall be submitted to the city by the user. Submission of
this plan does not relieve the discharger of liability for any violations
occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
   (B)   Consent orders. The POTW Director is hereby empowered to enter into
consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the non-compliance.
The orders will include specific action to be taken by the discharger to
correct the non-compliance within a time period also specified by the order.
Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as an administrative order
issued pursuant to division (D) below.
   (C)   Show cause hearing.
      (1)   The POTW Director may order any industrial user who causes or is
responsible for an unauthorized discharge, has violated this chapter or is in
non-compliance with a wastewater discharge permit, to show cause why a proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. In the event the POTW Director
determines that a show cause order should be issued, a notice shall be served
on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for the action, and a request that the user
show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice
of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be
made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
      (2)   The POTW Director shall review the evidence presented at the
hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement action is appropriate.
      (3)   A show cause hearing under this section is not a prerequisite to
the assessment of a civil penalty under §
53.166, nor is any action or inaction taken by the POTW Director under this
section subject to an administrative appeal under §
53.170.
   (D)   Administrative orders. When the POTW Director finds that an industrial
user has violated or continues to violate this chapter, permits or orders
issued thereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW Director may
issue an order to cease and desist all violations and direct those persons in
non-compliance to do any of the following:
      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements;
      (2)   Comply in accordance with a compliance time schedule set forth in
the order;
      (3)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a
continuing or threatened violation; and
      (4)   Disconnect unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other
related appurtenances are installed and properly operated within a specified
time period.
   (E)   Emergency suspensions.
      (1)   The POTW Director may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/
or wastewater permit when suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or
threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, interferes
with the POTW or causes the POTW to violate any condition of its NPDES or non-
discharge permit.
      (2)   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. A hearing will be held within 15 days of the notice of suspension
to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or the user’s waste discharge
permit terminated. In the event of a failure to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the shall take steps as deemed necessary including immediate
severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW
system or endangerment to any individuals. The POTW Director shall reinstate
the wastewater permit and the wastewater treatment service upon proof of the
elimination of the non-compliant discharge. The industrial user shall submit a
detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution
and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the POTW Director
prior to the date of the above-described hearing.
   (F)   Termination of permit or permission to discharge.
      (1)   The POTW Director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit or
permission to discharge for good cause, including, but not limited to, the
following reasons:
         (a)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his or her discharge;
         (b)   Failure to report significant changes in operations, or
wastewater constituents and characteristics;
         (c)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring; or
         (d)   Violation of conditions of the permit or permission to
discharge, conditions of this chapter, or any applicable state and federal
regulations.
      (2)   Non-compliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed
termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an opportunity to
show cause under §
53.165 why the proposed action should not be taken.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.166 CIVIL PENALTIES.
   (A)   (1)   Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any
provision of this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued
hereunder, may be assessed a civil penalty of up to $25,000 per day per
violation.
      (2)   Penalties between $10,000 and $25,000 per day per violation may be
assessed against a violator only if:
         (a)   For any class of violation, only if a civil penalty has been
imposed against the violator with in the five years preceding the violation, or
         (b)   In the case of failure to file, submit, or make available, as
the case may be, any documents, data, or reports required by this chapter, or
the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder, only if the POTW
Director determines that the violation was intentional and a civil penalty has
been imposed against the violator within the-five years preceding the
violation.
   (B)   In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW Director
shall consider the following:
      (1)   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural resources, to the
public health, or to public or private property resulting from the violation;
      (2)   The duration and gravity of the violation;
      (3)   The effect on ground or surface water quantity or quality or on air
quality;
      (4)   The cost of rectifying the damage;
      (5)   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;
      (6)   Whether the violation was committed willfully or intentionally;
      (7)   The prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply
with the pretreatment program;
      (8)   The costs of enforcement to the city.
   (C)   Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this section
shall be as provided in §
53.170.
(Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.167 OTHER AVAILABLE REMEDIES.
   Remedies, in addition to those previously mentioned in this chapter, are
available to the Director who may use any single one or combination against a
non-compliant user. Additional available remedies include, but are not limited
to:
   (A)   Criminal violations. The District Attorney for the applicable Judicial
District may, at the request of the city, prosecute noncompliant users who
violate the provisions of G.S. § 143-215.6B. (Note: under North Carolina law,
it is a crime to negligently violate any term, condition, or requirement of a
pretreatment permit, or negligently fail to apply for a pretreatment permit,
issued by local governments (see G.S. § 143-215.6B(f)), to knowingly and
willfully violate any term, condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit,
or knowingly and willfully fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, issued by
local governments (see G.S. § 143-215.6B(g)), to knowingly violate any term,
condition, or requirement of a pretreatment permit issued by local governments,
or knowingly fail to apply for a pretreatment permit, knowing at the time that
a person is placed in imminent danger of death or serious bodily injury, (see
G.S. § 143-2156B(h)), and to falsify information required under G.S. Ch. 143,
Art. 21 (see G.S. § 143-215.6B(i)).
   (B)   Injunctive relief. Whenever a user is in violation of the provisions
of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, the POTW Director,
through the City Attorney, may petition the Superior Court of Justice for the
issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary and permanent injunction which
restrains or compels the activities in question.
   (C)   Water supply severance. Whenever an industrial user is in violation of
the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, water
service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only recommence,
at the user’s expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated ability to
comply.
   (D)   Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent
limitations of this chapter or of a permit or order issued hereunder, is hereby
declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the
POTW Director. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the
provisions of the ordinances of the city governing the nuisances, including
reimbursing the POTW for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying
the nuisance.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.168 REMEDIES NON-EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The POTW
Director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a non-
compliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in
accordance with the city’s enforcement response plan. However, the POTW
Director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant.
Further, the POTW Director is empowered to take more than one enforcement
action against any non-compliant user.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.169 PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NON-COMPLIANCE.
   At least annually, the POTW Director shall publish in the largest daily
newspaper circulated in the service area, a list of those industrial users
which were found to be in significant non-compliance, also referred to as
reportable non-compliance in 15A NCAC 02H .0903(b)(34), with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements, during the previous 12 months.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.170 ADJUDICATORY HEARINGS.
   The local government may conduct hearings in accordance with its regular
hearing procedure.
   (A)   Initial adjudicatory hearing. An applicant whose permit is denied, or
is granted subject to conditions he or she deems unacceptable, a permittee/user
assessed a civil penalty under §
53.166, or one issued an administrative order under §
53.166 shall have the right to an adjudicatory hearing before the POTW Director
or other hearing officer appointed by the POTW Director upon making written
demand, identifying the specific issues to be contested, to the POTW Director
within 30 days following receipt of the significant industrial user permit,
civil penalty assessment, or administrative order. Unless such written demand
is made within the time specified herein, the action shall be final and binding
and further appeal is barred. For modified permits, only those parts of the
permit being modified may be adjudicated. The hearing officer shall make a
final decision on the contested permit, penalty, or order within 45 days of the
receipt of the written demand for a hearing. The POTW Director shall transmit a
copy of the hearing officer's decision by registered or certified mail as
described in paragraph (C) below. The terms and conditions of a permit under
appeal shall be as follows:
      (1)   New permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the General
Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a newly issued permit, the
terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed and the permit is not in
effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties
reach a mutual resolution.
      (2)   Renewed permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the
General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a renewed permit, the
terms and conditions of the existing permit remain in effect until either the
conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution.
      (3)   Terminated permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the
General Courts of Justice, of a terminated permit, no permit is in effect until
either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual
resolution.
   (B)   Final appeal hearing. Any decision of a hearing officer made as a
result of an adjudicatory hearing held under division (A) above may be appealed
to the Council or Board serving the city upon filing a written demand within
ten days of receipt of notice of the decision. Hearings held under this
division shall be conducted in accordance with Local Ordinance # 01-19. Failure
to make written demand within the time specified herein shall bar further
appeal. Council or Board serving the city shall make a final decision on the
appeal within 90 days from receipt of the demand filed under division (A) and
shall transmit a written copy of its decision by registered or certified mail
as described in division (C) below. The decision is a final decision for the
purposes of seeking judicial review.
   (C)   Official record. When a final decision is issued under division (B)
above, the Council or Board serving the city shall prepare an official record
of the case that includes:
      (1)   All notices, motions, and other like pleadings;
      (2)   A copy of all documentary evidence introduced;
      (3)   A certified transcript of all testimony taken, if testimony is
transcribed. If testimony is taken and not transcribed, then a narrative
summary of any testimony taken; and
      (4)   A copy of the final decision of the Council or Board serving the
city.
   (D)   Judicial review. Any person against whom a final order or decision of
the Council or Board serving the city is entered, pursuant to the hearing
conducted under division (B) above, may seek judicial review of the order or
decision by filing a written request for review by the Superior Court of
Cleveland County within 30 days after receipt of notice by registered or
certified mail of the order or decision, but not thereafter along with a copy
to the city. Within 30 days after receipt of the copy of the written request
for review by the Court, the Council or Board serving the city shall transmit
to the reviewing court the original or a certified copy of the official record.
(Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
§ 53.171 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Upset. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action
brought for non- compliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the
requirements of division (B) below are met.
   (B)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs or other
relevant evidence that:
      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the Director
within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset and if this submittal was done
orally, has followed with a written submission within five days.
         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of non-
compliance;
         (b)   The period of non-compliance, including exact dates and times
or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the non-compliance is expected to
continue; and
         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the non-compliance.
   (C)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (D)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for non-compliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   (E)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or fails.
   (F)   Prohibited discharge standards defense. A user shall have an
affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for non-
compliance with the general prohibitions in §
53.132(A) or the specific prohibitions in §
53.132(B)(2), (3), (5)-(7) and (9)-(23), if it can prove that it did not know,
or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interfere and that
either:
      (1)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was
in compliance with a limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or
interference; or
      (2)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change
substantially in nature or constituents from the user’s prior discharge when
the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of
interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
   (G)   Bypass. A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause
pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is
for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to the provision of divisions (B) and (C) above.
      (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the POTW Director at least ten days before the date of
the bypass, if possible.
      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW Director of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and
its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times and, if
the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW Director may waive the written report on a
case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
      (3)   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW Director may take an enforcement
action against a user for a bypass, unless:
         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury
or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under division (B) above.
      (4)   The POTW Director may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the POTW Director determines that it will
meet the three conditions listed in division (C) above.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001; Ord. 13-20, passed 9-24-2013)
WATER SHORTAGE RESPONSE PLAN
§ 53.185 AUTHORIZATION.
   The City Manager shall enact the following water shortage response
provisions whenever the trigger conditions outlined in §
53.188 are met. In his or her absence, the Director of Public Infrastructure
will assume this role.
(Ord. 11-18, passed 10-25-2011; Ord. 18-23, passed 11-18-2018; Ord. 23-20,
passed 8-29-2023)
§ 53.186 NOTIFICATION.
   The following notification methods will be used to inform water system
employees and customers of a water shortage declaration: employee e-mail
announcements, notices at municipal buildings, and on the city website
homepage. Required water shortage response measures will be communicated
through The Kings Mountain Herald, PSA announcements on local radio and cable
stations, and on the city website. http://www.cityofkm.com.
(Ord. 11-18, passed 10-25-2011; Ord. 18-23, passed 11-18-2018; Ord. 23-20,
passed 8-29-2023)
§ 53.187 LEVELS OF RESPONSE.
   Five levels of water shortage response are outlined in the table below. The
five levels of water shortage response are: voluntary reductions, mandatory
reductions I and II, emergency reductions and water rationing. A detailed
description of each response level and corresponding water reduction measures
follow below.
 
Stage Response                Description
                              Water users are encouraged to reduce their water
1     Voluntary reductions    use and improve water use efficiency; however, no
                              penalties apply for noncompliance. Water supply
                              conditions indicate a potential for shortage.
                              Water users must abide required water use
                              reduction and efficiency measures; penalties
2     Mandatory reductions I  apply for noncompliance. Water supply conditions
                              are significantly lower than the seasonal norm
                              and water shortage conditions are expected to
                              persist.
3     Mandatory reductions II Same as in Stage 2.
                              Water supply conditions are substantially
4     Emergency reductions    diminished and pose an imminent threat to human
                              health or environmental integrity.
                              Water supply conditions are substantially
5     Water rationing         diminished and remaining supplies must be
                              allocated to preserve human health and
                              environmental integrity.
 
   (A)   Stage 1, voluntary reductions. All water users will be asked to reduce
their normal water use by 5%. Customer education and outreach programs will
encourage water conservation and efficiency measures including: irrigating
landscapes a maximum of one inch per week; preventing water waste, runoff and
watering impervious surfaces; watering plants deeply to encourage root growth;
washing only full loads in clothes and dishwashers; using spring-loaded nozzles
on garden hoses; and identifying and repairing all water leaks.
   (B)   Stage 2, mandatory reductions I. All customers are expected to reduce
their water use by 10% in comparison to their previous month’s water bill. In
addition to continuing to encourage all voluntary reduction actions, the
following restrictions apply: irrigation is limited to a one-half inch per week
between 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.; outdoor use of drinking water for washing
impervious surfaces is prohibited; and all testing and training purposes
requiring drinking water (e.g., fire protection) will be limited.
   (C)   Stage 3, mandatory reductions II. Customers must continue actions from
all previous stages and further reduce water use by 20% compared to their
previous month’s water bill. All non-essential uses of drinking water are
banned and garden and landscape irrigation must be reduced to the minimum
amount necessary for survival. Additionally, in Stage 3, a drought surcharge of
1.5 times the normal water rate applies.
   (D)   Stage 4, emergency reductions. Customers must continue all actions
from previous stages and further reduce their water use by 25% compared to
their previous month’s water bill. A ban on all use of drinking water except to
protect public health and safety is implemented and drought surcharges increase
to two times the normal water rate.
   (E)   Stage 5, water rationing. Is to provide drinking water to protect
public health (e.g., residences, residential health care facilities and
correctional facilities). In Stage 5, all customers are only permitted to use
water at the minimum required for public health protection. Firefighting is the
only allowable outdoor water use and pickup locations for distributing potable
water will be announced according to the city’s emergency response plan.
Drought surcharges increase to five times the normal water rate.
(Ord. 11-18, passed 10-25-2011; Ord. 18-23, passed 11-18-2018; Ord. 23-20,
passed 8-29-2023)
§ 53.188 TRIGGERS.
 
Stage Usable Storage Water Level
1     <75%           5 feet below full
2     <65%           8 feet below full
3     <50%           11 feet below full
4     <30%           15 feet below full
5     <10%           Water below top of lower intake
 
   Return to normal. When water shortage conditions have abated and the
situation is returning to normal, water conservation measures employed during
each phase should be decreased in reverse order of implementation. Permanent
measures directed toward long-term monitoring and conservation should be
implemented or continued so that the community will be in a better position to
prevent shortages and respond to recurring water shortage conditions.
(Ord. 11-18, passed 10-25-2011; Ord. 18-23, passed 11-18-2018; Ord. 23-20,
passed 8-29-2023)
§ 53.189 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The provisions of the water shortage response plan will be enforced by
the city’s Water Resources Department and police personnel. Violators may be
reported to the city’s dedicated water conservation hotline or the e-mail
contact listed on the city’s website (http://www.cityofkm.com/). Citations are
assessed according to the following schedule depending on the number of prior
violations and current level of water shortage.
 
Water Shortage Level  First Violation Second Violation   Third Violation
Voluntary reductions  N/A             N/A                N/A
Mandatory reductions  Warning         $250               Discontinuation of
(stages 2 and 3)                                         service
Emergency reductions  $250            Discontinuation of Discontinuation of
                                      service            service
Water rationing       $500            Discontinuation of Discontinuation of
                                      service            service
 
   (B)   Drought surcharge rates are effective in Stages 3, 4 and 5.
(Ord. 11-18, passed 10-25-2011; Ord. 18-23, passed 11-18-2018; Ord. 23-20,
passed 8-29-2023)
§ 53.190 PUBLIC COMMENT.
   Customers will have multiple opportunities to comment on the provisions of
the water shortage response plan. First, a draft plan will be will be available
at City Hall for customers to view. Also, a draft plan will be published in The
Kings Mountain Herald and on the city website. A public hearing will be
scheduled and time and location will be published in The Kings Mountain Herald
and on the city website. All subsequent revisions to the draft plan will be
published at least 30 days prior to an adoption vote by City Council.
(Ord. 11-18, passed 10-25-2011; Ord. 18-23, passed 11-18-2018; Ord. 23-20,
passed 8-29-2023)
§ 53.191 VARIANCE PROTOCOLS.
   Applications for water use variance requests are available from the city
website and Citizen Service Center. All applications must be submitted to the
Water Resources Department for review by the Director of Public Infrastructure
or his or her designee. A decision to approve or deny individual variance
requests will be determined within two weeks of submittal after careful
consideration of the following criteria: impact on water demand, expected
duration, alternative source options, social and economic importance, purpose
(i.e., necessary use of drinking water) and the prevention of structural
damage.
(Ord. 11-18, passed 10-25-2011; Ord. 18-23, passed 11-18-2018; Ord. 23-20,
passed 8-29-2023)
§ 53.192 EFFECTIVENESS.
   The effectiveness of the city’s water shortage response plan will be
determined by comparing the stated water conservation goals with observed water
use reduction data. Other factors to be considered include frequency of plan
activation, any problem periods without activation, total number of violation
citations, desired reductions attained and evaluation of demand reductions
compared to the previous year’s seasonal data.
(Ord. 11-18, passed 10-25-2011; Ord. 18-23, passed 11-18-2018; Ord. 23-20,
passed 8-29-2023)
§ 53.193 REVISION.
   The water shortage response plan will be reviewed and revised as needed to
adapt to new circumstances affecting water supply and demand, following
implementation of emergency restrictions, and at a minimum of every five years
in conjunction with the updating of our local water supply plan. Further, a
water shortage response planning work group will review procedures following
each emergency or rationing stage to recommend any necessary improvements to
the plan to the City Council. The Director of Public Infrastructure is
responsible for initiating all subsequent revisions.
(Ord. 11-18, passed 10-25-2011; Ord. 18-23, passed 11-18-2018; Ord. 23-20,
passed 8-29-2023)
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
§ 53.205 INTRODUCTION.
   What is cross-connection control? Cross-connection control is the use of in-
line testable backflow prevention assemblies, non-in-line testable backflow
prevention devices, methods and procedures to prevent contamination of a
potable water supply. A cross-connection is any physical connection between two
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other, water of unknown or questionable quality.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.206 INTENT.
   It is the intent of these specifications to keep persons who are involved
with the installation or upkeep of backflow prevention assemblies supplied with
current information. For this reason, these specifications are subject to
periodic amendments as laws and industry standards continue to progress.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.207 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter, the following words shall have the meaning
as set out below. As to terms not defined below, the definitions established by
the North Carolina Building Code shall apply.
   ACCEPTED STANDARDS FOR DEVICES. All in-line testable backflow prevention
assemblies must meet or exceed standards set forth by USCFCCHR (The University
of Southern California Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic
Research) and/or ASSE (The American Society of Sanitary Engineering) by being
on the agencies’ approval list. Non-in-line testable backflow prevention
devices must meet or exceed standards set forth by ASSE. Backflow prevention
assemblies to be used in fire suppression systems must have the additional
approval of FM (Factory Mutual) and comply with the NFPA (National Fire
Protection Association) Code. To determine whether a particular size and model
is approved by the above agencies, contact the city’s Cross-Connection Control
Office.
   APPROVED. Authorized or accepted as satisfactory to the Cross-Connection
Control Inspector.
   ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER (ASSE APPROVAL #1001). May be used at the
discharge of the control valve when located at least six inches above the flood
rim of the container. This device shall not be subject to continuous pressure
or backpressure backflow. This device shall not include contact with toxic
chemicals or liquids that may be a health hazard.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any effective device or method used to prevent
backflow or backsiphonage into the potable water system. The type of device
required shall be based on degree of hazard, existing or potential.
   CERTIFIED TESTER. A person who has proven his or her competency to test,
repair, overhaul and make reports on backflow prevention devices as evidenced
by certification or successful completion of a training program approved by the
Director of Water Resources.
   CONTINUOUS PRESSURE. Twelve (12) or more hours of water usage in any 24-hour
period.
   CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL INSPECTOR. The official position established and
authorized by the city to administer and enforce the provisions of the cross-
connection control regulations. The CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL INSPECTOR shall be
certified as a backflow device technician by a recognized research center and
as a North Carolina Plumbing Inspector Level III.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of two single,
independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing shut-off
valves located at each end of the assembly, and having suitable connections for
testing the water tightness of each check valve.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY (ASSE APPROVAL #1015). This device may be used
singly or in parallel with any flow requirements. This device shall not include
contact with toxic chemicals or liquids that may be a health hazard.
   FIRELINE. A system of pipes and equipment used exclusively to supply water
in an emergency for extinguishing fire.
   HIGH HAZARD (HEALTH HAZARD). Actual or potential threat of contamination
that presents an imminent danger to the public health with consequence of
serious illness or death.
   HOSE BIBB VACUUM BREAKER (ASSE APPROVAL #1011). May be used on hose bibbs
and hose hydrants except when usage would be at a point six inches higher than
the vacuum breaker and when usage would include contact with toxic chemicals or
liquids which may be a health hazard.
   LOW HAZARD (NON-HEALTH HAZARD). One that presents foreseeable and
significant potential for pollution, nuisance, aesthetically objectionable or
other undesirable alterations of the drinking water supply.
   PRESSURE TYPE VACUUM BREAKER (ASSE APPROVAL #1020). This assembly must be
installed at a minimum of 12 inches above all downstream piping and shall not
be subjected to backpressure backflow. It may be used under continuous pressure
applications.
   READILY ACCESSIBLE. Having direct access to a backflow preventer without the
need of removing any panel, door or similar covering of the item described, and
without requiring the use of portable ladders, chairs, and the like.
   REDUCED PRESSURE ASSEMBLY (ASSE APPROVAL #1013). A device containing within
its structure a minimum of two independently acting, approved check valves,
together with an automatically operating pressure differential relief valve
located between the two check valves. The first check valve reduces the supply
pressure a predetermined amount so that during normal flow and at cessation of
normal flow the pressure between the checks shall be less than the supply
pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the differential relief
valve, by discharging to atmosphere, shall operate to maintain the pressure
between the checks less than the supply pressure.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.208 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL INSPECTOR.
   (A)   Position established. The position of Cross-Connection Control
Inspector is hereby established. The Cross-Connection Control Inspector shall
be appointed by the Water Resources Director and shall interpret and enforce
the provisions of this subchapter.
   (B)   Right of entry. As a condition of water service, the Cross-Connection
Control Inspector shall have the right to enter any building or premises served
by the city’s water system for the purpose of performing the duties established
by this subchapter.
   (C)   Interference prohibited. No person shall interfere with the Cross-
Connection Control Inspector in the performance of the duties and
responsibilities established by this subchapter.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.209 AUTHORIZED INSTALLERS.
   Any device required to be installed by the provisions of this subchapter or
by a corrective order issued by the Cross-Connection Control Inspector or any
device installed to prevent or correct atmospheric or pressure back siphonage
shall be installed by a properly licensed state contractor. The contractor
shall only be allowed to install backflow preventers on applications covered
under their license.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.210 FACILITIES AND APPLICATIONS REQUIRING BACKFLOW PREVENTION.
   (A)   Facilities are broken into two categories.
      (1)   Low hazard - DCVA.
         (a)   Fire sprinkler systems without booster pump facilities or
chemical additives**.
         (b)   Connection to tanks, lines and vessels that handle non-toxic
substances.
         (c)   Automotive service stations.
         (d)   Bakeries and beauty shops with no health hazard.
         (e)   Bottling plants with no back pressure.
         (f)   Most commercial establishments.
      (2)   High hazard - RPZ.
         (a)   Lawn sprinkler systems.
         (b)   Wastewater treatment plants.
         (c)   Connection to an unapproved water system or unapproved auxiliary
water supply.
         (d)   Connection to tanks, pumps, lines, steam boilers and vessels
that handles sewage, lethal substances toxic or radioactive substances.
         (e)   Fire sprinkler systems with booster pump facilities or chemical
additives**.
         (f)   Buildings with five or more stories above ground level.
         (g)   Hospitals, dental offices and other medical facilities.
         (h)   Morgues, mortuaries and autopsy facilities.
         (i)   Metal plating facilities.
         (j)   Bottling plants subject to backpressure.
         (k)   Canneries.
         (l)   Battery manufacturers.
         (m)   Exterminators.
         (n)   Lawn care companies.
         (o)   Chemical processing plants.
         (p)   Dairies.
         (q)   Film laboratories.
         (r)   Car wash facilities.
         (s)   Dye works.
         (t)   Laundries.
         (u)   Swimming pools.
         (v)   Water front facilities.
   (B)   Notes.
      (1)   Under no circumstances will a potable water line be directly or
indirectly connected to any piping or equipment that conveys sewage.
      (2)   An approved double check detector assembly (DCDA) is required on a
low hazard fire system and an approved reduced pressure detector assembly
(RPDA) is required on a high hazard fire system.
      (3)   This is not an exhaustive list.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.211 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall install, remove, or maintain, or cause the
installation, removal, or maintenance of a cross-connection or backflow
prevention device without the prior issuance of a permit by the Cross-
Connection Control Inspector.
   (B)   Conditions, activities, or installations requiring a permit from the
Cross-Connection Control Inspector include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Pit installation;
      (2)   Temporary connections to the potable water system;
      (3)   Cooling jackets, condensers, heat exchanges or other industrial or
special appliances for which a minimum air gap or backflow prevention device is
not possible;
      (4)   Double check valve assembly;
      (5)   Reduced pressure principle backflow device;
      (6)   Pressure type vacuum device; (or)
      (7)   Ball-cock in which the critical level of the vacuum breaker is less
than ten inches from the bottom of the flush tank or is adjustable to less than
ten inches.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.212 ANNUAL TESTING REQUIRED.
   The owner, permit holder, or agent, of an owner or permit holder shall test
or cause to be tested each double check valve assembly, reduced pressure
principal backflow prevention device, and pressure type vacuum breaker under
his or her control at least annually. The test shall be conducted by a
certified tester. The certified tester shall report the results of the test to
the Cross-Connection Control Inspector.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.213 TESTING, INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   Any person who installs, removes, or corrects any cross-connection device or
condition shall test the altered system for proper operation and shall certify
the results to the Cross-Connection Control Inspector. The test shall be
conducted by a certified tester. Any person who installs, removes, or corrects
any cross-connection device or condition shall notify the Cross-Connection
Control Inspector for the purpose of securing an inspection or reinspection by
the Cross-Connection Control Inspector.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.214 NON-RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION OUTSIDE THE CITY AND EXTRATERRITORIAL
AREA.
   The owner, contractor, or agent of the owner or contractor of any
nonresidential structure served or to be served by the city water system and
not subject to the authority of the city plumbing code shall submit plumbing
plans to and secure the approval of the Cross-Connection Control Inspector
prior to the connection of the water system to the city water main.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.215 INTRASYSTEM PROTECTION.
   No owner, occupant, or other person in control of any structure served by
the city water system shall cause or allow any contamination of the potable
water provided by the city water system and made available for the use or
consumption of employees, customers, or other consumers on the premises.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.216 FIRELINE.
   (A)   Every fireline system shall be protected against possible backflow by
a minimum of an approved double check valve with test cocks upstream of the
alarm valve or dry pipe valve.
   (B)   The footage of any fireline system containing antifreeze solutions or
inhibitors shall be additionally protected against possible cross-connect by a
reduced pressure principle backflow device.
   (C)   Any fire system with booster or transfer pumps or storage tanks shall
be protected against possible backflow by a reduced pressure principle device
upstream of the alarm valve or dry pipe valve or some alternate equivalent
device approved by the Cross-Connection Control Inspector.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.217 FLUSHING TANKS.
   Each flushing tank shall be equipped with an approved ball-cock. The ball-
cock shall be installed with the critical level of the vacuum breaker at least
one inch above the full opening of the overflow pipe. If the ball-cock has no
hush tube, the bottom of the water supply inlet shall be installed one inch
above the full opening of the overflow pipe. In cases where the ball-cock has
no hush tube, the bottom of the water supply inlet shall be installed one inch
above the full opening of the overflow pipe. Any ball-cock in which the
critical level of the vacuum breaker is less than ten inches from the bottom of
the flush tank or adjustable to less than ten inches must be approved before
installation.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.218 CARBONATION EQUIPMENT.
   Any carbonation equipment directly or indirectly connected to any outlet or
conduit of the city water system shall be protected against possible backflow
by an approved double check valve assembly with an atmospheric vent.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.219 TANK TRUCKS.
   Any tank truck directly or indirectly connected to any outlet or conduit of
the city water system shall be equipped with an approved, permanently installed
air gap designed to create a minimum distance of four inches between the city
water supply and the receiving tank.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.220 PRIVATE WELLS.
   No person shall make, cause, or allow a physical connection or a cross-
connection between the city of water system and any private well, spring, or
other water source riot approved by the State of North Carolina as a public
water supply.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.221 DEVICE PROTECTION.
   Any back-flow protection system in which there are apparent pressure surges
or abnormally high pressure shall be protected against possible damage by a
device approved by the Cross-Connection Control Inspector, such as hammer
arresters or pressure reducing valve.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.222 BYPASS LOOPS.
   No person shall undertake, cause, or allow a required or permitted backflow
prevention device to be bypassed or looped around.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.223 ADDITIONAL PROTECTION REQUIRED.
   In addition to the backflow prevention devices and measures required by
other sections of this subchapter, the following classes of uses and structures
shall install and maintain a backflow prevention device approved by the Cross-
Connection Control Inspector and placed at the point of the water service
connection to the structure:
   (A)   Buildings with complex plumbing systems;
   (B)   Buildings within which hazardous material or waste is handled in a
manner which presents the foreseeable and reasonable possibility of a cross-
connection of hazardous material or waste to the city water system, including
research and chemical industry facilities;
   (C)   Buildings of five or more stories above ground level;
   (D)   Hospitals and similar medical facilities;
   (E)   Morgues, mortuaries, and autopsy facilities;
   (F)   Wastewater plants;
   (G)   Metal plating facilities;
   (H)   Sites at which two or more operational violations have occurred within
any one 12-month period; and
   (I)   Buildings otherwise closed to inspection.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.224 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Procedure. The city may discontinue water service to any structure(s)
or parcel(s) when the Water Resources Director, upon the recommendation of the
Cross-Connection Control Inspector gives written notice of a violation of this
subchapter to the customer as shown on the revenue billing roll or to the
owner, occupant, or other person in apparent control of the system; if the
cited violation is not corrected within the reasonable period of time provided
in the notice of violation; and the Cross-Connection Control Inspector finds
that the violation constitutes an unreasonable risk to the potable water
system.
   (B)   Service restoration. When service is discontinued pursuant to the
provisions of this section, service shall not be reinstituted unless and until
the Cross-Connection Control Inspector finds that the risk to the city water
system has been alleviated.
   (C)   No liability. The city shall bear no liability for direct or
consequential damages proximately caused by the discontinuance of service
pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.225 ORDER TO REMOVE.
   (A)   Order to remove. The Cross-Connection Control Inspector shall have the
authority to order the owner, person in control of the system, or the agent of
the owner or person in control to remove any existing or potential cross-
connection or backflow connection that presents an unreasonable risk of
contamination to the city water system. The order to remove issued by the
Cross-Connection Control Inspector shall classify the hazard posed by the cited
device or condition as “Class A-Severe” or “Class B-Moderate.”
   (B)   Severe hazard. A Class A-Severe hazard is one that presents an
imminent danger to the public health or drinking water supply and the
reasonable and foreseeable consequence of which is death or serious illness.
The Cross-Connection Control Inspector shall order that a Class A-Severe
condition be corrected within a time certain and as expeditiously as possible.
The Cross-Connection Control Inspector shall also order test intervals
appropriate to insure continued compliance after correction.
   (C)   Moderate hazard. A Class B-Moderate hazard is one that presents the
foreseeable and significant potential for pollution, nuisance, or aesthetically
objectionable or other undesirable alteration of the drinking water supply. The
Cross-Connection Control Inspector shall order that a Class B-Moderate hazard
be corrected within a time certain not to exceed 60 days. The Cross-Connection
Control Inspector shall also order test intervals appropriate to insure
continued compliance after correction.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.226 VIOLATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
   (A)   Violation, misdemeanor. Any person who violates any provision of this
subchapter, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made
hereunder, or who shall install or alter a plumbing system in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved hereunder,
or any certificate or permit issued hereunder, or who shall fail to comply with
such an order within the time fixed therein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
for each such violation or noncompliance and shall be subject to enforcement as
provided in this section. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall
not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall
be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time.
   (B)   Correction required. The application of other penalties shall not be
held to prevent the enforced removal of any prohibited condition.
   (C)   Equitable relief. The provisions of this subchapter may be enforced by
an appropriate equitable remedy, including a mandatory or prohibitory
injunction, issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (D)   Continuous violations. Each day of a continuous violation of any
provision of this division may be charged as a separate and distinct offense or
violation.
   (E)   Civil penalty.
      (1)   Violation of any provision of this subchapter may subject the
offender to a civil penalty to be recovered by the city in a civil action in
the nature of debt if the offender does not pay the penalty within 30 days
after the assessment has become final by exhaustion of the appeal process
established by this section, or by failure to appeal the assessment.
      (2)   The civil penalty for violation of any provision of this subchapter
shall not exceed $250 per day for each day of continuous violation, or a
cumulative or single civil penalty of $5,000. The civil penalty for willful
violation of any provision of this article shall not exceed $500 per day for
each day of a continuous violation or a cumulative or single civil penalty of
$10,000.
      (3)   Any civil penalty shall be assessed by the City Manager, upon the
recommendation of the Water Resources Director, and shall be based upon the
reasonable estimated cost of correcting the cited violation, the magnitude of
the potential risk posed to the public health, safety and welfare by the
violation, and the cost of the public safety or other emergency response caused
by the violation. The City Manager shall serve written notice of the civil
penalty assessment on the offender and set out with reasonable care the basis
of the amount so assessed.
      (4)   Any offender so assessed shall have a right of appeal to the City
Council, upon serving written notice of appeal on the City Manager within ten
days after he or she receives notice of the assessment.
   (F)   Enforcement alternatives. Violation of any provision of this
subchapter may be enforced by one, all, or a combination of the remedies
authorized by this section.
   (G)   Enforcement option. The penalties and enforcement provisions
established by this subchapter may be applied in addition to or in lieu of the
penalties established by other sections of this chapter.
(Ord. 23-38, passed 11-9-2023)
§ 53.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of
this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations and permits issued hereunder,
may be fined up to $25,000 per day per violation.
   (B)   In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the Director shall
consider the following:
      (1)   The degree and extent of the harm to the natural resources, to the
public health or to public or private property resulting from the violation;
      (2)   The duration and gravity of the violation;
      (3)   The effect on ground or surface water quantity or quality or on air
quality;
      (4)   The cost of rectifying the damage;
      (5)   The amount of money saved by non-compliance;
      (6)   Whether the violation was committed willfully or intentionally;
      (7)   The prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply
with the pretreatment program; and
      (8)   The costs of enforcement to the city.
   (C)   Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this section
shall be as provided herein.
(Ord. 01-19, passed 3-27-2001)
CHAPTER 54: STORMWATER
Section
General Provisions
   
54.001   Title
   
54.002   Authority
   
54.003   Stormwater utility
   
54.004   Findings of fact
   
54.005   Statement of purpose
   
54.006   Service charges, rates and fee schedule
   
54.007   Exemptions and credits
   
54.008   Applicability and jurisdiction
   
54.009   Interpretation
   
54.010   Design Manual
   
54.011   Relationship to other laws, regulations and private agreements
   
54.012   Effective date and transitional provisions
   
54.013   Definitions
Administration and Procedures
   
54.030   Review and decision-making entities
   
54.031   Plan review process
   
54.032   Applications for approval
   
54.033   Approvals
   
54.034   Appeals
Standards
   
54.050   General standards
   
54.051   Development standards for low-density projects
   
54.052   Development standards for high-density projects
   
54.053   Standards for stormwater control measures
   
54.054   Dedication of BMPs, facilities and improvements
   
54.055   Variances
   
54.056   Onsite wastewater
Maintenance
   
54.070   General standards for maintenance
   
54.071   Operation and maintenance agreement
   
54.072   Inspection program
   
54.073   Performance security for installation and maintenance
   
54.074   Notice to owners
   
54.075   Records of installation and maintenance activities
   
54.076   Nuisances
Illicit Discharges
   
54.080   Illicit discharges and connections
Enforcement and violations
   
54.100   General
   
54.101   Remedies and penalties
   
54.102   Procedures
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 54.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be officially known as "The Phase II Stormwater
Ordinance." It is referred to herein as "this chapter."
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.002 AUTHORITY.
   The City Council is authorized to adopt this chapter to create a stormwater
utility and establish a schedule of stormwater fees for property in the
corporate limits, pursuant to North Carolina law, including but not limited to
Article 14, Section 5 of the Constitution of North Carolina; G.S. 143-214.7 and
rules promulgated by the Environmental Management Commission thereunder;
Session Law 2004-163; Chapter 160A 174, 185.4.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.003 STORMWATER UTILITY.
   A stormwater utility is hereby established to provide stormwater management
services, as authorized by state law. Stormwater service charges will be
determined and modified from time to time so that the total revenues generated
by said charges will be used to pay the principal of and interest on the debt
incurred for stormwater purposes and such expenses as are reasonably necessary
or convenient in the planning, construction, operation, and maintenance of the
stormwater system. (Article 14, Section 5 of the Constitution of North
Carolina; G.S. § 143-214.7 and rules promulgated by the Environmental
Management Commission thereunder; Session Law 2004-163; Chapter 160A §§ 174,
185.)
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.004 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   Whereas, development and redevelopment alter the hydrologic response
of local watersheds and increased stormwater runoff rates and volumes,
flooding, soil erosion stream channel erosion, non-point and point source
pollution, sediment transport and deposition, and reduce groundwater recharge;
   (B)   Whereas, these changes in stormwater runoff contribute to increased
quantities of water-borne pollutants and alterations in hydrology which are
harmful to public health and safety as well as to the natural environment These
effects can be managed and minimized by applying proper design and well-planned
controls to manage stormwater runoff from development sites;
   (C)   Whereas, the Federal Water Pollution Control Act of 1972 (Clean Water
Act) and Federal Phase II Stormwater Rules promulgated under it, as well as
rules of the North Carolina Environmental Management Commission promulgated in
response to Federal Phase II requirements, compel certain urbanized areas,
including the city, to adopt stormwater controls as included in this chapter;
and
   (D)   Whereas, the city's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit became effective December 1, 2011, and requires the city to
adopt a local ordinance implementing stormwater controls on sites during and
after construction activity.
   (E)   Therefore, the City Council hereby establishes this set of regulations
to meet the requirements of state and federal law regarding control of
stormwater runoff and discharge.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.005 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   (A)   Statement of purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to protect,
maintain and enhance the public health, safety, environment and general welfare
by establishing requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of
increased post-development stormwater runoff and nonpoint and point source
pollution associated with new development and redevelopment as well as illicit
discharges into municipal stormwater systems. Proper management of
construction-related and post development stormwater runoff will minimize
damage to public and private property and infrastructure, safeguard the public
health, safety, and general welfare, and protect water and aquatic resources.
   (B)   The chapter seeks to meet the requirements of the city's National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit and its general purposes
through;
      (1)   Establishing decision-making process for development that protects
the integrity of watersheds and preserve the health of water resources;
      (2)   Requiring new development and redevelopment maintain the pre-
development hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as
practicable to reduce flooding, stream bank erosion, nonpoint and point source
pollution and increases in stream temperature, and to maintain the integrity of
stream channels and aquatic habitats;
      (3)   Establishing minimum post-development stormwater management
standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater
runoff quantity and quality;
      (4)   Establishing design and review criteria for the construction,
function, and use of structural stormwater Best Management Practices (BMPs) to
meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards;
      (5)   Encouraging the use of better management and set design practices,
such as the use of vegetated conveyances for stormwater and the preservation of
green space, riparian buffers and other conservation areas to the maximum
extent practicable;
      (6)   Establishing provisions for the long-term responsibility for and
maintenance of structural and nonstructural stormwater BMPs to ensure that they
continue to function as designed, are maintained appropriately, and pose no
threat to public safety; and
      (7)   Establishing administrative procedures for the submission, review,
approval and disapproval of stormwater management plans, for the inspection of
approved projects, and to assure appropriate long term maintenance.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.006 SERVICE CHARGES, RATES AND FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Stormwater service charges shall accrue beginning on February 1, 2014.
Stormwater service charges shall apply to all property within the city limits
that is serviced by the city's stormwater system without regard to ownership.
Such charges shall be based on the amount of impervious surface on each parcel
as determined by the equivalent residential unit standard. For purposes of this
chapter, and equivalent residential unit (ERU) is 2000 square feet of
impervious surface.
   (B)   The City Council shall set a base rate for single-family residential
uses and charges for non-single-family residential uses shall be calculated
utilizing the equivalent residential unit. For purposes of this chapter, a
"non-single-family residential use" shall be any land use other than single-
family residential, except for undeveloped land.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.007 EXEMPTIONS AND CREDITS.
   Except as provided in this section, no public or private property shall be
exempt from stormwater service charges or receive a credit against such
charges.
   (A)   Only undeveloped land shall be exempt from stormwater service fees.
   (B)   Properties subject to stormwater service fees may be granted credits
against the fees in accordance with a credit policy manual developed by the
City Manager and referenced in the city fee schedule. Any non-single-family
residential use that provides measures to mitigate the impacts of runoff on the
stormwater system shall be eligible for a maximum credit of 40% of the service
fee. The amount of the credit shall be proportional to the extent the measures
address the impacts on peak discharge, total runoff volume and water quality as
compared to the applicable city, state, and federal standards. Water quantity
and water quality measures shall each be eligible for a 20% maximum credit. Any
credit allowance shall be conditional on continuing compliance with applicable
standards, including requirements for operation and maintenance. Subject to
approval in accordance with the credit policy, any credits shall be effective
on the date of application therefore.
   (C)   The city shall be responsible only for the portions of the drainage
system which are in the city-maintained street rights-of-way and permanent
storm drainage easements conveyed to and accepted by the city. Repairs and
improvements to the drainage system shall be in accordance with established
standards.
   (D)   The city's acquisition of storm drainage easements and/or the
construction or repair by the city of drainage facilities does not constitute a
warranty against stormwater hazards, including, but not limited to, flooding,
erosion, or standing water.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.008 APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION.
   (A)   General. Beginning with and subsequent to its effective date, this
chapter shall be applicable to all development and redevelopment, including,
but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and
grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to division (B) below.
   (B)   Exemptions. Activities that are exempt from permit requirements of
Section 404 of the federal Clean Water Act as specified in 40 CFR 232
(primarily, ongoing farming and forestry activities) are exempt from the
provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   No development or redevelopment until compliance and permit. No
development or redevelopment shall occur except in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter or unless exempted. No development for which a
permit is required pursuant to this chapter shall occur except in compliance
with the provisions, conditions, and limitations of the permit
   (D)   Map.
      (1)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply within the areas
designated on the map titled Phase II Stormwater Map of Kings Mountain, North
Carolina, which is adopted simultaneously herewith. The Stormwater Map and all
explanatory matter contained thereon accompany, and are hereby made a part of,
this chapter.
      (2)   The Stormwater Map shall be kept on file by the Stormwater
Administrator and shall be updated to take into account changes in the land
area covered by this chapter and the geographic location of all structural BMPs
permitted under this chapter. In the event of a dispute, the applicability of
this chapter to a particular area of land or BMP shall be determined by
reference to the North Carolina Statutes, the North Carolina Administrative
Code, and local zoning and jurisdiction boundary ordinances.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.009 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Meaning and intent. All provisions, terms, phrases, and expressions
contained in this chapter shall be construed according to the general and
specific purposes set forth. If a different or more specific meaning is given
for a term defined elsewhere in the municipal code, the meaning and application
of the term in this chapter shall control for purposes of application of this
chapter.
   (B)   Text controls in event of conflict. In the event of a conflict or
inconsistency between the text of this chapter and any heading, caption,
figure, illustration, table, or map, the text shall control.
   (C)   Authority for interpretation. The Stormwater Administrator has
authority to determine the interpretation of this chapter. Any person may
request an interpretation by submitting a written request to the Stormwater
Administrator, who shall respond in writing within 30 days. The Stormwater
Administrator shall keep on file a record of all written interpretations of
this chapter.
   (D)   References to statutes, regulations, and documents. Whenever reference
is made to a resolution, ordinance, statute, regulation, manual (including the
Design Manual), or document, it shall be construed as a reference to the most
recent edition of such that has been finalized and published with due provision
for notice and comment, unless otherwise specifically stated.
   (E)   Computation of time. The time in which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first day and including the last day. If a deadline
or required date of action falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday observed by
the city, the deadline or required date of action shall be the next day that is
not a Saturday, Sunday or holiday observed by the city. References to days are
calendar days unless otherwise stated.
   (F)   Delegation of authority. Any act authorized by this chapter to be
carried out by the Stormwater Administrator of the city may be carried out by
his or her designee.
   (G)   Usage.
      (1)   Mandatory and discretionary terms. The words "shall," "must," and
"will" are mandatory in nature, establishing an obligation or duty to comply
with the particular provision. The words "may" and "should" are permissive in
nature.
      (2)   Conjunctions. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary,
conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows: the word "and" indicates that all
connected items, conditions, provisions and events apply. The word "or"
indicates that one or more of the connected items, conditions, provisions or
events apply.
      (3)   Tense, plurals, and gender. Words used in the present tense include
the future tense. Words used in the singular number include the plural number
and the plural number includes the singular number, unless the context of the
particular usage clearly indicates otherwise. Words used in the masculine
gender include the feminine gender, and vice versa.
   (H)   Measurement and computation. Lot area refers to the amount of
horizontal land area contained inside the lot lines of a lot or site.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.010 DESIGN MANUAL.
   (A)   Adoption of State Design Manual. The city hereby adopts the North
Carolina State BMP Manual, hereafter called the Design Manual, with any and all
future updates and/or revisions.
   (B)   References to Design Manual.
      (1)   The Stormwater Administrator shall use the policy, criteria, and
information, including technical specification and standards, in the Design
Manual as the basis for decisions about stormwater permits and about the
design, implementation and performance of the structural and non-structural
BMPs.
      (2)   The Design Manual includes a list of acceptable stormwater
treatment practices, including specific design criteria for each stormwater
practice. Stormwater treatment practices that are designed, constructed, and
maintained in accordance with these design and sizing criteria will be presumed
to meet the minimum water quality performance standards of the Phase II laws.
   (C)   Relationship of Design Manual to other laws and regulations. If the
specifications or guidelines of the Design Manual are more restrictive or apply
a higher standard than other laws or regulations, that fact shall not prevent
application of the specifications in the Design Manual.
   (D)   Changes to standards and specifications. If the standards,
specifications, guidelines, policies, criteria, or other information in the
Design Manual are amended subsequent to the submittal of an application for
approval pursuant to this chapter but prior to approval, the new information
shall control and shall be utilized in reviewing the application in
implementing this chapter with regard to the application.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.011 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS, REGULATIONS AND PRIVATE AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   Conflicts of laws. This chapter is not intended to modify or repeal
any other ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. The
requirements of this chapter are in addition to the requirements of any other
ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law. Where any provision of
this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other
ordinance, rule, regulation or other provision of law, whichever provision is
more restrictive or imposes higher protective standards for human or
environmental health, safety, and welfare shall control.
   (B)   Private agreements. This chapter is not intended to revoke or repeal
any easement, covenant, or other private agreement. However, where the
regulations of this chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards or
requirements than such easement, covenant, or other private agreement, the
requirements of this chapter shall govern. Nothing in this chapter shall modify
or repeal any private covenant or deed restriction, but such covenant or
restriction shall not legitimize any failure to comply with this chapter. In no
case shall the city be obligated to enforce the provisions of any easements,
covenants, or agreements between private parties.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.012 EFFECTIVE DATE AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Effective date. This chapter shall take effect on November 26, 2013.
   (B)   Final approvals, complete applications.
      (1)   All development and redevelopment projects for which complete and
full applications were submitted and approved by the city prior to the
effective date of this chapter and which remain valid, unexpired, unrevoked and
not otherwise terminated at the time of development or redevelopment shall be
exempt from complying with all provisions of this chapter dealing with the
control and/or management of post-construction runoff, but shall be required to
comply with all other applicable provision.
      (2)   A phased development plan shall be deemed approved prior to the
effective date of this chapter if it has been approved by all necessary
government units, it remains, valid, unexpired, not revoked and not otherwise
terminated, and it shows:
         (a)   For initial or first phase of development, the type and
intensity of use for a specific parcel or parcels, including at a minimum, the
boundaries of the project and a subdivision plan that has been approved.
         (b)   For any subsequent phase of development, sufficient detail so
that implementation of the requirements of this chapter to that phase of
development would require a material change in that phase of the plan.
   (C)   Violations continue. Any violation of provisions existing on the
effective date of this chapter shall continue to be a violation under this
chapter and be subject to penalties and enforcement under this chapter unless
the use, development, construction, or other activity complies with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.013 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP). Control measures taken to mitigate changes
to both quantity and quality of water runoff caused thru land use changes. The
term BMP has been used to describe both structural or engineered control
devices and systems (e.g. retention ponds) to treat polluted stormwater, as
well as operational or procedural practices (e.g. minimizing use of chemical
fertilizers and pesticides).
   BUILT-UPON AREA (BUA). That portion of a development project that is covered
by impervious or partially impervious surface including, but not limited to,
buildings, pavement and gravel areas such as roads, parking lots, and paths,
and recreation facilities such as tennis courts. BUILT-UPON AREA does not
include a wooden slatted deck, the water area of a swimming pool, or pervious
or partially pervious paving material to the extent that the paving material
absorbs water or allows water to infiltrate through the paving material.
   DEPARTMENT. The North Carolina Division of Energy, Mineral and Land
Resources.
   DESIGN MANUAL. The Stormwater Design Manual approved for use in Phase II
jurisdictions by the Department for the proper implementation of the
requirements of the federal Phase II stormwater program. All references herein
to the Design Manual are to the latest published edition or revision.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any land-disturbing activity that increases the amount of
built-upon area or that otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation
into the soil.
   DIVISION. The Division of Water Quality in the Division of Energy, Mineral
and Land Resources.
   HIGH-DENSITY PROJECT. Any project that exceeds the low-density threshold for
dwelling units per acre or built-upon area.
   LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT OR SALE. Any area where multiple separate
and distinct construction or land-disturbing activities will occur under one
plan. A plan is any announcement or piece of documentation (including but not
limited to a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, loan
application, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design)
or physical demarcation (including but not limited to boundary signs, lot
stakes, or surveyor markings) indicating that construction activities may occur
on a specific plot.
   LOW-DENSITY PROJECT.
      (1)   For a project that is not located within one-half mile of and
draining to Shellfish Resource Waters: the project is a low-density project if
it has no more than two dwelling units per acre or 24% built-upon area (BUA)
for all residential and non-residential development.
      (2)   For a project that is located within one-half mile of and draining
to Shellfish Resource Waters: the project is a low-density project only if it
contains no more than 12% built-upon area (BUA).
      (3)   A project with an overall density at or below the relevant low-
density threshold, but containing areas with a density greater than the overall
project density, may be considered low- density as long as the project meets or
exceeds the post construction model practices for low-density projects and
locates the higher density in upland areas and away from surface waters and
drainage ways to the maximum extent practicable.
   ONE-YEAR, TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR STORM (1-YEAR, 24-HOUR STORM). The surface runoff
resulting from a 24-hour rainfall of intensity expected to be equaled or
exceeded, on average, once in 12 months and with duration of 24 hours.
   OWNER. The legal or beneficial owner of land, including but not limited to a
mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, or long-term or
commercial lessee, or any other person or entity holding proprietary rights in
the property or having legal power of management and control of the property.
OWNER shall include long-term commercial tenants, management entities, such as
those charged with or engaged in the management of properties for profit, and
every person or entity having joint ownership of the property. A secured lender
not in possession of the property does not constitute an owner, unless the
secured lender is included within the meaning of OWNER under another
description in this definition, such as a management entity.
   REDEVELOPMENT. Any development on previously-developed land, other than a
rebuilding activity that results in no net increase in built-upon area and
provides equal or greater stormwater control than the previous development.
   STRUCTURAL BMP. A physical device designed to trap, settle out, or filter
pollutants from stormwater runoff; to alter or reduce stormwater runoff
velocity, amount, timing, or other characteristics; to approximate the pre-
development hydrology on a developed site; or to achieve any combination of
these goals. Structural BMP includes physical practices such as constructed
wetlands, vegetative practices, filter strips, grassed swales, and other
methods installed or created on real property. STRUCTURAL BMP is synonymous
with "structural practice," "stormwater control facility," "stormwater control
practice," "stormwater treatment practice," "stormwater management practice,"
"stormwater control measures," "structural stormwater treatment systems," and
similar terms used in this chapter.
   SUBSTANTIAL PROGRESS. For the purposes of determining whether sufficient
progress has been made on an approved plan, one or more of the following
construction activities toward the completion of a site or subdivision plan
shall occur: obtaining a grading permit and conducting grading activity on a
continuous basis and not discontinued for more than 30 days; installation and
approval of on-site infrastructure; or obtaining a building permit for the
construction and approval of a building foundation. SUBSTANTIAL PROGRESS for
purposes of determining whether an approved plan is null and void is not
necessarily the same as SUBSTANTIAL EXPENDITURES used for determining vested
rights pursuant to applicable law.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
ADMINISTRATION AND PROCEDURES
§ 54.030 REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING ENTITIES.
   (A)   Stormwater Administrator.
      (1)   Designation. A Stormwater Administrator shall be designated by the
City Manager of the city to administer and enforce this chapter.
      (2)   Powers and duties. In addition to the powers and duties that may be
conferred by other provisions of the municipal code and other laws, the
Stormwater Administrator shall have the following powers and duties under this
chapter:
         (a)   To review and approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove,
applications for approval of plans pursuant to this chapter.
         (b)   To make determinations and render interpretations of this
chapter.
         (c)   To establish application requirements and schedules for
submittal and review of applications and appeals, to review and make
recommendations to the City Council on applications for development or
redevelopment approvals.
         (d)   To enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance with its
enforcement provisions.
         (e)   To maintain records, maps, forms and other official materials as
related to the adoption, amendment, enforcement, and administration of this
chapter.
         (f)   To provide expertise and technical assistance to the City
Council and/or Stormwater Management Advisory Board, upon request.
         (g)   To designate appropriate other person(s) who shall carry out the
powers and duties of the Stormwater Administrator.
         (h)   To take any other action necessary to administer the provisions
of this chapter.
   (B)   Reserved.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015; Ord. 23-21, passed 8-29-2023)
§ 54.031 PLAN REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   Permit required; must apply for permit. A stormwater permit is
required for all development and redevelopment unless exempt pursuant to this
chapter. A permit may only be issued subsequent to a properly submitted and
reviewed permit application, pursuant to this section.
   (B)   Effect of permit.
      (1)   A stormwater permit shall govern the design, installation, and
construction of stormwater management and control practices on the site,
including structural BMPs and elements of site design for stormwater management
other than structural BMPs.
      (2)   The permit is intended to provide a mechanism for the review,
approval, and inspection of the approach to be used for management control of
stormwater for the development or redevelopment site consistent with the
requirements of this chapter, whether the approach consists of structural BMPs
or other techniques such as low-impact or low-density design. The permit does
not continue in existence indefinitely after the completion of the project;
rather, compliance after project construction is assured by the maintenance
provisions of this ordinance.
      (3)   Innovative engineering designs shall be reviewed by a PE retained
by the city.
   (C)   Authority to file applications. All applications required pursuant to
this code shall be submitted to the Stormwater Administrator by the land owner
or the land owner's duly authorized agent.
   (D)   Establishment of application requirements, schedule, and fees.
      (1)   Application contents and forms. The Stormwater Administrator shall
establish requirements for the content and form of all applications and shall
amend and update those requirements from time to time. At a minimum, the
stormwater permit application shall describe in detail how post-development
stormwater runoff will be controlled and managed, the design of all stormwater
facilities and practices, and how the proposed project will meet the
requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   Submission schedule. The Stormwater Administrator shall establish a
submission schedule for applications. The schedule shall establish deadlines by
which complete applications must be submitted for the purpose of ensuring that
there is adequate time to review applications, and that the various stages in
the review process are accommodated.
      (3)   Permit review fees. The City Council shall establish permit review
fees as well as policies regarding refund of any fees upon withdrawal of an
application, and may amend and update the fees and policies from time to time.
      (4)   Administrative Manual. For applications required under this code,
the Stormwater Administrator shall compile the application requirements,
submission schedule, fee schedule, a copy of this chapter, and information on
how and where to obtain the Design Manual in an Administrative Manual, which
shall be made available to the public.
   (E)   Submittal of complete application.
      (1)   Applications shall be submitted to the Stormwater Administrator
pursuant to the application submittal schedule in the form established by the
Stormwater Administrator, along with the appropriate fee established pursuant
to this section.
      (2)   An application shall be considered as timely submitted only when it
contains all elements of a complete application pursuant to this chapter, along
with the appropriate fee. If the Stormwater Administrator finds that an
application is incomplete, the applicant shall be notified of the deficient
elements and shall be provided with an opportunity to submit a complete
application. However, the submittal of an incomplete application shall not
suffice to meet a deadline contained in the submission schedule established
above.
   (F)   Review process.
      (1)   Approval. If the Stormwater Administrator finds that the
application complies with the standards of this chapter, the Stormwater
Administrator shall approve the application.
      (2)   Fails to comply. If the Stormwater Administrator finds that the
application fails to comply with the standards of this chapter, the Stormwater
Administrator shall notify the applicant and shall indicate how the application
fails to comply. The Stormwater Administrator may suggest conditions of
approval as needed to ensure compliance with this chapter. The applicant shall
have an opportunity to submit a revised application.
      (3)   Revision and subsequent review.
         (a)   A complete revised application shall be reviewed by the
Stormwater Administrator after its re-submittal and shall be approved, or
disapproved. One re-submittal of a revised application may be submitted without
payment of an additional permit review fee. Any re-submittal after the first
re-submittal shall be accompanied by a permit review fee as established
pursuant to this chapter.
         (b)   If a revision application is not re-submitted within 30 calendar
days from the date the applicant was notified, the application shall be
considered withdrawn, and a new submittal for the same or substantially the
same project shall be required along with the appropriate fee for a new
submittal.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.032 APPLICATIONS FOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   Concept plan and consultation meeting.
      (1)   Before a stormwater management permit application is deemed
complete, the Stormwater Administrator or developer may request a consultation
on a concept plan for the post-construction stormwater management system to be
utilized in the proposed development project. This consultation meeting should
take place at the time of the preliminary plan of subdivision or other early
step in the development process. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the
post-construction stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed
project, as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities and
potential approaches to stormwater management designs before formal site design
engineering is commenced. Local watershed plans, and other relevant resource
protection plans should be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan.
      (2)   To accomplish this goal, the following information should be
included in the concept plan, which should be submitted in advance of the
meeting:
         (a)   Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and
proposed site layout sketch plans, which illustrate at a minimum: existing and
proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant
soils from soil surveys (if available); boundaries of existing predominant
vegetation; proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing
and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas and other impervious surfaces.
         (b)   Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of
natural resources at the site and surrounding area as it exists prior to the
commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of
soil conditions, forest cover, geologic features, topography, wetlands, and
native vegetative areas on the site, as well as the location and boundaries of
other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as lakes, ponds,
floodplains, stream buffers and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well
setbacks, septic setbacks, and the like). Particular attention should be paid
to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or
constraints for development and stormwater management.
         (c)   Stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic
concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system
including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater
controls; low-impact design elements; location of existing and proposed
conveyance systems such as grass channels, swales, and storm drains; flow
paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream
and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of any
proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings.
   (B)   Stormwater management permit application.
      (1)   The stormwater management permit application shall detail how post-
development. stormwater runoff will be controlled and managed and how the
proposed project will meet the requirements of this chapter. All such plans for
any non-single-family residence shall be prepared by a qualified registered
North Carolina professional engineer, surveyor, soil scientist or landscape
architect, and the engineer, surveyor, soil scientist or landscape architect
shall perform services only in their area of competence, and shall verify that
the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meets the
submittal requirements for complete applications, that the designs and plans
are sufficient to comply with applicable standards and policies found in the
Design Manual, and that the designs and plans ensure compliance with this
chapter.
      (2)   The submittal shall include all of the information required in the
submittal checklist established by the Stormwater Administrator. Incomplete
submittals shall be treated pursuant to §
54.031(F)(2).
   (C)   As-built plans and final approval.
      (1)   Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy
shall be granted, the applicant shall certify that the completed project is in
accordance with the approved stormwater management plans and designs, and shall
submit actual "as-built" plans for all stormwater management facilities or
practices after final construction is completed.
      (2)   The plans shall show the final design specifications for all
stormwater management facilities and practices and the field location, size,
depth, and planted vegetation of all measures, controls, and devices, as
installed. The designer of the stormwater management measures and plans shall
certify, under seal, that the as-built stormwater measures, controls, and
devices are in compliance with the approved stormwater management plans and
designs and with the requirements of this chapter. A final inspection and
approval by the Stormwater Administrator shall occur before the release of any
performance securities.
   (D)   Other permits. No certificate of compliance or occupancy shall be
issued by the Building Inspector without final as-built plans and a final
inspection and approval by the Stormwater Administrator, except where multiple
units are served by the stormwater practice or facilities, in which case the
Building Inspector may elect to withhold a percentage of permits or
certificates of occupancy until as-built plans are submitted and final
inspection and approval has occurred.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.033 APPROVALS.
   (A)   Effect of approval. Approval authorizes the applicant to go forward
with only the specific plans and activities authorized in the permit. The
approval shall not be construed to exempt the applicant from obtaining other
applicable approvals from local, state, and federal authorities.
   (B)   Time limit/expiration.
      (1)   An approved plan shall become null and void if the applicant fails
to make substantial progress on the site within one year after the date of
approval. The Stormwater Administrator may grant a single, one-year extension
of this time limit, for good cause shown, upon receiving a written request from
the applicant before the expiration of the approved plan.
      (2)   In granting an extension, the Stormwater Administrator may require
compliance with standards adopted since the original application was submitted
unless there has been substantial reliance on the original permit and the
change in standards would infringe the applicant's vested rights.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.034 APPEALS.
   (A)   Right of appeal. Any aggrieved person affected by any decision, order,
requirement, or determination relating to the interpretation or application of
this chapter made by the Stormwater Administrator, may file an appeal to the
Board of Adjustment within 45 days.
   (B)   Filing of appeal and procedures.
      (1)   Appeals shall be taken within the specified time period by filing a
notice of appeal and specifying the grounds for appeal on forms provided by the
city. The Stormwater Administrator shall transmit to the Board of Adjustment
all documents constituting the record on which the decision appealed from was
taken.
      (2)   The hearing conducted by the Board of Adjustment shall be conducted
in the nature of a quasi-judicial proceeding with all findings of fact
supported by competent, material evidence.
   (C)   Review by Superior Court. Every decision of the Board of Adjustment
shall be subject to Superior Court review by proceedings in the nature of
certiorari. Petition for review by the Superior Court shall be filed with the
Clerk of Superior Court within 30 days after the latter of the following:
      (1)   The decision of the Board of Adjustment is filed; or
      (2)   A written copy of the decision is delivered to every aggrieved
party who has filed a written request for such copy with the Secretary of the
Board of Adjustment at the time of its hearing of the case.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015; Ord. 23-21, passed 8-29-2023)
STANDARDS
§ 54.050 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   All development and redevelopment to which this chapter applies shall comply
with the standards of this section.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.051 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR LOW-DENSITY PROJECTS.
   Low-density projects shall comply with each of the following standards:
   (A)   Stormwater runoff from the development shall be transported from the
development by vegetated conveyances to the maximum extent practicable.
   (B)   All built-upon area shall be at a minimum of 30 feet landward of all
perennial and intermittent surface waters. A perennial or intermittent surface
water shall be deemed present if the feature is approximately shown on either
the most recent version of the soil survey map prepared by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) or the most recent version of the 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute) quadrangle
topographic maps prepared by the United States Geologic Survey (USGS). An
exception to this requirement may be allowed when surface waters are not
present in accordance with the provisions of 15A NCAC 2B.0233(3)(a) or similar
site-specific determination made using division-approved methodology.
   (C)   The approval of the stormwater permit shall require an enforceable
restriction on property usage that runs with the land, such as a recorded deed
restriction or protective covenants, to ensure that future development and
redevelopment maintains the site consistent with the approved project plans.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.052 DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR HIGH-DENSITY PROJECTS.
   High-density projects shall implement stormwater control measures that
comply with each of the following standards:
   (A)   The measures shall control and treat runoff from the first inch of
rain. Runoff volume drawdown time shall be a minimum of 48 hours, but not more
than 120 hours.
   (B)   All structural stormwater treatment systems used to meet these
requirements shall be designed to have a minimum of 85% average annual removal
for Total Suspended Solids (TSS);
   (C)   General engineering design criteria for all projects shall be in
accordance with 15A NCAC 2H.1008(c), as explained in the Design Manual;
   (D)   All built-upon area shall be at a minimum of 30 feet landward of all
perennial and intermittent surface waters. A perennial or intermittent surface
water shall be deemed present if the feature is approximately shown on either
the most recent version of the soil survey map prepared by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) or the most recent version of the 1:24,000 scale (7.5 minute) quadrangle
topographic maps prepared by the United States Geologic Survey (USGS). An
exception to this requirement may be allowed when surface waters are not
present in accordance with the provisions of 15A NCAC 2B.0233(3)(a) or similar
site-specific determination made using division-approved methodology; and
   (E)   The approval of the stormwater permit shall require an enforceable
restriction on property usage that runs with the land, such as recorded deed
restrictions or protective covenants, to ensure that future development and
redevelopment maintains the site consistent with the approved project plans.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.053 STANDARDS FOR STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURES.
   (A)   Evaluation according to contents of Design Manual. All stormwater
control measures and stormwater treatment practices (also referred to as Best
Management Practices, or BMPs) required under this chapter shall be evaluated
by the Stormwater Administrator according to the policies, criteria, and
information, including technical specifications and standards and the specific
design criteria for each stormwater practice, in the Design Manual. The
Stormwater Administrator shall determine whether proposed BMPs will be adequate
to meet the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Determination of adequacy; presumptions and alternatives. Stormwater
treatment practices that are designed, and constructed, and maintained in
accordance with the criteria and specifications in the Design Manual will be
presumed to meet the minimum water quality and quantity performance standards
of this chapter. Whenever an applicant proposes to utilize a practice or
practices not designed and constructed in accordance with the criteria and
specifications in the Design Manual, the applicant shall have the burden of
demonstrating that the practice(s) will satisfy the minimum water quality and
quantity performance standards of this chapter. The Stormwater Administrator
may require the applicant to provide the documentation, calculations, and
examples necessary for the Stormwater Administrator to determine whether such
an affirmative showing is made.
   (C)   Separation from seasonal high water table. For BMPs that require a
separation from the seasonal high water table, the separation shall be provided
by at least 12 inches of naturally occurring soil above the seasonal high water
table.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.054 DEDICATION OF BMPS, FACILITIES AND IMPROVEMENTS.
   The city may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater
management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the
requirements of this chapter and includes adequate and perpetual access and
sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular
maintenance.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.055 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Petitions. Any person may petition the Stormwater Management Advisory
Board for a variance granting permission to use the person's land in a manner
otherwise prohibited by this chapter. To qualify for a variance, the petitioner
must show all of the following:
      (1)   Unnecessary hardships would result from strict application of this
chapter.
      (2)   The hardships result from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as the location, size, or topography of the property.
      (3)   The hardships did not result from actions taken by the petitioner.
      (4)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and
intent of this chapter, will secure public safety and welfare, and will
preserve substantial justice.
   (B)   Impositions. The Stormwater Management Advisory Board may impose
reasonable and appropriate conditions and safeguards upon any variance it
grants.
   (C)   Statutory exceptions. Notwithstanding division (A) of this section,
exceptions from the 30-foot landward location of built-upon area requirement as
well as the deed restrictions and protective covenants requirements shall be
granted in any of the following instances:
      (1)   When there is a lack of practical alternatives for a road crossing,
railroad crossing, bridge, airport facility, or utility crossing as long as it
is located, designed, constructed, and maintained to minimize disturbance,
provide maximum nutrient removal, protect against erosion and sedimentation,
have the least adverse effects on aquatic life and habitat, and protect water
quality to the maximum extent practicable through the use of the BMPs.
      (2)   When there is a lack of practical alternatives for a stormwater
management facility; a stormwater management pond; or a utility, including, but
not limited to, water, sewer, or gas construction and maintenance corridor, as
long as it is located 15 feet landward of all perennial and intermittent
surface waters and as long as it is located, designed, constructed, and
maintained to minimize disturbance, provide maximum nutrient removal, protect
against erosion and sedimentation, have the least adverse effects on aquatic
life and habitat, and protect water quality to the maximum extent practicable
through the use of BMPs.
      (3)   A lack of practical alternatives may be shown by demonstrating
that, considering the potential for a reduction in size, configuration, or
density of the proposed activity and all alternative designs, the basic project
purpose cannot be practically accomplished in a manner which would avoid or
result in less adverse impact to surface waters.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.056 ONSITE WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Operation and maintenance requirements. New and replaced onsite
systems for domestic wastewater installed after the effective date of this
chapter shall be subject to the same requirements for operation and maintenance
as structural BMPs for stormwater, including, at a minimum, annual inspection
reports and a recorded operation and maintenance agreement, pursuant to §§
54.070 through
54.076.
   (B)   Standards for operation and maintenance. Onsite systems for domestic
wastewater covered by this chapter shall be operated and maintained so as to
avoid adverse effects on surface water and groundwater, including
eutrophication [the process by which a body of water becomes enriched in
dissolved nutrients (as phosphates) that stimulate the growth of aquatic plant
life usually resulting in the depletion of dissolved oxygen] of surface water
and microbial or nitrate contamination of groundwater. Septic tank residuals
shall be pumped whenever necessary to assure the proper operation of the system
to meet these standards, and the seepage shall be reused or disposed of in a
manner that does not present significant risks to human health, surface water
or groundwater.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
MAINTENANCE
§ 54.070 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Function of BMPs as intended. The owner of each structural BMP
installed pursuant to this chapter shall maintain and operate it so as to
preserve and continue its function in controlling stormwater quality and
quantity at the degree or amount of function for which the structural BMP was
designed.
   (B)   Annual maintenance inspection and report.
      (1)   The person responsible for maintenance of any structural BMP
installed pursuant to this chapter shall submit to the Stormwater Administrator
an inspection report from one of the following persons performing services only
in their area of competence: a qualified registered North Carolina professional
engineer, surveyor, landscape architect, soil scientist, aquatic biologist, or
person certified by the North Carolina Cooperative Extension Service for
stormwater treatment practice inspection maintenance. The inspection report
shall contain all of the following:
         (a)   The name and address of the land owner;
         (b)   The recorded book and page number of the lot of each structural
BMP;
         (c)   A statement that an inspection was made of all structural BMPs;
         (d)   The date the inspection was made;
         (e)   A statement that all inspected structural BMPs are performing
properly and are in compliance with the terms and conditions of the approved
maintenance agreement required by this chapter; and
         (f)   The original signature and seal of the engineer, surveyor, or
landscape architect.
      (2)   All inspection reports shall be on forms supplied by the Stormwater
Administrator. An original inspection report shall be provided to the
Stormwater Administrator beginning one year from the date of as-built
certification and each year thereafter on or before the date of the as-built
certification.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.071 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT.
   (A)   In general.
      (1)   Prior to the conveyance or transfer of any lot or building site to
be served by a structural BMP pursuant to this chapter, and prior to issuance
of any permit for development or redevelopment requiring a structural BMP
pursuant to this chapter, the applicant or owner of the site must execute an
operation and maintenance agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent
owners of the site, portions of the site, and lots or parcels served by the
structural BMP, until the transference of all property, sites, or lots served
by the structural BMP, the original owner or applicant shall have primary
responsibility for carrying out the provisions of the maintenance agreement.
      (2)   The operation and maintenance agreement shall require the owner or
owners to maintain, repair and if necessary, reconstruct the structural BMP,
and shall state the terms, conditions, and schedule of maintenance for the
structural BMP. In addition, it shall grant to the city a right of entry in the
event that the Stormwater Administrator has reason to believe it has become
necessary to inspect, monitor, maintain, repair or reconstruct the structural
BMP; however, in no case shall the right of entry, of itself, confer an
obligation on the city to assume responsibility for the structural BMP.
      (3)   The operation and maintenance agreement must be approved by the
Stormwater Administrator prior to plan approval, and it shall be referenced on
the final plat and shall be recorded with the county Register of Deeds upon
final plat approval. A copy of the recorded maintenance agreement shall be
given to the Stormwater Administrator within 14 days following its recordation.
   (B)   Special requirement for homeowners' and other associations. For all
structural BMPs required pursuant to this chapter and that are to be or are
owned and maintained by a homeowners' association, property owners'
association, or similar entity, the required operation and maintenance
agreement shall include all the following provisions:
      (1)   Acknowledgment that the association shall continuously operate and
maintain the stormwater control and management facilities.
      (2)   Establishment of an escrow account, which can be spent solely for
sediment removal, structural, biological or vegetative replacement, major
repair, or reconstruction of the structural BMPs. If structural BMPs are not
performing adequately or as intended or are not properly maintained, the city,
in its sole discretion, may remedy the situation, and in such instances the
city shall be fully reimbursed from the escrow account. Escrowed funds may be
spent by the association for sediment removal, structural, biological or
vegetative replacement, major repair, and reconstruction of the structural
BMPs, provided that the city shall first consent to the expenditure.
      (3)   Both developer contribution and annual sinking funds shall fund the
escrow account. Prior to plat recordation or issuance of construction permits,
whichever shall first occur, the developer shall pay into the escrow account an
amount equal to 15% of the initial construction cost of the structural BMPs.
Two-thirds of the total amount of sinking fund budget shall be deposited into
the escrow account within the first five years and the full amount shall be
deposited within ten years following initial construction of the structural
BMPs. Funds shall be deposited each year into the escrow account. A portion of
the annual assessments of the association shall include an allocation into the
escrow account. Any funds drawn down from the escrow account shall be replaced
in accordance with the schedule of anticipated work used to create the sinking
fund budget.
      (4)   The percent of developer contribution and lengths of time to fund
the escrow account may be varied by the city depending on the design and
materials of the stormwater control and management facility.
      (5)   Granting to the city a right of entry to inspect, monitor,
maintain, repair, and reconstruct structural BMPs.
      (6)   Allowing the city to recover from the association and its members
any and all costs the city expends to maintain or repair the structural BMPs or
to correct any operational deficiencies. Failure to pay the city all of its
expended costs, after 45 days written notice, shall constitute a breach of the
agreement. In case of a deficiency, the city shall thereafter be entitled to
bring action against the association and its members to pay, or foreclose upon
the lien hereby authorized by the agreement against the property, or both.
Interest, collection costs, and attorney fee shall be added to the recovery.
      (7)   A statement that this agreement shall not obligate the city to
maintain or repair any structural BMPs, and the city shall not be liable to any
person for the condition or operation of structural BMPs.
      (8)   A statement that this agreement shall not in any way diminish,
limit, or restrict the right of the city to enforce any of its ordinances as
authorized by law.
      (9)   A provision indemnifying and holding harmless the city for any
costs and injuries arising from or related to the structural BMP, unless the
city has agreed in writing to assume the maintenance responsibility for the BMP
and has accepted dedication of any and all rights necessary to carry out that
maintenance.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.072 INSPECTION PROGRAM.
   (A)   Inspections and inspection programs by the city may be conducted or
established on any reasonable basis, including but not limited to routine
inspections; random inspections; inspections based upon complaints or other
notice of possible violations; and joint inspections with other agencies
inspecting under environmental or safety laws. Inspections may include, but are
not limited to, reviewing maintenance and repair records; sampling discharges,
surface water, groundwater, and material or water in BMPs; and evaluating the
condition of BMPs.
   (B)   If the owner or occupant of any property refuses to permit such
inspection, the Stormwater Administrator shall proceed to obtain an
administrative search warrant pursuant to G.S. § 15-27.2 or its successor. No
person shall obstruct, hamper or interfere with the Stormwater Administrator
while carrying out his or her official duties.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.073 PERFORMANCE SECURITY FOR INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   May be required. The city may, at its discretion, require the
submittal of a performance security or bond with surety, cash escrow, letter of
credit or other acceptable legal arrangement prior to issuance of a permit in
order to ensure that the structural BMPs are:
      (1)   Installed by the permit holder as required by the approved
stormwater management plan; and/or
      (2)   Maintained by the owner as required by the operation and
maintenance agreement.
   (B)   Amount.
      (1)   Installation. The amount of an installation performance security
shall be the total estimated construction cost of the BMPs approved under the
permit, plus 25%.
      (2)   Maintenance. The amount of a maintenance performance security shall
be the present value of an annuity of perpetual duration based on a reasonable
estimate of the annual cost of inspection, operation and maintenance of the
BMPs approved under the permit, at a discount rate that reflects the
jurisdiction's cost of borrowing minus a reasonable estimate of long-term
inflation.
   (C)   Uses of performance security.
      (1)   Forfeiture provisions. The performance security shall contain
forfeiture provisions for failure, after proper notice, to complete work within
the time specified, or to initiate or maintain any actions which may be
required of the applicant or owner in accordance with this chapter, approvals
issued pursuant to this chapter, or an operation and maintenance agreement
established pursuant to this chapter.
      (2)   Default. Upon default of the owner to construct maintain, repair
and, if necessary, reconstruct any structural BMP in accordance with the
applicable permit or operation and maintenance agreement, the Stormwater
Administrator shall obtain and use all or any portion of the security to make
the necessary improvements based on an engineering estimate. Such expenditure
of funds shall only be
made after requesting the owner to comply with the permit or maintenance
agreement. In the event of default triggering the use of installation
performance security, the city shall not return any of the unused deposited
cash funds or other security, which shall be retained for maintenance.
      (3)   Costs in excess of performance security. If the city takes action
upon such failure by the applicant or owner, the city may collect from the
applicant or owner the difference between the amount of the reasonable cost of
such action and the amount of the security held, in addition to any other
penalties or damages due.
      (4)   Refund. Within sixty days of the final approval, the installation
performance security shall be refunded to the applicant or terminated, except
any amount attributable to the cost (plus 25%) of landscaping installation and
ongoing maintenance associated with the BMPs covered by the security. Any such
landscaping shall be inspected one year after installation with replacement for
compliance with the approved plans and specifications and, if in compliance,
the portion of the financial security attributable to landscaping shall be
released.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.074 NOTICE TO OWNERS.
   (A)   Deed recordation and indications on plat. The applicable operations
and maintenance agreement, conservation easement, or dedication and acceptance
into public maintenance (whichever is applicable) pertaining to every
structural BMP shall be referenced on the final plat and shall be recorded with
the county Register of Deeds upon final plat approval. If no subdivision plat
is recorded for the site, then the operations and maintenance agreement,
conservation easement, or dedication and acceptance into public maintenance,
whichever is applicable shall be recorded with the county Register of Deeds so
as to appear in the chain of title of all subsequent purchasers under generally
accepted searching principles.
   (B)   Signage. Where appropriate in the determination of the Stormwater
Administrator to assure compliance with this chapter, structural BMPs shall be
posted with a conspicuous sign stating who is responsible for required
maintenance and annual inspection. The sign shall be maintained so as to remain
visible and legible.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.075 RECORDS OF INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES.
   The owner of each structural BMP shall keep records of inspections,
maintenance, and repairs for at least five years from the date of creation of
the record and shall submit the same upon reasonable request to the Stormwater
Administrator.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.076 NUISANCES.
   The owner of each stormwater BMP, whether structural or non-structural BMP,
shall maintain it so as not to create or result in a nuisance condition.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
ILLICIT DISCHARGES
§ 54.080 ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTION.
   (A)   Illicit discharges. No person shall cause or allow the discharge,
emission, disposal, pouring, or pumping directly or indirectly to any
stormwater conveyance, the waters of the state, or upon the land in manner and
amount that the substance is likely to reach a stormwater conveyance or the
waters of the state, any liquid, solid, gas, or other substance, other than
stormwater, provided that non-storm water discharges associated with the
following activities are allowed and provided that they do not significantly
impact water quality:
      (1)   Water line flushing;
      (2)   Landscape irrigation;
      (3)   Diverted stream flows;
      (4)   Rising ground waters;
      (5)   Uncontaminated ground water infiltration [as defined at 40 CFR
35.2005(20)];
      (6)   Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
      (7)   Discharges from potable water sources;
      (8)   Foundation drains;
      (9)   Air conditioning condensation;
      (10)   Irrigation water;
      (11)   Springs;
      (12)   Water from crawl space pumps;
      (13)   Footing drains;
      (14)   Lawn watering;
      (15)   Individual residential car washing;
      (16)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
      (17)   De-chlorinated swimming pool discharges;
      (18)   Street wash water; and
      (19)   Other non-stormwater discharges for which a valid NPDES discharge
permit has been approved and issued by the State of North Carolina, and
provided that any such discharges to the municipal separate storm sewer system
shall be authorized by the city. Prohibited substances include but are not
limited to: oil, anti-freeze, chemicals, animal waste, paints, garbage, and
litter.
   (B)   Illicit connections.
      (1)   Connections to a stormwater conveyance or stormwater conveyance
system that allow the discharge of non-stormwater, other than the exclusions
described in division (A) above, are unlawful. Prohibited connections include,
but are not limited to: floor drains, waste water from washing machines or
sanitary sewers, wash water from commercial vehicle washing or steam cleaning,
and waste water from septic systems.
      (2)   Where such connections exist in violation of this section and said
connections were made prior to the adoption of this provision or any other
ordinance prohibiting such connections, the property owner or the person using
said connection shall remove the connection within one year following the
effective date of this chapter. However, the one-year grace period shall not
apply to connections which may result in the discharge of hazardous materials
or other discharges which pose an immediate threat to health and safety, or are
likely to result in immediate injury and harm to real or personal property,
natural resources, wildlife, or habitat.
      (3)   (a)   Where it is determined that said connection:
            1.   May result in the discharge of hazardous materials or may pose
an immediate threat to health and safety, or is likely to result in immediate
injury and harm to real or personal property, natural resources, wildlife, or
habitat; or
            2.   Was made in violation of any applicable regulation or chapter,
other than this section;
         (b)   The Stormwater Administrator shall designate the time within
which the connection shall be removed. In setting the time limit for
compliance, the Stormwater Administrator shall take into consideration:
            1.   The quantity and complexity of the work;
            2.   The consequences of delay;
            3.   The potential harm to the environment, to the public health,
and to public and private property; and
            4.   The cost of remedying the damage.
   (C)   Spills.
      (1)   Spills or leaks of polluting substances released, discharged to, or
having the potential to be released or discharged to the stormwater conveyance
system, shall be contained, controlled, collected, and properly disposed. All
affected areas shall be restored to their preexisting condition.
      (2)   Persons in control of the polluting substances immediately prior to
their release or discharge, and persons owning the property on which the
substances were released or discharged, shall immediately notify the Fire Chief
of the release or discharge, as well as making any required notifications under
state and federal law. Notification shall not relieve any person of any
expenses related to the restoration, loss, damage, or any other liability which
may be incurred as a result of said spill or leak, nor shall such notification
relieve any person from other liability which may be imposed by state or other
law.
   (D)   Nuisance. Illicit discharges and illicit connections which exist
within the city limits are hereby found, deemed, and declared to be dangerous
or prejudiced to the public health or public safety and are found, deemed, and
declared to be public nuisances.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
ENFORCEMENT AND VIOLATIONS
§ 54.100 GENERAL.
   (A)   Authority to enforce. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced
by the Stormwater Administrator, his or her designee, or any authorized agent
of the city. Whenever this section refers to the Stormwater Administrator, it
includes his or her designee as well as any authorized agent of the city.
   (B)   Violation unlawful. Any failure to comply with an applicable
requirement, prohibition, standard, or limitation imposed by this chapter, or
the terms or conditions of any permit or other development or redevelopment
approval or authorization granted pursuant to this chapter, is unlawful and
shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Each day a separate offense. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation or offense.
   (D)   Responsible persons/entities.
      (1)   Any person who erects, constructs, reconstructs, alters (whether
actively or passively), or fails to erect, construct, reconstruct, alter,
repair or maintain any structure, BMP, practice, or condition in violation of
this chapter shall be subject to the remedies, penalties, and/or enforcement
actions in accordance with this section. Persons subject to the remedies and
penalties set forth herein may include any architect, engineer, builder,
contractor, developer, agency, or any other person who participates in,
assists, directs, creates, causes, or maintains a condition that results in or
constitutes a violation of this chapter, or fails to take appropriate action,
so that a violation of this chapter results or persists, or an owner, any
tenant or occupant, or any other person, who has control over, or
responsibility for, the use or development of the property on which the
violation occurs.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, responsible person(s) shall
include but not be limited to:
         (a)   Person maintaining condition resulting in or constituting
violation. An architect, engineer, builder, contractor, developer, agency, or
any other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, causes, or
maintains a condition that constitutes a violation of this chapter, or fails to
take appropriate action, so that a violation of this chapter results or
persists.
         (b)   Responsibility for land or use of land. The owner of the land on
which the violation occurs, any tenant or occupant of the property, any person
who is responsible for stormwater controls or practices pursuant to a private
agreement or public document, or any person, who has control over, or
responsibility for, the use, development or redevelopment of the property.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.101 REMEDIES AND PENALTIES.
   The remedies and penalties provided for violations of this chapter, whether
civil, or criminal, shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy
provided by law, and may be exercised in any order.
   (A)   Remedies.
      (1)   Withholding of certificate of occupancy. The Stormwater
Administrator or other authorized agent may refuse to issue a certificate of
occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being
constructed on the site and served by the stormwater practices in question
until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures
set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations
described therein.
      (2)   Disapproval of subsequent permits and development approvals. As
long as a violation of this chapter continues and remains uncorrected, the
Stormwater Administrator or other authorized agent may withhold, and the
Planning and Zoning Board, City Council and/or Stormwater Management Advisory
Board may disapprove, any request for permit or development approval or
authorization provided for by this chapter or the Zoning, Subdivision and/or
the North Carolina Building Code for the land on which the violation occurs.
      (3)   Injunction, abatements, and the like. The Stormwater Administrator,
with the authorization of the City Council, may institute an action in a court
of competent jurisdiction for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order
of abatement to correct a violation of this chapter. Any person violating this
chapter shall be subject to the full range of equitable remedies provided in
the General Statutes or at common law.
      (4)   Correction as public health nuisance, costs as lien, and the like.
If the violation is deemed dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or
public safety and is within the geographic limits prescribed by G.S. § 160A-
193, the Stormwater Administrator, with the authorization of the City Council
may cause the violation to be corrected and the costs to be assessed as a lien
against the property.
      (5)   Stop work order. The Stormwater Administrator may issue a stop work
order to the person(s) violating this chapter. The stop work order shall remain
in effect until the person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the
notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations
described therein. The stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable
the person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or
violations.
   (B)   Civil penalties. Violation of this chapter may subject the violator to
a civil penalty to be recovered in a civil action in the nature of a debt if
the violator does not pay the penalty within 30 days after notice of the
violation is issued by the Stormwater Administrator. Civil penalties may be
assessed up to the full amount of penalty to which the city is subject for
violations of its Phase II Stormwater permit.
   (C)   Criminal penalties. Violation of this chapter may be enforced as a
misdemeanor subject to the maximum fine permissible under North Carolina law.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
§ 54.102 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Initiation/complaint. Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or
is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Such
complaint shall state fully the alleged violation and the basis thereof, and
shall be filed with the Stormwater Administrator, who shall record the
complaint. The complaint shall be investigated promptly by the Stormwater
Administrator.
   (B)   Inspection. The Stormwater Administrator shall have the authority,
upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter and inspect any land,
building, structure, or premises to ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (C)   Notice of violation and order to correct.
      (1)   When the Stormwater Administrator finds that any building,
structure, or land is in violation of this chapter, the Stormwater
Administrator shall notify, in writing, the property owner or other person
violating this chapter. The notification shall indicate the nature of the
violation, contain the address or other description of the site upon which the
violation is occurring, order the necessary action to abate the violation, and
give a deadline for correcting the violation. If civil penalties are to be
assessed, the notice of violation shall also contain a statement of the civil
penalties to be assessed, the time of their accrual, and the time within which
they must be paid or be subject to collection as a debt.
      (2)   The Stormwater Administrator may deliver the notice of violation
and correction order personally, by the police or by the Code Enforcement
Officer, by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested, or by any
means authorized for the service of documents by Rule 4 of the North Carolina
Rules of Civil Procedure.
      (3)   If a violation is not corrected within a reasonable period of time,
as provided in the notification, the Stormwater Administrator may take
appropriate action under this chapter to correct and abate the violation and to
ensure compliance with this chapter.
   (D)   Extension of time. A person who receives a notice of violation and
correction order, or the owner of the land on which the violation occurs, may
submit to the Stormwater Administrator a written request for an extension of
time for correction of the violation. On determining that the request includes
enough information to show that the violation cannot be corrected within the
specified time limit for reasons beyond the control of the person requesting
the extension, the Stormwater Administrator may extend the time limit as is
reasonably necessary to allow timely correction of the violation, up to, but
not exceeding 90 days. The Stormwater Administrator may grant 30-day extensions
in addition to the foregoing extension if the violation cannot be corrected
within the permitted time due to circumstances beyond the control of the person
violating this chapter. The Stormwater Administrator may grant an extension
only by written notice of extension. The notice of extension shall state the
date prior to which correction must be made, after which the violator will be
subject to the penalties described in the notice of violation and correction
order.
   (E)   Enforcement after time to correct. After the time has expired to
correct a violation, including any extensions) if authorized by the Stormwater
Administrator, the Stormwater Administrator shall determine if the violation is
corrected, if the violation is not corrected, the Stormwater Administrator may
act to impose one or more of the remedies and penalties authorized by this
chapter.
   (F)   Emergency enforcement. If delay in correcting a violation would
seriously threaten the effective enforcement of this chapter or pose an
immediate danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, then the Stormwater
Administrator may order the immediate cessation of a violation. Any person so
ordered shall cease any violation immediately. The Stormwater Administrator may
seek immediate enforcement, without prior written notice, through any remedy or
penalty authorized by this chapter.
(Ord. 15-01, passed 1-15-2015)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
      
72.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
73.   STOPPING AND PARKING RULES
      
74.   GOLF CARTS
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Adoption of state law
   
70.02   Obedience to traffic provisions
   
70.03   Obedience to police
   
70.04   Authority of police to direct traffic
   
70.05   Application to persons propelling pushcarts or riding bicycles or
animals
   
70.06   Application to authorized emergency vehicles
   
70.07   Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers
   
70.08   Number of passengers in front seat restricted
   
70.09   Riders of motorcycles and bicycles to have hands on handlebars
   
70.10   Passengers to remain inside vehicle
   
70.11   Entering or riding vehicle without consent of owner or driver
   
70.12   Boarding or alighting from moving vehicles
   
70.13   Clinging to moving vehicles
   
70.14   Use of skates, coasters and the like in roadway
   
70.15   Placing advertising on motor vehicles
   
70.16   Opening doors into traffic
Cross-reference:
   Advertising with sound vehicle, see §
112.02
   Creation of noise by “scratching off”, see §
96.004(A)(2)(a)
   Distributing handbills, see §
112.22
   Driving on streets under construction, see §
90.026
   Motor vehicles at city lakes, see §
92.17
   Obstructing fire hydrant, see §
98.07
   Refuse reflections at parking lots, see §
97.17
   Spilling of materials, see §
97.12(B)
   Tracking of streets with mud, see §
97.14
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city relative to traffic, see G.S. §§ 20-169,160A-77, 160A-300
et seq.
§ 70.01 ADOPTION OF STATE LAW.
   The state law regulating motor- and animal-drawn vehicles on public highways
and particularly pertaining to traffic regulations in cities and towns
throughout the state is hereby adopted and made a part of this title.
(Prior Code, § 18-1)
§ 70.02 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC PROVISIONS.
   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden, or fail to
perform any act required, in this title.
(Prior Code, § 18-2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.03 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction by a police officer given in the performance of duties or the
exercise of powers prescribed by this title.
(Prior Code, § 18-3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.04 AUTHORITY OF POLICE TO DIRECT TRAFFIC.
   In the event of a fire or other emergency, or when necessary to expedite
traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this title.
(Prior Code, § 18-4)
§ 70.05 APPLICATION TO PERSONS PROPELLING PUSHCARTS OR RIDING BICYCLES OR
ANIMALS.
   Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a
roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to
the provisions of this title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except
those provisions of this title which, by their very nature, can have no
application.
(Prior Code, § 18-5)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law as to animals, see G.S. § 20-171
§ 70.06 APPLICATION TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and
standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles; except that,
a driver when operating the vehicle in any emergency, unless otherwise directed
by a police officer, may:
      (1)   Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this title;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal, or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as the driver does not
endanger life or property; and/or
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement, or turning,
in specified directions so long as the driver does not endanger life or
property.
   (B)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any
vehicle from the consequences of the driver’s reckless disregard of the safety
of others.
(Prior Code, § 18-6)
Statutory reference:
   Exceptions to right-of-way rules for emergency vehicles, see G.S. § 20-156
§ 70.07 RIDING ON PORTION OF VEHICLE NOT INTENDED FOR PASSENGERS.
   (A)   No person shall ride any portion of a vehicle not designed or intended
for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee
engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty or to persons riding within truck
bodies in spaces intended for merchandise.
   (B)   The operator of a motorcycle or bicycle, when upon a street, shall not
carry any person upon the handlebar, frame or tank of any vehicle, nor shall
any person so ride upon any vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 18-7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.08 NUMBER OF PASSENGERS IN FRONT SEAT RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver or the person in charge of any motor
vehicle to permit more than three persons, including the driver, to ride in the
front or driver’s seat of a motor vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 18-8) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Overloaded or overcrowded vehicle, see G.S. § 20-140.2
§ 70.09 RIDERS OF MOTORCYCLES AND BICYCLES TO HAVE HANDS ON HANDLEBARS.
   No person shall ride a bicycle or motorcycle on any street without having
his or her hands upon the handlebars.
(Prior Code, § 18-9) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.10 PASSENGERS TO REMAIN INSIDE VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall allow any part of his or her body to protrude beyond
the limits of the vehicle in which the person is riding, except to give signals
as are required by this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall hang on to any vehicle whatsoever.
(Prior Code, § 18-10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.11 ENTERING OR RIDING VEHICLE WITHOUT CONSENT OF OWNER OR DRIVER.
   No person shall enter, jump on or ride any vehicle without the consent of
the owner or driver.
(Prior Code, § 18-11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.12 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM MOVING VEHICLES.
   No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while the vehicle is in
motion.
(Prior Code, § 18-12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.13 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.
   Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates
or any other toy vehicle shall not attach the same or the person’s self to any
public conveyance or moving vehicle upon any roadway.
(Prior Code, § 18-13) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.14 USE OF SKATES, COASTERS AND THE LIKE IN ROADWAY.
   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway, except while crossing a
street at a crosswalk or intersection, and except upon streets set aside as
play streets.
(Prior Code, § 18-14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.15 PLACING ADVERTISING ON MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person shall distribute advertising or printed matter of any kind by
placing the same in or on, a motor vehicle that is parked on any street or in
other public places.
(Prior Code, § 18-15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 70.16 OPENING DOORS INTO TRAFFIC.
   No person shall open the door of a motor vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall any
person leave a door open on the side of a motor vehicle available to traffic
for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(Prior Code, § 18-16) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Section
   
71.01   Designation of traffic zones, through streets and the like; erection
and installation of devices
   
71.02   Obedience to devices
   
71.03   Necessity of signs
   
71.04   Ratification of existing devices
   
71.05   Moving or damaging devices
   
71.06   Four-way stop signs
   
71.07   Stop streets and intersections schedule
Statutory reference:
   Authority of town to regulate traffic by means of traffic-control devices,
see G.S. § 20-169
§ 71.01 DESIGNATION OF TRAFFIC ZONES, THROUGH STREETS AND THE LIKE; ERECTION
AND INSTALLATION OF DEVICES.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall have the power to designate, lay off and
indicate, with the approval of the governing body, by appropriate signs and
markings: parking spaces and zones, no parking zones, limited parking zones,
zones in which vehicles shall be parked at an angle to the curb, loading zones,
safety zones, school zones, hospital zones, quiet zones, traffic zones other
than the above, speed limits, truck routes, through streets, stop streets and
intersections, yield right-of-way intersections, one-way streets, streets to be
laned for traffic, play streets, bus stops and taxicab stands. The Chief shall
also have the power to designate and indicate, with the approval of the
governing body, intersections at which traffic shall be controlled by traffic
signals, intersections at which left turns and/or right turns and “U” turns
shall be prohibited, and intersections at which markers, buttons or other
indications shall be placed to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles
traversing or turning at the intersections.
   (B)   Whenever any designation is made in accord with this section, the
Chief of Police shall erect and install signs, markings, lines, signals and
other traffic-control devices as may be necessary to clearly indicate the
designation and to put drivers of vehicles on notice of the restriction,
limitation or prohibition resulting from the designation.
   (C)   Additions and amendments:
      (1)   Remove loading zone in front of 233 S. Battleground Avenue and add
a loading zone in front of 205 S. Battleground Avenue for the hours of 8:00
a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
      (2)   To add a Stop sign and speed table on Fairview Street.
      (3)   To make the intersections of Woodside Drive and Katherine Avenue
four-way stop intersections.
      (4)   To make the intersections of E. Mountain Street and S. Piedmont
Avenue four-way stop intersections.
      (5)   To add a crosswalk at the Ervin Clinic on West Mountain Street.
      (6)   Addition of a crosswalk and three-way stop sign at the corner of
Park Dr. and Ramseur St.
      (7)   Addition of a crosswalk and three-way stop sign at the corner of
McGinnis St. and Ramseur St.
(Prior Code, § 18-50) (Ord. 17-08, passed 5-30-2017; Ord. 17-09, passed 5-30-
2017; Ord. 17-10, passed 5-30-2017; Ord. 17-16, passed 6-27-2017; Ord. 17-20,
passed 9-26-2017; Ord. 17-22, passed 11-28-2017; Ord. 17-23, passed 11-28-2017)
§ 71.02 OBEDIENCE TO DEVICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or use a vehicle upon
the streets of the city contrary to any signs, signals or other traffic-control
devices that are placed upon the streets for the purpose of directing traffic,
except upon direction of a police officer and except as otherwise provided in
this title.
(Prior Code, § 18-51) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.03 NECESSITY OF SIGNS.
   No provision of this chapter for which signs are required shall be enforced
against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged violation,
an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to an
ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state that
signs are required, the section shall be effective without signs being placed
to give notice thereof.
(Prior Code, § 18-52)
§ 71.04 RATIFICATION OF EXISTING DEVICES.
   All traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markings placed or erected
in the city prior to the adoption of this code and in use for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and
declared to be official traffic-control devices; provided, the traffic-control
devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter or state law.
(Prior Code, § 18-53)
§ 71.05 MOVING OR DAMAGING DEVICES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to move, deface or otherwise damage any
sign, signal or other traffic-control device placed upon the streets of the
city.
(Prior Code, § 18-54) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 71.06 FOUR-WAY STOP SIGNS.
   The following intersection shall be hereby designated as four-way stop
intersections:
   (A)   Scotland Drive and Lee Street;
   (B)   Somerset and Lee Street; and
   (C)   South Cansler Street and West Gold Street.
(Ord. 15-21, passed 9-29-2015; Ord. 23-26, passed 9-26-2023)
§ 71.07 STOP STREETS AND INTERSECTIONS SCHEDULE.
   To place a stop sign on Alston Circle at the intersection of Marcella Drive
and a stop sign on Nora Drive at the intersection of Marcella Drive in the
Crocker Ridge Subdivision.
(Ord. 16-27, passed 6-28-2016)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
72.01   Driving on roadway laned for traffic
   
72.02   Driving in school zones
   
72.03   Driving on one-way streets
   
72.04   Driving in quiet zones
   
72.05   Driving on play streets
   
72.06   Blocking intersections or crosswalks
   
72.07   Use of certain vehicles on sidewalks restricted
   
72.08   Driving through funeral procession
   
72.09   Limitations on turning around
   
72.10   Limitations on backing
   
72.11   Trick riding
   
72.12   Driving on streets being paved
   
72.13   Bus routes
   
72.14   Corner cutting
   
72.15   Commercial motor vehicles crossing railroad tracks
Speed Regulations
   
72.25   Maximum limits generally
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to prohibit other than one-way traffic, see G.S. § 20-169
   Speed limits and powers of local authorities relative thereto, see G.S. §
20-141
   Speed restrictions generally, see G.S. § 20-141
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 72.01 DRIVING ON ROADWAY LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
   All vehicles operated on any roadway which has been clearly marked with
lanes for traffic shall be driven as nearly as practical entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from the lane until the driver has first
ascertained that the movement can be made with safety.
(Prior Code, § 18-30) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.02 DRIVING IN SCHOOL ZONES.
   Whenever authorized signs are placed designating any street or part thereof
as a school zone pursuant to §
71.01, drivers of vehicles using the street shall exercise the greatest care
for the protection of children.
(Prior Code, § 18-31) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.03 DRIVING ON ONE-WAY STREETS.
   Upon those streets and parts of streets designated as one-way streets in
accord with §
71.01, vehicular traffic shall move only in the indicated direction, when signs
indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every
intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 18-32)
§ 72.04 DRIVING IN QUIET ZONES.
   Whenever authorized signs are placed, erected or installed as a quiet zone
pursuant to §
71.01, no person operating a motor vehicle within any zone shall sound the
horn, or other warning device, of the vehicle, except in an emergency.
(Prior Code, § 18-33) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.05 DRIVING ON PLAY STREETS.
   Whenever authorized signs are placed designating any street, or part
thereof, as a play street pursuant to §
71.01, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any designated street, except
persons who have business or who reside within the designated area and all
persons shall exercise the greatest care when driving upon any play street.
(Prior Code, § 18-34) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.06 BLOCKING INTERSECTIONS OR CROSSWALKS.
   No driver of a vehicle shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk
unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle the driver is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any
traffic-control signal indication to proceed.
(Prior Code, § 18-35) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.07 USE OF CERTAIN VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS RESTRICTED.
   No person shall ride, pull, push or drive any vehicle whatsoever, except a
baby carriage, on any of the sidewalks within the city, except at a permanent
or temporary driveway lawfully established.
(Prior Code, § 18-36) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.08 DRIVING THROUGH FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   No vehicle shall be driven through a funeral procession, except Fire
Department vehicles, police vehicles and ambulances responding to calls.
(Prior Code, § 18-37) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.09 LIMITATIONS ON TURNING AROUND.
   No driver shall turn any vehicle and proceed in the opposite direction
within a business district, except at street intersections; provided, however,
that, when authorized signs are placed pursuant to §
71.01, prohibiting the turns at street intersections, it shall be unlawful for
any driver to make the turns.
(Prior Code, § 18-38) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.10 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not back it into any intersection, or over a
crosswalk, nor shall the driver back it otherwise unless the movement can be
made in safety, and unless ample warning has been given by hand and horn or
other signals.
(Prior Code, § 18-39) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.11 TRICK RIDING.
   It shall be unlawful for a person operating a bicycle or motorcycle to do
any “trick riding” or any “fancy riding” of any kind on any street.
(Prior Code, § 18-40) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.12 DRIVING ON STREETS BEING PAVED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle over any of the
streets or sidewalks while the streets or sidewalks are being macadamized or
paved, and before the same shall have been rolled or completed. There shall be
placed upon the streets, by the persons doing the work, a notice of warning at
each corner in front and rear of the place the work is being done, or by
guarding that part of the street with plank, rope, lanterns or otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 18-41) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.13 BUS ROUTES.
   It shall be unlawful for buses operating into and out of the city in
interstate and intrastate traffic and which are classified as common public
carriers to be operated through and upon city streets not marked as state
highways and not maintained by the State Highway Department, except in case of
emergency and then over a prescribed route.
(Prior Code, § 18-42) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.14 CORNER CUTTING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle over any sidewalk
area and through any driveway, parking lot or any business entrance at any
intersection, in making either a right or left turn, except for the purpose of
coming to a complete stop to obtain or render some service or make a sale or
purchase. It is the intention of this section to prohibit “corner cutting” by
driving a vehicle from one street into another across any sidewalk and/or
driveway and/or through any driveway.
(Prior Code, § 18-43) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 72.15 COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES CROSSING RAILROAD TRACKS.
   (A)   A violator prohibiting the crossing of railroad tracks, at their
intersections with public streets, where so marked, shall be subject to a fine
of $500, per offense, and if the charge is written as a traffic citation, the
fine of $500, after being paid into the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court
for Cleveland County, shall then be disbursed to the city.
   (B)   A violator prohibiting the crossing of railroad tracks, at their
intersections with public streets, where so marked, shall be subject to a civil
penalty of $500, per offense, with such civil penalty being paid directly to
the city within 20 days after having been cited.
(Ord. 10-23, passed 10-26-2010)
SPEED REGULATIONS
§ 72.25 MAXIMUM LIMITS GENERALLY.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a street or highway within the city
at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then
existing.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, it shall be unlawful
to operate a vehicle in excess of the following speeds:
      (1)   Twenty mph in any business district;
      (2)   Twenty-five mph throughout the entirety of the residential district
or subdivision unless otherwise posted or until such time as this change to the
existing speed regulations is further amended. This provision shall apply to
existing and future residential districts and subdivisions;
      (3)   Forty-five mph in places other than those named in divisions (B)(1)
and (B)(2) above for:
         (a)   All vehicles other than passenger cars, regular passenger
vehicles, pickup trucks of less than one-ton capacity and school buses loaded
with children; and
         (b)   All vehicles, of whatever kind, which are engaged in towing,
drawing or pushing another vehicle; provided, this division (B)(3)(b) shall not
apply to vehicles engaged in towing, drawing or pushing trailers with a gross
weight of not more than 3,000 pounds.
      (4)   Fifty-five mph in places other than those named in divisions (B)(1)
and (B)(2) above for passenger cars, regular passenger-carrying vehicles and
pickup trucks of less than one-ton capacity.
   (C)   The fact that the speed of a vehicle is lower than the foregoing
limits shall not relieve the driver from the duty to decrease speed when
approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching and going around a
curve, when approaching a hill crest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding
roadway, or when special hazards exist with respect to pedestrians or other
traffic or by reasons of weather or street conditions, and speed shall be
decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or
other conveyance on or entering the street or highway, and to avoid causing
injury to any person or property either on or off the street or highway, in
compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
(Prior Code, § 18-60) (Ord. 18-16, passed 8-28-2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 73: STOPPING AND PARKING RULES
Section
   
73.01   Impoundment of vehicles generally
   
73.02   Unattended vehicles
   
73.03   Parking over 48 hours
   
73.04   Parking prohibited in certain places
   
73.05   Parking prohibited for certain purposes
   
73.06   Stopping in streets generally
   
73.07   Stopping with left side of vehicle to curb
   
73.08   Blocking entrances, exits and the like in parking areas
   
73.09   Backing to curb
   
73.10   Moving vehicle of another into prohibited parking area and the like
   
73.11   Moving from parked position
   
73.12   Lights on parked vehicles
   
73.13   Parking for purpose of selling produce
   
73.14   Use of parking lots and certain privately owned public vehicular areas
   
73.15   Parking of trucks
   
73.16   Parking large vehicles
   
73.17   Loading zones
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to regulate and limit vehicular parking, see G.S. § 160A-
301
§ 73.01 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES GENERALLY.
   (A)   Notice. After any vehicle has been left parked or stored on a public
street or alley within the city continuously for more than 48 hours, or
otherwise in violation of the provisions of this chapter, the Police Department
shall place a notice on the vehicle that if it is not moved off the street or
alley within a period of 48 hours from the time the notice is placed thereon,
the vehicle shall be towed off the street or alley under the direction of the
Police Department.
   (B)   Impoundment.
      (1)   Any vehicle parked, left or stored on a public street for more than
48 hours and after notice has been given as above provided, the vehicle shall
be towed off the street under the direction of the Police Department and stored
in a suitable place.
      (2)   In addition to any penalty or fine which may be imposed for the
violation, the owner shall be required to pay the wrecker or towing costs and
the storage costs.
(Prior Code, § 18-70)
Cross-reference:
   Notice to remove abandoned vehicles, see §
101.06
§ 73.02 UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow the
vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first effectively setting the
brakes thereon and stopping the motor of the vehicle, and, when standing upon
any grade, without turning the front wheels of the vehicle to the curb or side
of the street.
(Prior Code, § 18-72) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see G.S. § 20-163
§ 73.03 PARKING OVER 48 HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, leave, park or store any
vehicle on a public street or alley within the city continuously for more than
48 hours.
(Prior Code, § 18-73) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.04 PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN PLACES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to
avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or traffic-control device, excepting emergency vehicles and
personnel, in any of the following places:
   (A)   On any sidewalk;
   (B)   Within an intersection;
   (C)   On a crosswalk, or within 20 feet of any crosswalk;
   (D)   Within 35 feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign, yield sign or
traffic-control signal located at the side of a street or roadway;
   (E)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction, when the
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (F)   On either side of any street approaching a grade crossing within 50
feet of the closest rail; provided that, where existing permanent structures
are located along the street and closer than 50 feet, parking may be permitted
in front of the structures, unless otherwise prohibited, if the parking does
not interfere with the view in either direction of an approaching locomotive or
train, and provided the parking does not interfere with the view of the
railroad track pavement markings;
   (G)   Within 50 feet in either direction from any bridge or other elevated
structure or any underpass structure;
   (H)   Within 15 feet in either direction of the entrance to a hotel,
theater, hospital, sanitorium or any public building;
   (I)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped, standing or parked at the
edge or curb of a street;
   (J)   In front of or within ten feet of any private driveway;
(Prior Code, § 18-74)
   (K)   There shall be no vehicular traffic upon the paved pathways restricted
to pedestrian use at Deal Street Park, the Community Center, Davidson Park or
at the area designated as the walking tract adjacent to the Community Center
facility; unless it shall be vehicles being used for the maintenance of the
parks and recreation facilities; permitted concession vendor vehicles; and any
emergency equipment and vehicles as needed. In the areas designated for parking
and in which parking is allowed at the Community Center, Deal Street Park,
Davidson Park, and at the area designated and used as a walking tract adjacent
to the Community Center facility, there shall be no parking of any commercial
motor vehicles as defined under state law, unless the vehicle is a vehicle
designed to transport passengers. Signs shall be posted conspicuously
indicating the parking restrictions as are contained herein;
   (L)   There shall be no parking from the intersection of Phifer Road on
Fulton Drive, 150 feet towards Lee Street, on both sides of the road;
   (M)   There shall be no parking on the south side of Elm Street, between S.
Cansler Street and S. Railroad Avenue;
   (N)   There shall be no parking on Guyton Loop and Cranford Drive;
   (O)   There shall be no parking on Ellison Street; and
   (P)   There shall be no parking on South Cherokee Street between Kings
Mountain Police Department and West Mountain Street.
(Ord. 99-02, passed 2-23-1999; Ord. 15-20, passed 9-29-2015; Ord. 16-04, passed
3-29-2016; Ord. 19-14, passed 7-30-2019; Ord. 22-01, passed 1-25-2022; Ord. 22-
25, passed 8-30-2022; Ord. 22-36, passed 10-25-2022) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Parking in front of fire hydrant and the like, see G.S. § 20-162
§ 73.05 PARKING PROHIBITED FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any street for the
principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying it for sale;
   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairs
necessitated by an emergency;
   (C)   Storing the vehicle by a garage, dealer or other person when the
storage is not incident to the bona fide use and operation of the vehicle;
   (D)   Storing any detached trailer or van when the towing unit has been
disconnected;
   (E)   Transferring merchandise or freight from one vehicle to another; and
   (F)   Advertising.
(Prior Code, § 18-75) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.06 STOPPING IN STREETS GENERALLY.
   No vehicle shall stop in any street except for the purpose of parking as
prescribed in this chapter, unless the stop is made necessary by the approach
of fire apparatus or other emergency vehicles, by the approach of a funeral or
other procession which is given the right-of-way, by the stopping of a public
conveyance, by the lowering of railway gates, by the giving of traffic signals,
by the passing of some other vehicle or a pedestrian or by some emergency, and
in any case covered by these exceptions, the vehicle shall stop so as not to
obstruct any crosswalk, pedestrian aisle, safety zone, crossing or street
intersection, if it can be avoided.
(Prior Code, § 18-76) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to designate stop intersections, see G.S. § 20-158
§ 73.07 STOPPING WITH LEFT SIDE OF VEHICLE TO CURB.
   No vehicle shall stop with its left side to the curb on any street within
the city limits; except that, on one-way streets, vehicles shall stop headed in
the direction of traffic.
(Prior Code, § 18-77) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.08 BLOCKING ENTRANCES, EXITS AND THE LIKE IN PARKING AREAS.
   (A)   In any area set aside for the use of the public for parking vehicles
therein, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or otherwise leave a
vehicle stationary in a position as to interfere with the free entry into the
parking area or withdrawal therefrom.
   (B)   It shall likewise be unlawful for any person, having entered an area
with a vehicle, to park the vehicle in a manner and in a position with
reference to any other vehicle already parked therein as to interfere with the
free movement of the other vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 18-78) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.09 BACKING TO CURB.
   In no case shall the driver or person in charge of any vehicle permit the
same to remain backed to the curb, except when actually loading or unloading.
(Prior Code, § 18-79) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.10 MOVING VEHICLE OF ANOTHER INTO PROHIBITED PARKING AREA AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall move a vehicle not owned by the person into any prohibited
parking area or sufficiently away from a curb to make the distance unlawful.
(Prior Code, § 18-80) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.11 MOVING FROM PARKED POSITION.
   When a parked vehicle is moved from its parking space, the driver thereof
shall move out in the direction in which the vehicle is headed or, if it is
parked at an angle with the curb, the driver shall back out on that angle until
the driver has cleared other parked vehicles and shall then proceed in the
direction in which the vehicle is most nearly headed.
(Prior Code, § 18-81) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.12 LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.
   The displaying of lights upon a vehicle, when lawfully parked at night upon
the street of the city, shall not be required when there is sufficient light to
reveal any person within a distance of 200 feet upon the street.
(Prior Code, § 18-82) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to enact ordinance similar to above section, see G.S. §
20-134
§ 73.13 PARKING FOR PURPOSE OF SELLING PRODUCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park any truck or wagon for a period
greater than five minutes’ duration within 150 feet of any street intersection
on any street within the corporate limits for the purpose of selling to retail
trade any fruit or vegetables.
(Prior Code, § 18-83) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Regulation of peddlers, see
Ch. 115
§ 73.14 USE OF PARKING LOTS AND CERTAIN PRIVATELY OWNED PUBLIC VEHICULAR AREAS.
   (A)   Definition. A PARKING LOT shall be defined for the purposes of this
section as any area within the city on which more than ten automobiles may be
parked and shall include public parking lots and those parking lots which are
for the principal purpose of providing parking during business hours for
shopping centers, stores, restaurants, drive-ins, theaters and other business
or commercial establishments.
   (B)   Congregation prohibited. It shall be unlawful for more than ten people
to congregate on any one parking lot in the city between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m., eastern standard time, if the closest part of the parking
lot is within 300 feet of a private residence, excepting any person parking a
vehicle on a lot or being on a lot for the purpose of patronizing a business
establishment which is actually open for business between the aforesaid hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., eastern standard time.
   (C)   Enumeration of offenses. It shall be unlawful for any person on a
parking lot in the city between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., eastern
standard time, to do one or more of the following:
      (1)   Talk in a loud or boisterous manner;
      (2)   Drink beer or any kind of alcoholic beverage;
      (3)   Throw any type of bottle, can, container, trash or paper on the
parking lot; and
      (4)   Make noise or disturbance so that persons living in homes or other
dwelling accommodations within 300 feet of the parking lot are disturbed in
their place of living and deprived of their peace and quiet.
   (D)   Privately owned public vehicular areas.
      (1)   No person owning or having control or charge of a vehicle shall
park or leave standing the vehicle upon the privately owned public vehicular
areas and during the hours indicated on Schedule A attached to the ordinance
from which this section is derived, and made a part hereof, by reference.
      (2)   The City Manager is directed to ensure that signs giving notice of
the hours during which parking is prohibited in the areas be placed at the
entrances to each area. The signs shall indicate that vehicles parked contrary
to the provisions of this section shall be towed to storage.
      (3)   The provisions of this section shall be enforceable in the same
manner as is used to enforce other parking regulations and ordinances and
penalties shall be the same as for the corresponding violation on publicly
owned or controlled streets or property.
      (4)   The cost of erecting, placing or installing signs, and the cost of
the necessary signs as determined by the Chief of Police, shall be paid by the
person requesting regulations.
(Prior Code, § 18-84) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.15 PARKING OF TRUCKS.
   (A)   Definition. TRUCK shall mean any vehicle which exceeds 19 feet in
length and exceeds seven feet in width.
   (B)   Parking on city streets prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person to park any truck on any street within the city; provided, however,
that, any truck may be parked temporarily on the streets in event of emergency,
but in that event, a truck shall not be so parked overnight.
   (C)   Exception. City or state vehicles engaged in repair or construction
may park with proper signing.
(Prior Code, § 18-85) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.16 PARKING LARGE VEHICLES.
   Except while actively engaged in loading or unloading, no person shall park
a vehicle exceeding seven feet in width or 19 feet in length on any street.
(Prior Code, § 18-86) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 73.17 LOADING ZONES.
   (A)   The governing body may authorize loading zones for businesses and
industries as needed.
   (B)   Loading zones will be used for the purpose of loading or unloading
only. A one-hour limit is imposed.
   (C)   Parking in a loading zone while not actually engaged in loading or
unloading will be a violation of this section.
(Prior Code, § 18-87) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Maintenance of cleanliness of loading/unloading areas, see §
97.16
CHAPTER 74: GOLF CARTS
Section
   
74.01   Definition
   
74.02   Operation prohibited
   
74.03   Regulation, permits and fees
   
74.04   Operation and traffic laws
   
74.05   Liability disclaimer
   
74.06   Effective date
 
   
74.99   Penalty
§ 74.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GOLF CART. A low speed vehicle, as is more defined by state law, which by
that definition is a vehicle designed and manufactured for operation on a golf
course for sporting or recreational purposes, and that is not capable of
exceeding speeds of 20 mph.
(Ord. 08-24, passed 7-29-2008)
§ 74.02 OPERATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Golf cars are not authorized, allowed or permitted to be operated on
the following streets: N.C. Highway 216; Piedmont Avenue; Battleground Avenue;
Grover Road; King Street; Shelby Road; Kings Mountain Boulevard; Cansler Street
from its intersection with King Street to its intersection with Piedmont
Avenue/Highway 216; Waco Road from its intersection with U.S. Highway 74 to its
intersection with Watterson Street; Cleveland Avenue/N.C. Highway 161; and York
Road/N.C. Highway 161.
   (B)   The operation of golf carts is prohibited on Phifer Road between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. through 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. through 4:00 p.m. on those
days when school may be in session.
   (C)   However, the operation of golf carts may occur on the aforementioned
prohibited streets to cross the street at a clearly marked intersection.
   (D)   Golf carts may be operated on the prohibited streets if such is for
the purpose of participating in a special event, such as an authorized parade,
if, at the time, the prohibited streets have been marked off and closed to
traffic otherwise.
(Ord. 08-24, passed 7-29-2008) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.03 REGULATION, PERMITS AND FEES.
   Golf carts being operated on the permitted streets within the city must be
in compliance with the following.
   (A)   There may be two applications for golf cart permits per household made
each year. For any number greater than two, they must be approved by the City
Manager. All applicants for golf cart permits must be residents within the city
limits.
   (B)   The application must be on a form approved by the city for this
purpose.
   (C)   The applicant must be the owner of the golf cart and provide with the
application, proof of liability insurance in at least the minimum coverages for
liability insurance, as is required for the operation of other motor vehicles
for operation on the streets and highways of the state. The required liability
insurance coverage must be maintained in effect during all times when a permit
issued is in a valid status and/or as long as the golf cart is being operated
on the streets of the city.
   (D)   Permits/stickers will be issued to an owner of only electric or gas
golf carts.
   (E)   All golf carts must be meet minimum requirements and standards for
safety equipment. A photograph of the golf cart for which a permit may be
issued, must be attached to the application applying for issuance of a permit.
   (F)   All golf cart operators must possess a valid driver’s license.
However, one may operate a golf cart if one has been issued a limited learners
permit under those restrictions and requirements as are set out in G.S. § 20-11
and its subparagraphs. A driver or operator 18 years of age and older, with a
medical or physical condition that prevents that individual from being able to
obtain a valid state driver’s license, may be able to operate a golf cart. The
medical condition must be evidenced with professional, certified medical proof
that indicates that the condition prevents the driver or operator from taking a
driver licensing exam. The medical professional must document that the operator
does not possess a medical condition that would prevent the safe operation of a
motor vehicle and this documentation must be updated annually. Any driver or
operator that is exempt from the requirement of a valid state driver’s license
must still present and have on record and in their possession while operating a
golf cart, a valid state identification card.
   (G)   The permit and/or sticker which will be issued by the city, indicating
that the golf cart has been authorized to be operated on the streets of the
city, shall have that permit and/or sticker affixed to the golf cart during its
operation in a prominent area on the golf cart for display.
   (H)   Golf carts by design are equipped to seat a certain number of
passengers. Each golf cart differs in that it may accommodate two to six
passengers generally. This section is designed to regulate overcrowding or
reckless operation of a golf cart. Therefore, no passengers are permitted to
stand on a golf cart while it is in operation.
   (I)   Permits/stickers will be issued annually, and shall be valid from July
1 of a year through June 30 of the following year. The fee to be paid upon the
issuance of permit/sticker shall be in the sum of $20 annually, and as may be
amended, and such is not an amount which may be prorated. Lost or stolen
permits/stickers are the responsibility of the owner. The city shall
immediately be notified in the event of a lost or stolen permit/sticker. The
city may require a new application to be filed for the issuance of a permit/
sticker for that golf cart from which a permit/sticker has been lost or stolen.
This re-application may require the resubmission of any and all fees necessary
before a replacement permit/sticker is issued.
(Ord. 08-24, passed 7-29-2008; Ord. 08-27, passed 8-26-2008) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.04 OPERATION AND TRAFFIC LAWS.
   (A)   Any person who operates a golf cart in the city and fails to receive
or properly display a city permit/sticker, will be subject to the state laws
requiring registration, insurance and any other applicable laws, in addition to
being in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Golf carts will be subject to the traffic laws of the state.
      (1)   All operators must adhere to all laws that apply to normal vehicle
operation, to wit: stop signs, stop lights, one-way streets and the like, all
alcohol laws will also apply.
      (2)   Golf carts will adhere to all traffic flow patterns and will
operate on the right side of the roadway.
      (3)   Golf cart operators must yield the right-of-way to any overtaking
vehicles.
      (4)   Golf carts shall not be operated on sidewalks.
      (5)   Golf carts shall not be operated on private property without the
permission and consent of the property owner.
   (C)   Golf carts that are issued permits to operate under this chapter may
only be used from sunrise until 30 minutes prior to sunset.
   (D)   Golf carts shall be operated within a two-mile radius of the owners’
residence or place of business.
(Ord. 08-24, passed 7-29-2008) Penalty, see §
74.99
§ 74.05 LIABILITY DISCLAIMER.
   This chapter is adopted to address the interest of public safety. Golf carts
are not designed or manufactured to be used on public streets and the city in
no way advocates or endorses their operation on public streets or roads. The
city, by regulating the operation, is merely trying to address obvious safety
issues, and adoption of this chapter is not to be relied upon as a
determination that operation on a public street or public vehicular area is
safe or advisable if done in accordance with this chapter. All persons who
operate or ride upon golf carts on public streets or public vehicular areas do
so at their own risk and peril, and must be observant of and attentive to the
safety of themselves and others, including their passengers, other motorists,
bicyclist and pedestrians. The city has no liability under any theory of
liability and the city assumes no liability for permitting golf carts to be
operated on the public streets and public vehicular areas, under special
legislation granted by the state’s legislature. Any person who operates a golf
cart is responsible for procuring liability insurance sufficient to cover the
risk involved in using a golf cart on public streets and public vehicular areas
of the city.
(Ord. 08-24, passed 7-29-2008)
§ 74.06 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall be and the same is hereby effective upon the date of its
adoption.
(Ord. 08-24, passed 7-29-2008)
§ 74.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whosoever shall violate any provisions of this chapter for which no
other penalty is provided, shall be, upon conviction, guilty of a misdemeanor
and subject to a fine not to exceed $50. Each date that any of the provisions
of this chapter are violated shall constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Any owner of a permitted golf cart and/or an operator of the permitted
owner’s golf cart, who shall have been found to have violated this chapter on
at least two occasions, may be subject to a revocation of the permit issued for
the golf cart and may not be allowed to re-apply for at least two years from
the date of the second violation for a permit/sticker.
(Ord. 08-24, passed 7-29-2008)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
91.   PARKS AND RECREATION; LAKES AND WATERCRAFT
      
92.   JOHN H. MOSS RESERVOIR AREA
      
93.   UTILITY POLES AND CONDUITS
      
94.   LIBRARIES
      
95.   CEMETERIES
      
96.   HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
      
97.   GARBAGE AND TRASH; WEEDS AND JUNK
      
98.   FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
      
99.   ANIMAL SERVICES
      
100.   SIGNS
      
101.   ABANDONED, JUNKED AND NUISANCE VEHICLES
      
102.   ADDRESSING
CHAPTER 90: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
90.001   City Manager, Superintendent to administer
   
90.002   Expenditure of funds
   
90.003   Definitions
Streets and Sidewalks; Drainage
   
90.015   New streets
   
90.016   Subdivision regulations
   
90.017   Private entrances
   
90.018   Right-of-way requirements
   
90.019   Maintenance of existing streets and rights-of-way
   
90.020   Damage to streets; recovery of cost of repair
   
90.021   Protection of streets, sidewalks under construction
   
90.022   Encroachments
   
90.023   Obstruction of streets, sidewalks generally
   
90.024   Unloading of merchandise
   
90.025   License does not grant privilege to use sidewalks
   
90.026   Use of certain vehicles on sidewalks restricted
   
90.027   Closure
   
90.028   Storage of building materials
   
90.029   Removal of snow, ice and other obstructions
   
90.030   Spilling loads prohibited
   
90.031   Certain wheels, tires and the like restricted
   
90.032   Deposit of glass, other sharp objects on streets
   
90.033   Coal, wood deposited on streets
   
90.034   Erection of awnings regulated
   
90.035   Signs and banners across streets
   
90.036   Damage to curbs
   
90.037   Barbed wire prohibited along streets or alleys
   
90.038   Gates and doors not to open on street or sidewalk
   
90.039   Discharge of surface water, waste water
   
90.040   Obstruction of gutters, drains
   
90.041   Naming, changing names of streets
   
90.042   Protection of pedestrians and traffic during construction or other
work
   
90.043   Concrete curb and gutter and drainage facilities constructed by
petition
   
90.044   Street surfacing and resurfacing
   
90.045   Street grades
   
90.046   Street drainage facilities
   
90.047   Minimum street cross-sections
   
90.048   Side ditches
   
90.049   Financing extensions
Sidewalks
   
90.060   New sidewalks
   
90.061   Concrete curb and gutter required
   
90.062   Petitions required
   
90.063   Right-of-way granted
   
90.064   Side selection
   
90.065   Construction costs; responsibility
   
90.066   Actual cost computation
   
90.067   Materials and specifications
   
90.068   Sidewalk damage and replacement
   
90.069   Financing extensions
Storm Drainage
   
90.080   Drainage ditches
   
90.081   Private ditches
   
90.082   Ditch enclosement by owner
   
90.083   Priorities for drainage improvements
   
90.084   New drainage systems
Driveways
   
90.095   Permit required
   
90.096   Removing existing concrete sidewalk
   
90.097   Residential driveways
   
90.098   Commercial, industrial and institutional driveways
   
90.099   Driveway connection materials
   
90.100   Driveway limits
   
90.101   Concrete curb cuts
   
90.102   Owner responsibility
   
90.103   Driveways at intersections
   
90.104   Joint driveways
   
90.105   Driveways near fire hydrants
   
90.106   Driveway design
   
90.107   Driveways near catch basins
Excavations
   
90.120   Permit required
   
90.121   Permit application
   
90.122   Permit duration
   
90.123   Bonds
   
90.124   Fee; deposit
   
90.125   Protection of openings
   
90.126   Filling of openings
   
90.127   Approval of work
Intersections; Shrubs, Brush and the Like
   
90.140   Definition
   
90.141   Enforcement
   
90.142   Restricted areas
   
90.143   Maximum height of shrubs and the like
   
90.144   Minimum clearance of trees
 
   
90.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Billboards near streets, see §
100.03
   Garbage, trash and litter control, see
Ch. 97
   Signs in rights-of-way or across streets, see §
100.02
Statutory reference:
   Establishment and control over municipal streets, see G.S. § 160A-296
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.001 CITY MANAGER, SUPERINTENDENT TO ADMINISTER.
   Except where otherwise provided, the administration of the provisions of
this chapter shall be by the City Manager and the Superintendent of Public
Works, hereinafter called “the Superintendent”.
(Prior Code, § 16-1) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.002 EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS.
   Except on authority from the City Council, the City Manager shall not spend
for street purposes, in any one year, an amount exceeding that which has been
appropriated for street work out of the public funds; nor shall he or she spend
any of the public funds for work on streets which work has by proper resolution
been disapproved by the Board. He or she shall cause to be spent on the
streets, as soon as practical, the necessary public funds for work expressly
ordered by proper resolution of the Board.
(Prior Code, § 16-2) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.003 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Kings Mountain.
   CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER. The standard curb and gutter approved by the City
Engineer.
   CONSTRUCTION. Major work done in widening, placing of concrete curb and
gutter, surfacing or resurfacing the entire street width.
   DITCH LINE. The part of the roadway approximately four feet wide on one or
both sides of the road, graded and sloped to carry off storm waters.
   MAINTENANCE. Minor repairs to side ditches, pipe lines, potholes and
shoulders.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation or
group.
   PRIVATE DITCHES. Any ditch which originates on private property or exists
outside of an accepted right-of-way or storm drainage easement.
   PRIVATE ENTRANCE. A driveway across private property to one or more pieces
of property and for which no public dedication exists.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. A strip of land dedicated to the city for public use.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SHOULDER. The part of the roadway between the edge of the pavement and where
the ditch slope begins.
   STREET. A strip of land dedicated to the city which has been improved to
meet the minimum street standards and has been accepted for maintenance by the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 16-3) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS; DRAINAGE
§ 90.015 NEW STREETS.
   (A)   All new streets added to the city street system shall be only those
recommended by the City Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the City
Council.
   (B)   All new streets or street extensions shall be designed by a registered
engineer, at the developer’s expense, submitted and approved by the engineer
designated by the city or the city.
   (C)   Care should be taken to provide for drainage control.
(Prior Code, § 16-16) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.016 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
   All new streets added to the city street system shall meet all requirements
of the existing city subdivision ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 16-17) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.017 PRIVATE ENTRANCES.
   (A)   Any entrance off a public street to one or more pieces of property
which does not have a right-of-way dedicated for public street use shall be
considered private.
   (B)   No public funds shall be spent toward the construction or maintenance
of any private entrance.
(Prior Code, § 16-18) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.018 RIGHT-OF-WAY REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   A minimum right-of-way required by the subdivision ordinance shall be
granted to the city for all public street uses as specified by the subdivision
ordinance.
   (B)   Maintenance of the right-of-way, to include mowing, trimming and
disposal of trash and debris, shall be the responsibility of the landowner.
(Prior Code, § 16-19) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.019 MAINTENANCE OF EXISTING STREETS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   (A)   Only those streets shown on the most recently certified Powell Bill
Map will be maintained by the city.
   (B)   Maintenance shall consist of cleaning, resurfacing, patching potholes
and utility line cuts, machine grading on dirt streets and side ditch cleaning.
   (C)   Mud, earth or rocks or any other type of debris originating from
construction sites or from vehicles entering or leaving construction sites
shall be removed from the city’s streets, gutters and ditches by the offender.
(Prior Code, § 16-20) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.020 DAMAGE TO STREETS; RECOVERY OF COST OF REPAIR.
   (A)   No person shall injure, deface or mar, in any manner whatsoever, any
of the streets of the city.
   (B)   The city shall have the right and privilege to repair any injury,
defacement or mar and assess the cost thereof against the offender.
(Prior Code, § 16-21) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.021 PROTECTION OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS UNDER CONSTRUCTION.
   No person shall ride, lead or drive or cause to be ridden, led or driven any
horse or animal, or drive or cause to be driven any automobile or other vehicle
upon any street or sidewalk when the same is barricaded and under the process
of construction or, in any other manner, cause any damage to the street or
sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 16-22) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.022 ENCROACHMENTS.
   It shall be the duty of the Codes Inspector to notify all persons about to
erect any building, sidewalk, wall or fence near the street, or any public way
or alley, not to encroach upon the street, public way or alley and if, in the
opinion of the City Manager, any obstruction is being or has been constructed
on any street or public alley, the city shall cause a survey of the line of the
street or alley to be made by a competent surveyor, and if the survey shall
show that the street or alley is obstructed by any building, sidewalk, wall or
fence, the owner shall be required to pay the costs of the survey and shall be
required to remove all obstructions at once.
(Prior Code, § 16-23) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.023 OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS, SIDEWALKS GENERALLY.
   (A)   No person shall obstruct in any manner any of the streets or sidewalks
in the city in a manner as to hinder or delay the travel thereon on foot or
otherwise. In this case, it shall be the duty of the police to cause the
congregation to disperse or obstruction removed and keep the streets and
sidewalks clear for the travel of the public.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed so as to prohibit the members of
the Police Department from barricading, roping off or otherwise obstructing any
street or sidewalk in the city when the same may become necessary for the
protection, health or welfare of the citizens of the city.
(Prior Code, § 16-24) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.024 UNLOADING OF MERCHANDISE.
   No person shall unload boxes or packages of goods, wares and merchandise on
any sidewalk in the city; provided, however, that, if any person has no back
door or cellar through which he or she can unload his or her goods, merchandise
and the like, then he or she shall be allowed to load and unload in the street
in front of his or her place of business, and convey his or her boxes, packages
and the like across the sidewalk to or from his or her store or place of
business; provided that, the time and location are approved by the Chief of
Police.
(Prior Code, § 16-25) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.025 LICENSE DOES NOT GRANT PRIVILEGE TO USE SIDEWALKS.
   No license issued by the city for any fruit, vegetable, candy or other
stands or stores shall carry the privilege of using any street, alley or
sidewalk for or as a store, for the display of goods, wares or merchandise or
for other store purposes.
(Prior Code, § 16-26) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
Cross-reference:
   Licensing regulations generally, see
Ch. 110
§ 90.026 USE OF CERTAIN VEHICLES ON SIDEWALKS RESTRICTED.
   No person shall ride, pull, push or drive any vehicle, except a baby
carriage, on any of the sidewalks within the fire limits.
(Prior Code, § 16-27) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.027 CLOSURE.
   (A)   No person shall close or cause to be closed for traffic or any other
purpose any street, except on permission of the City Manager, and then only
when taking precautions as to safeguard the public, as may be directed by the
city authorities.
   (B)   (1)   The City Manager or his or her designee may declare a temporary
road closure for streets within local authority during the days and times in
which city sponsored events are being held.
      (2)   City staff shall notify the residents and businesses within the
confines of the street closings two weeks before the event of those city
streets which will be closed to traffic for the event.
      (3)   Signs shall be erected giving notice of the limits and times of the
event or festival, and implementation of adequate traffic control shall be
available to guide through vehicles around the festival area.
(Ord. passed 9-26-1989; Ord. 21-14, passed 4-27-2021)  Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.028 STORAGE OF BUILDING MATERIALS.
   No storage of building materials shall be allowed on any public right-of-
way.
(Prior Code, § 16-29) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.029 REMOVAL OF SNOW, ICE AND OTHER OBSTRUCTIONS.
   Every owner or occupant of a lot adjacent to an improved sidewalk shall
remove any snow, ice or other obstruction which shall have accumulated thereon
from the sidewalk within eight hours.
(Prior Code, § 16-30) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.030 SPILLING LOADS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to spill or cause to be spilled
from any vehicle any crushed rock, earth, concrete, sand, asphalt or other
similar material that might damage the surface of the permanently paved streets
of the city.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the person hauling the material to provide
tight vehicles and not to load to an extent that they will spill.
   (C)   The spilled material will be removed immediately by the perpetrator or
the material will be removed by the city and billed to the perpetrator.
(Prior Code, § 16-31) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.031 CERTAIN WHEELS, TIRES AND THE LIKE RESTRICTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or cause to be driven, any
traction engine or other vehicle with lugs or corrugations in the wheels
thereof over the permanently paved streets of the city, unless suitable
provision is made by planking or otherwise to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent so that the corrugations or lugs will not damage the pavement.
(Prior Code, § 16-32) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.032 DEPOSIT OF GLASS, OTHER SHARP OBJECTS ON STREETS.
   No person shall throw, place or deposit any glass or other sharp cutting
substance, or any injurious obstruction in, or upon, any of the public streets
of the city.
(Prior Code, § 16-33) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.033 COAL, WOOD DEPOSITED ON STREETS.
   (A)   No firewood or coal shall be deposited within any public right-of-way.
   (B)   Each day any coal or firewood shall remain on the street, shall
constitute a separate violation of this section by the owner of the coal or
firewood.
(Prior Code, § 16-34) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.034 ERECTION OF AWNINGS REGULATED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any awning or other
similar object in front of any building extending over the sidewalk, which has
a clearance of less than seven feet above the level of any sidewalk, or which
extends over the traveled portion of the street in front of the building to
which it may be attached; provided, however, that, stationary awning arms shall
be at least eight feet above the level of the sidewalk.
(Prior Code, § 16-35) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.035 SIGNS AND BANNERS ACROSS STREETS.
   No person shall erect or place any sign or banner of wood, cloth, metal or
other material across any street or sidewalk in the city without permission by
the City Manager; provided, however, that, the City Council shall have power to
revoke any permit to erect or maintain any sign.
(Prior Code, § 16-36) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
Cross-reference:
   Advertising generally, see
Ch. 112
§ 90.036 DAMAGE TO CURBS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to break and remove the street curbing
in any of the city’s improved streets, without first obtaining a driveway
permit from the City Code’s office.
(Prior Code, § 16-37) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.037 BARBED WIRE PROHIBITED ALONG STREETS OR ALLEYS.
   No person shall erect, maintain or allow on any premises along any street,
alley or easement of the city any barbed wire or barbed wire fence.
(Prior Code, § 16-39) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.038 GATES AND DOORS NOT TO OPEN ON STREET OR SIDEWALK.
   No person shall erect or maintain any gate or door which opens outwardly on
any street or sidewalk in the city.
(Prior Code, § 16-40) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.039 DISCHARGE OF SURFACE WATER, WASTE WATER.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any lot or building to
throw, or cause to be thrown or discharged, from any premises, water or liquid
of any kind, sufficient to put any part of the street, sidewalk or alley in a
nuisance condition. Provisions shall be made so that roof drainlines shall
discharge flow under the sidewalk to the gutter, such that no sheeting across
sidewalks occurs.
(Prior Code, § 16-41) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.040 OBSTRUCTION OF GUTTERS, DRAINS.
   No person shall obstruct or in any way interfere with any gutter, ditch,
catch basin or other portion of any drainage system maintained by the city. All
persons placing or using any bridge or passway over any gutter or drain on any
street shall keep the bridge or passway from obstructing the gutter or drain on
the street. The City Manager shall have the right to remove any bridge or
passway while any work is being done on the streets.
(Prior Code, § 16-42) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.041 NAMING, CHANGING NAMES OF STREETS.
   The naming or renaming of all streets must first be approved by the City
Council before the names of the streets are placed thereon.
(Prior Code, § 16-43) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.042 PROTECTION OF PEDESTRIANS AND TRAFFIC DURING CONSTRUCTION OR OTHER
WORK.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavations within any
street or sidewalk, tear down any building or remodel or repair, or cause to be
torn down, remodeled or repaired, any building until the person shall have
first erected or caused to be erected, a suitable walkway, under the direction
of the Superintendent, so as not to interfere with pedestrians or the general
traveling public, and to protect the pedestrians or traveling public from
bodily harm and danger.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to mix or cause to be mixed any
mortar, cement or other like preparation, upon any public right-of-way. Under
highly unusual circumstances the Public Works Director may grant an exception
to this provision subject to any conditions he or she deems necessary to
protect public safety and all existing public improvements.
(Prior Code, § 16-44) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
Cross-reference:
   Protection of open excavations, see §
90.125
§ 90.043 CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER AND DRAINAGE FACILITIES CONSTRUCTED BY
PETITION.
   Concrete curb and gutter and drainage facilities may be placed on any street
upon a valid petition being received and approved by the City Council, pursuant
to G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 10. The total cost of the curb and gutter and drainage
facilities, including design, construction and inspection, shall be borne 50%
by the city and 50% by the benefitted property owners. If curb and gutter
facilities were not included in new subdivisions, due to the granting of a
variance or exception, property owners shall pay 100% for any petitioned curb,
gutter and drainage work.
(Prior Code, § 16-45) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989; Ord. 01-47, passed 10-30-2001)
§ 90.044 STREET SURFACING AND RESURFACING.
   (A)   The city may surface, upon receipt and approval by the City Council of
a valid petition, any unpaved street in the city where there exists a public
street right-of-way. The city will pay 50% of the total cost. The benefitted
property owners shall pay 50% of the actual cost. This section covers only
assessments for unpaved streets that existed prior to 7-1-2001.
   (B)   Only those streets on the system which have been accepted by the City
Council shall be resurfaced from time to time by the city. The City Council
shall set priorities annually for the streets to be resurfaced, after
recommendations have been received from the Public Works Director. All utility
taps should be made prior to paving or surfacing.
(Prior Code, § 16-46) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989; Ord. 01-47, passed 10-30-2001)
§ 90.045 STREET GRADES.
   Unless necessitated by exceptional topography and subject to the approval of
the Public Works Director, street grades shall not be more than 7% on major and
minor thoroughfares and shall not exceed more than 9% on local and marginal
access streets, and within the bubble of cul-de-sacs a maximum of 3%. No
intersection should have more than a 4% vertical grade within 50 feet of the
intersection.
(Prior Code, § 16-47) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.046 STREET DRAINAGE FACILITIES.
   (A)   On existing city streets without curb and gutter, the city will
construct and maintain, at no cost to the property owners, the necessary street
drainage ditches.
   (B)   The ditches shall be constructed on the approved street right-of-way
or on additional drainage easements.
(Prior Code, § 16-48) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.047 MINIMUM STREET CROSS-SECTIONS.
   Following are the minimum street cross-section specifications:
   (A)   Concrete curb and gutter, 31 feet back to back;
   (B)   Paved streets 25 feet in width may be allowed by variance of the City
Council when the proposed development has lots equal to or greater than three-
fourths acre, and proper ditching and culverts are installed;
   (C)   Six-foot shoulders on street fills and cuts on both sides;
   (D)   Three to one on slope on banks and fills; and
   (E)   Fifteen-foot minimum curb radius at intersections.
(Prior Code, § 16-49) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.048 SIDE DITCHES.
   (A)   (1)   All streets shall have concrete curb and gutter rainfall runoff,
in conformance with requirements of the subdivision ordinance.
      (2)   However, if a variance is granted under § 91 of the subdivision
ordinance, all ditches and shoulders shall conform to the specifications of the
city.
   (B)   (1)   Any person wishing to enclose a ditch inside the street right-
of-way or extend the pipe that exists in the right-of-way shall first contact
the Public Works Director or engineer designated by the city.
      (2)   This work is to be done at the property owner’s expense and is to
include material, labor, equipment and design, unless it has become a budgeted
priority under §
90.083.
(Prior Code, § 16-50) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.049 FINANCING EXTENSIONS.
   For considerations of financing extensions, either within or outside
corporate limits, the applicant is referred to the latest policy adopted by the
City Council and filed with the City Clerk. No financial agreement not within
the outlines of this policy, or not approved by the City Council at open public
meeting shall have the effect of the city policy.
(Ord. 01-47, passed 10-30-2001)
SIDEWALKS
§ 90.060 NEW SIDEWALKS.
   No new sidewalks shall be constructed along any street until the plans and
specifications have been approved by the Public Works Director or engineer
designated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 16-65) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.061 CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER REQUIRED.
   No new sidewalks shall be constructed along any street until concrete curb
and gutter and adequate storm drainage facilities have been installed.
Wheelchair ramps and detectable warnings shall be required at all
intersections.
(Prior Code, § 16-66) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.062 PETITIONS REQUIRED.
   The City Council may act on petitions for sidewalk construction on any curb
and gutter street, pursuant to G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 10. The petition must be
signed by a majority of the property owners on both sides of the street who own
a majority of the property frontage.
(Prior Code, § 16-67) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.063 RIGHT-OF-WAY GRANTED.
   Right-of-way easements shall be granted to the city by the property owners
of the side or sides on which the sidewalk will be constructed.
(Prior Code, § 16-68) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.064 SIDE SELECTION.
   The property owners shall select the side or both sides on which the
sidewalk will be constructed, unless there is an existing sidewalk to which the
new one can be connected. In that case, the sidewalk shall be constructed on
the side where the existing sidewalk is located.
(Prior Code, § 16-69) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.065 CONSTRUCTION COSTS; RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The city will pay 50% of the total cost.
   (B)   The benefitting property owners shall pay the other 50% of the total
cost using any assessment formula the City Council may choose under G.S. Ch.
160A, Art. 10.
(Prior Code, § 16-70) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.066 ACTUAL COST COMPUTATION.
   The actual cost shall be the total cost of all work necessary to complete
the project, such as, but not limited to, design, grading, driveway
adjustments, wall replacements, fence realignment, tree and shrubbery removal
and replacement, lawn rebuilding and reseeding, fire hydrant relocation, water
meter relocation, power pole relocations, materials, labor and equipment.
(Prior Code, § 16-71) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.067 MATERIALS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   All new sidewalk material shall be class B concrete. The minimum width shall
be five feet with a marking joint each five feet and an expansion joint with
one-half inch expansion joint materials placed each 40 feet. Additional
expansion joint material shall be used in every place where the walk joins curb
and gutter, walls, buildings and the like. No trees, hydrants, electric or
telephone poles or other obstructions shall be placed in the sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 16-72) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.068 SIDEWALK DAMAGE AND REPLACEMENT.
   (A)   All sidewalk damage which occurs during the construction of a new
building or additional work being done to an existing building or where
property is being developed shall be corrected by replacing the damaged walk
with new concrete, to the standards listed in §
90.067, at the property owner’s expense.
   (B)   In order to maintain the best appearance and safety of the sidewalks
adjacent to city streets, city owned properties and rights-of-way, it shall be
required that whenever a sidewalk cut is required for any reason, including but
not limited to, the installation or removal of any utility or service line, the
contractor, property owner, and/or city staff shall remove one full section, or
not less than four feet, of sidewalk and replace it with poured concrete to the
standards listed in §
90.067.
   (C)   The following safety measures are required to begin immediately
following the removal of the sidewalk, during and following construction, until
the final replacement sidewalk is in place.
      (1)   Sidewalk sections that have been removed must be marked with cones
or tape which includes reflective material to prevent accidents during non-
daylight hours, except during times when crews are actively working in that
immediate area of the project (when cones or tape shall hinder the work of the
crews).
      (2)   Sections where work has been completed shall be filled with gravel
until such time as they are permanently repaired with concrete to the standards
listed in §
90.067.
(Prior Code, § 16-73) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989; Ord. 16-32, passed 9-27-2016)
§ 90.069 FINANCING EXTENSIONS.
   For considerations of financing extensions, either within or outside
corporate limits, the applicant is referred to the latest policy adopted by the
City Council and filed with the City Clerk. No financial agreement not within
the outlines of this policy, or not approved by the City Council at open public
meeting shall have the effect of the city policy.
(Ord. 01-47, passed 10-30-2001)
STORM DRAINAGE
§ 90.080 DRAINAGE DITCHES.
   Where natural drainage ditches cross private property, it shall be the
responsibility for the property owner to keep the ditch banks clean and to keep
the ditch clear of all obstacles which impede the natural flow of rainfall
runoff. The property owner who changes the natural flow of water or intensifies
the flow of water off his or her property may be liable to the adjacent
property owner for any damages in accordance with state law. No buildings shall
be constructed on top of drainage systems or within the drainage easement.
(Prior Code, § 16-80) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.081 PRIVATE DITCHES.
   Any ditch which originates on private property or exists outside of an
accepted right-of-way or storm drainage easement shall be considered a private
ditch. The city will not participate in the construction or maintenance of a
private ditch enclosement.
(Prior Code, § 16-81) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.082 DITCH ENCLOSEMENT BY OWNER.
   Plans and specifications shall be approved by the Stormwater Department, the
Department of Public Works and the Codes Department on all planned ditch
enclosure projects.
(Prior Code, § 16-82) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989; Ord. 16-33, passed 9-27-2016)
§ 90.083 PRIORITIES FOR DRAINAGE IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The city may participate in the enclosement of ditches and improvement
of existing drainage pipes and catch basins on a priority basis. The city will
determine the feasibility of enclosing the ditches or improving existing
drainage pipes and catch basins, and notify the adjoining property owner(s) of
its intentions. The City Council shall annually determine in its budgeting
process, if not before, those projects to be undertaken. Any drainage request
shall be forwarded to the Public Works Director or engineer designated by the
city for a recommendation to the City Council for a priority ranking, using the
system below. Upon receiving the recommendation, the City Council shall
determine the priority of the request for future funding.
   (B)   The city shall bear the full cost of design, labor, materials and
equipment for those projects listed below as first priority. For all other
priorities, the city will participate in enclosing or improving a ditch by
furnishing labor and equipment. All design and materials costs for priorities
other than first priority shall be borne by the property owners benefitted
using any cost assessment formula allowed by G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 10 and
approved by the City Council. In addition, benefitted property owners must
provide any required drainage easements or rights-of-way to the city at no
cost. All work will be performed or contracted by the city, with payment of
property owners’ shares by special assessment. No petition is required for
drainage improvements, but the City Council may take into consideration the
willingness of the benefitting property owners to pay special assessments, in
determining whether to undertake a particular drainage project. All design of
drainage facilities is subject to approval by the Public Works Director or
engineer designated by the city and must meet a minimum design standard of a
ten-year storm water runoff. A 20- to 50-year storm water runoff design shall
be required for major watershed areas:
      (1)   First priority. Will be existing drainage facilities and ditches
which are the responsibility of the city and are inadequately sized or
constructed so that they represent a hazard to life or property;
      (2)   Second priority. Will be ditch lines receiving direct discharge
from a city-maintained street;
      (3)   Third priority. Will be ditch lines receiving secondary discharge
from a city-maintained street. Example: a ditch line receiving water from an
abutting lot which receives direct discharge from a city-maintained street;
      (4)   Fourth priority. Will be side ditches on reconstructed or
resurfaced streets; and
      (5)   Fifth priority. Will be side ditches along existing city-maintained
streets.
(Prior Code, § 16-83) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.084 NEW DRAINAGE SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Owners or developers of property one acre or more in size shall submit
for approval a soil erosion and sedimentation control plan meeting the
regulations of the state. The city will review and approve the plan and forward
it for review and approval by the state.
   (B)   Owners or developers of property one acre or more in size, or
containing two or more lots, shall submit plans and specifications for the
construction of a drainage system capable of handling the storm water runoff
from a ten-year storm, with no increase in the release rate and not causing
erosion or other damage to the downstream drainage ditches and facilities. The
plans and specifications shall be certified by a registered engineer licensed
in the state. The owners or developers must install at their cost the
improvements required by the plans and specifications, with all necessary
easements, rights-of-way and drainage system improvements dedicated to the city
at no cost. After acceptance of the dedication, the city shall be responsible
for maintenance of the accepted drainage system.
(Prior Code, § 16-84) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
DRIVEWAYS
§ 90.095 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A permit issued by the City Codes Inspector shall be obtained along with
specifications for any new driveway, cutting of a curb or the widening or
relocation of any existing driveway.
(Prior Code, § 16-95) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.096 REMOVING EXISTING CONCRETE SIDEWALK.
   (A)   Where a concrete sidewalk exists, the entire portion affected by the
new driveway shall be removed to the nearest marking joint each side of the
driveway. The old sidewalk shall be matched to the new driveway with new
concrete.
   (B)   The maximum slope on the matching sidewalk or on the driveway ramp
shall be two inches in 12 inches maximum when measured in any direction.
(Prior Code, § 16-96) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.097 RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAYS.
   Only two driveways shall be permitted for any one residence. Any one
driveway or combination of driveways shall not exceed 24 feet in width at the
curbline or pavement-shoulder line. Any two driveways to any one piece of
property shall be separated by at least 30 feet. Not more than 50% of any one
side of any residential lot may be used for driveways.
(Prior Code, § 16-97) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.098 COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   Entrances and exits to public streets shall be placed and constructed
in accordance with the Policy on Street and Driveway Access to North Carolina
Highways, adopted by the State Department of Transportation (NCDOT) as may be
amended.
   (B)   Plans and studies as required by the city shall be submitted and
reviewed for compliance with city plans, codes and standards prior to the
issuance of a permit or the start of construction.
   (C)   The above category of driveways must also be approved by the State
Department of Transportation when on a state maintained road.
(Prior Code, § 16-98) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989; Ord. 96-19, passed 8-27-1996)
§ 90.099 DRIVEWAY CONNECTION MATERIALS.
   (A)   Where either concrete curb and gutter or concrete sidewalk or pavement
is adjacent to a proposed drive, concrete shall be the only material used for
any new driveway connection.
   (B)   Asphalt or stone will be permitted on a dirt or asphalt street when no
concrete is adjacent.
(Prior Code, § 16-99) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.100 DRIVEWAY LIMITS.
   The control limits of this chapter for any driveway shall be the street
right-of-way line, the back side of a concrete walk and the back side of
concrete curb and gutter or the pavement-shoulder line.
(Prior Code, § 16-100) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.101 CONCRETE CURB CUTS.
   A concrete driveway must be planned and a driveway permit secured before any
concrete shall be cut.
(Prior Code, § 16-101) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.102 OWNER RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of any property owner to construct and
maintain any private driveway from the street right-of-way line to the back of
the curb or the pavement-shoulder line. This includes the area across any
concrete sidewalk.
   (B)   When any private driveway becomes a hazard to the safety of
pedestrians using a concrete walk, the owner shall be notified and corrective
action shall be taken within a 30-day period.
(Prior Code, § 16-102) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.103 DRIVEWAYS AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   No driveway shall be permitted to extend into the curved portion of
any concrete curb radius or beyond the back edge of any intersecting sidewalk.
   (B)   No driveway edge shall extend closer than 25 feet from the back of the
curbline of the intersecting street.
(Prior Code, § 16-103) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.104 JOINT DRIVEWAYS.
   Joint driveways will be permitted if the driveway conforms to all other
sections of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 16-104) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.105 DRIVEWAYS NEAR FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   No driveway edge shall be constructed closer than 15 feet to any fire
hydrant.
   (B)   Fire hydrants will be moved at the owner’s cost.
(Prior Code, § 16-105) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.106 DRIVEWAY DESIGN.
   (A)   Driveways shall conform to the city’s standard design.
   (B)   The driveway slope to the gutter shall not be extended through any
concrete sidewalk.
   (C)   The driveway shall also conform to all state regulations to
accommodate handicapped people.
(Prior Code, § 16-106) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.107 DRIVEWAYS NEAR CATCH BASINS.
   No driveway edge shall be constructed closer than five feet to any drainage
catch basin.
(Prior Code, § 16-107) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
EXCAVATIONS
§ 90.120 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall open, cut or excavate any street or sidewalk in the city
until a written permit shall have been granted and ordered issued by the Codes
Department and approved by the Public Works Director.
(Prior Code, § 16-115) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.121 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   No permit shall be granted under the provisions of this subchapter for the
opening or excavation of any street or sidewalk, except upon written
application therefor, stating the length and width of the opening desired to be
made and the time required to complete the work thereon, duly filed with the
City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 16-116) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.122 PERMIT DURATION.
   No permit shall be issued under the provisions of this subchapter, nor shall
any opening or excavation in any street or sidewalk be kept open, for a longer
period of time than, in the judgment of the Director, is necessary to complete
the work to be done under the permit.
(Prior Code, § 16-117) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.123 BONDS.
   No permit shall be issued under the provisions of this subchapter to any
person until the person shall have filed with the City Clerk, a bond in the sum
of 25% of the contract or a minimum of $5,000, which shall cover and embrace
any work, opening or excavation done or performed under any permit issued
during a period of 12 months after the date of the bond. The bond shall be
approved by the City Manager and shall indemnify the city from all claims,
suits, actions and proceedings of every character which may be brought against
it for any injuries or damages to any person or property received or sustained
by any person resulting from any accident that may occur upon any work or
excavation done by authority of any permit, whether caused by the negligence of
the permittee, the permittee’s agent, servant or employees or otherwise, or
from any unforseen contingency that may occur, or from any act of omission or
commission of the permittee, agent, servant or employee, during the performance
of any work or excavation.
(Prior Code, § 16-118) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.124 FEE; DEPOSIT.
   (A)   The fee for cutting streets or sidewalks shall be the actual total
cost thereof, a deposit. Equal to the estimated cost as determined by the
Director, shall be placed with the city upon making application for the
excavation.
   (B)   When the opening is being made and it is found that the cost will be
larger than was estimated in the application, the applicant shall immediately
pay the city the remainder of the fee which would have been charged for the
opening or cut in the first instance. Any excess shall be returned to the
depositor.
   (C)   All fees collected for the purpose of opening or cutting of any street
or sidewalk in the city shall be paid into the General Fund.
   (D)   The deposit required herein shall not be exacted or collected from any
person doing or performing any work or excavation contemplated in this
subchapter by virtue and under authority of any contract with the city for the
work or excavation.
(Prior Code, § 16-119) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.125 PROTECTION OF OPENINGS.
   (A)   No person making an excavation in the street or sidewalk, for any
purpose whatsoever, shall fail to cover the excavation with planks or place
ropes with red flags along the same three feet from the ground, or shall fail
to place a sufficient number of red lights and barricades around the
excavations before dark, and to keep the lights burning all night every night
the excavation remains open.
   (B)   Excavations in or near any street or sidewalk shall be securely
covered or closed at all times when persons are not at work therein.
(Prior Code, § 16-120) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.126 FILLING OF OPENINGS.
   All openings made in any street or sidewalk under the provisions of this
subchapter shall immediately upon the completion thereof be filled in and the
surface thereof be made flush with adjacent surfaces. Any hard surface, macadam
or asphalt removed shall be replaced by the city at the expense of the
applicant granted permission to open the street or sidewalk. Each day the
opening is left unfilled in violation of the section shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 16-121) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.127 APPROVAL OF WORK.
   All work done and performed under the provisions of this subchapter shall be
subject to the inspection of the Director or assistants. The work shall be done
in accordance with specifications to be furnished by the Director, and shall
not be considered as completed, nor shall the permittee be released from
liability to restore the street or sidewalk to the condition in which it was
before the work or excavation was commenced, until its final condition is
approved by the Director and the City Manager.
(Prior Code, § 16-122) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
INTERSECTIONS; SHRUBS, BRUSH AND THE LIKE
§ 90.140 DEFINITION.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the phrase STREET GUTTER FLOW LINE
shall mean the street gutter flow line of the curb adjacent to and bordering
upon each restricted area; in the event there be no curb, the height
restrictions set forth in this subchapter shall be based upon the actual level
of the paved or used portion of the public street adjacent to and bordering
upon each restricted area.
(Prior Code, § 16-125) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.141 ENFORCEMENT.
   In addition to any penalty which may be imposed for the violation of this
subchapter, the city shall be entitled to enter upon and remove from the
triangular corner areas described in this subchapter any of the growths
prohibited by this subchapter. The entry and removal shall be without liability
to the owners thereof.
(Prior Code, § 16-126) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 90.142 RESTRICTED AREAS.
   The areas in the city, restricted by the provisions of this subchapter,
include the visibility triangle as defined by § 156.40.01 of the Unified
Development Ordinance entitled "Measurements.
(Prior Code, § 16-127) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989; Ord. 24-37, passed 9-12-2024)
§ 90.143 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF SHRUBS AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall plant, grow or maintain in any restricted area any plant,
hedge, shrub or other growth, except trees, at a height greater than three feet
from the street gutter flow line.
(Prior Code, § 16-128) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.144 MINIMUM CLEARANCE OF TREES.
   Any trees planted, grown and maintained in any restricted area shall not
have branches or foliage extending from the trunk thereof at a height lower
than 15 feet from the street gutter flow line.
(Prior Code, § 16-129) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
90.999
§ 90.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person who shall violate any provision within this chapter shall
be subject to a civil penalty of $50, to be recovered in a civil action in the
nature of a debt if not paid voluntarily within 72 hours after having been
cited for the violation. Each day the violation shall continue to exist after
the aforementioned 72 hours shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
subject to a civil penalty of $10 per day, in addition to the original civil
penalty of $50 for the violation. This provision is adopted pursuant to and in
accordance with G.S. § 160A-175 and may be enforced by any one, all or a
combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 16-141) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
CHAPTER 91: PARKS AND RECREATION; LAKES AND WATERWAYS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   General rules
   
91.02   Sex offenders in or around recreation areas
   
91.03   Playground, parks, and walking track hours
   
91.04   Use of playground equipment
Municipal Lakes Generally
   
91.15   Office of Park Ranger
   
91.16   Fishing license
   
91.17   Motorboats prohibited; exceptions
   
91.18   Manner of fishing restricted
   
91.19   Hunting prohibited
   
91.20   Swimming
   
91.21   Intoxicated persons; use, possession of intoxicants
   
91.22   Minors
 
   
91.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Driving on play streets, see §
72.05
   John H. Moss Reservoir Area, see
Ch. 92
Statutory reference:
   Administration of parks and recreation program, see G.S. § 160A-354
   Boating and water safety, see G.S. §§ 75A-1 et seq.
   Conservation of marine and estuarine and wildlife resources, see G.S. §§
113-127 et seq.
   Municipal recreation programs and facilities, see G.S. §§ 160A-350 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 GENERAL RULES.
   The following policies and procedures are established for the recreation
program to ensure and provide enjoyable recreation programs.
   (A)   All athletic leagues and special athletic programs utilizing city-
owned facilities must be approved and sanctioned by the Director.
   (B)   All league schedules, field assignments and use of facilities are the
responsibility of the Director.
   (C)   Special tournaments (local, district, state and national competition)
must be approved in conjunction with the Director and the Superintendent of
Parks and Recreation.
   (D)   Special tournaments and functions not directed by the city are subject
to the adopted fee structure for use of recreational facilities. All fees shall
be paid to the city.
   (E)   Youth leagues sponsored or approved by the city must provide accident
insurance prior to practice and league competition. Insurance shall be
purchased by league fee, player fee or sponsor fee, whichever the league
chooses.
   (F)   A copy of the insurance coverage will be presented to the athletic
director for all youth programs not conducted by the city.
   (G)   Adult teams and leagues are responsible for their own accident
insurance.
   (H)   Neither the city, nor the employees of the city, will be held
responsible for any damage to personal property, stolen or lost items.
   (I)   League rules (adult and youth) must provide for spectator and team
policies pertaining to individual and team disciplinary procedures for
violations of league rules, city ordinances along with city policies.
   (J)   Programs conducted by the city have priority over all programs
utilizing city facilities.
(Prior Code, § 14-4)
   (K)   The Parks and Recreation Advisory Commission is hereby authorized to
establish reasonable rules and regulations concerning the operation of the
walking track at Jake Early Memorial Park. The rules and regulations shall be
conspicuously posted on the walking track property; and refusal to obey the
rules and regulations shall result in expulsion from the park, and further
enforcement of this division (K) shall be under provisions of §
10.99.
(Ord. passed 6-5-1990; Ord. passed 7-31-1990)
§ 91.02 SEX OFFENDERS IN OR AROUND RECREATION AREAS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      CITY OWNED PARKS AND RECREATIONAL FACILITIES. Any city owned and
maintained park or recreational facility; inclusive of the boat landing and
campground at John H. Moss Reservoir (Oak Grove Road) and the landing and park
area located off New Camp Creek Church Road at the John H. Moss Reservoir.
      REGISTERED SEX OFFENDER. An individual who is registered by any state or
federal agency as a sex offender and whose name is published on any state or
federal registered sex offender listing, including, but not limited to, the sex
offender registry established in G.S. Ch. 14, Art. 27A.
   (B)   It shall constitute a general offense against the regulations of the
city for any person or persons registered as a sex offender with the state or
any other state or federal agency to knowingly enter into or upon any city
owned parks and recreational facility, as defined in division (A) above.
   (C)   The Chief of the Police Department for the city shall be charged with
having this regulation posted at the main entrance of each area being so
regulated within 30 days of the adoption of this section.
   (D)   This section shall be effective upon the date of its adoption.
(Ord. 08-23, passed 7-29-2008) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.03 PLAYGROUND, PARKS, AND WALKING TRACK HOURS.
   (A)   No person or persons shall be upon the premises which are the Mayor
Rick Murphrey Children’s Park playground area located on Cleveland Avenue,
Kings Mountain, NC, or Davidson Park located on Sims Street, Kings Mountain,
NC, between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless an authorized special
event shall be occurring. Further, no person or persons shall be upon the
premises which are Patriots Park, located on Gold Street, Kings Mountain, NC,
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless an authorized special
event shall be occurring.
   (B)   No person or persons shall be upon the premises of the walking track
which is located adjacent to the YMCA on Cleveland Avenue or the walking track
located on Kings Street between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., unless an
authorized special event shall be occurring or if such purpose or purposes for
being there be a use for walking or exercising for which those two facilities
are so designated.
   (C)   Any person or persons found upon the aforementioned premises during
the aforementioned hours, shall be designated as a trespasser.
   (D)   Signs shall be erected indicating these restrictions of hours,
prominently, and conspicuously at the areas mentioned above.
(Ord. 13-21, passed 9-24-2013; Ord. 14-15, passed 7-29-2014; Ord. 19-15, passed
7-30-2019)
§ 91.04 USE OF PLAYGROUND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Use of the playground equipment at the Mayor Rick Murphrey Children’s
Park is restricted to children 12 years of age and under.
   (B)   Any person who violates this provision shall be asked to leave the
park and shall be designated a trespasser.
   (C)   A sign shall be erected indicating this restriction, prominently and
conspicuously at the Mayor Rick Murphrey Children’s Park.
(Ord. 18-14, passed 7-31-2018)
MUNICIPAL LAKES GENERALLY
§ 91.15 OFFICE OF PARK RANGER.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Office of Park Ranger for the municipal
lakes who shall be appointed and supervised by the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 14-20)
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Park Ranger to enforce all rules and
regulations set forth in this subchapter and to enforce the watershed
regulations and state laws relative to fishing and public water supplies. The
Park Ranger shall from time to time render reports as required by the City
Manager and Chief of Police regarding the operations of his or her office.
(Prior Code, § 14-21)
(Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
Cross-reference:
   John H. Moss Reservoir Area, see
Ch. 92
§ 91.16 FISHING LICENSE.
   No person shall be permitted to fish in Davidson Lake, City Lake on York
Road, or Moss Lake without first obtaining a state-issued fishing license,
issued as required by the North Carolina Wildlife Resource Commission. At all
times while fishing in Davidson Lake, City Lake on York Road, or Moss Lake, the
person shall keep that license in his or her possession.
(Prior Code, § 14-22) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991; Ord. 18-08, passed 5-29-2018)
§ 91.17 MOTORBOATS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Motorboats are prohibited on the Davidson Lake and City Lake on York
Road unless:
      (1)   Used by a law enforcement officer or government employee on
official duty; or
      (2)   Used by rescue personnel in performance of duty.
   (B)   MOTORBOATS, as used in this section, shall not include a boat using an
electric motor as the only means of mechanical propulsion of any vessel.
(Prior Code, § 14-26) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.18 MANNER OF FISHING RESTRICTED.
   No seining or trapping of fish shall be permitted in the municipal lakes.
(Prior Code, § 14-27) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.19 HUNTING PROHIBITED.
   No hunting is permitted on any municipal lake or property around the lake
owned by the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-28) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.20 SWIMMING.
   Swimming is prohibited in the Davidson Lake and City Lake on York Road and
John H. Ross Resevoir.
(Prior Code, § 14-29) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.21 INTOXICATED PERSONS; USE, POSSESSION OF INTOXICANTS.
   Admission to the municipal lakes will be denied to any person having in his
or her person’s possession intoxicating drinks or beverages or who shows
evidence of being under the influence of any alcoholic or intoxicating
beverage.
(Prior Code, § 14-30) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.22 MINORS.
   No person under the age of 12 shall be allowed upon the municipal lakes,
except when accompanied by a parent or guardian.
(Prior Code, § 14-31) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Anyone who is found in violation of §
91.02 shall be subject to a fine of not less than $500 per offense and/or 30
days in jail. Each and every entry into the prohibited and banned area,
regardless of the time period involved, shall constitute a separate offense
under §
91.02.
(Ord. 08-23, passed 7-29-2008)
CHAPTER 92: JOHN H. MOSS RESERVOIR AREA
Section
Moss Lake Commission
   
92.01   Establishment; members; duties and powers
Rules and Regulations
   
92.15   Definitions
   
92.16   Applicability of state rules and regulations
   
92.17   Motor vehicles
   
92.18   Boats
   
92.19   Structures
   
92.20   Aircraft
   
92.21   Swimming
   
92.22   Picnicking
   
92.23   Camping
   
92.24   Hunting, fishing, trapping and wildlife
   
92.25   Sanitation
   
92.26   Fires
   
92.27   Control of horses, dogs, cats and pets
   
92.28   Restrictions; noise, emergencies, intoxicating beverages
   
92.29   Explosives, firearms, other weapons and fireworks
   
92.30   Public property
   
92.31   Lost and found articles
   
92.32   Advertisements
   
92.33   Commercial activities
   
92.34   Compliance with terms of permits
   
92.35   Special events
   
92.36   Boating permits
   
92.37   Cutting trees
   
92.38   Shoreline alterations
   
92.39   Shoreline use
   
92.40   Permit to construct
   
92.41   Shoreline improvement
   
92.42   Waste water treatment and fuel storage tanks
   
92.43   Adopted watershed protection classifications and management criteria
Usage of Raw Water
   
92.55   Permit required
   
92.56   Permit application
   
92.57   Conditions for issuance
   
92.58   Violation; termination of permit
 
   
92.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Parks and Recreation; Lakes and Waterways, see
Ch. 91
MOSS LAKE COMMISSION
§ 92.01 ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERS; DUTIES AND POWERS.
   (A)   The John H. Moss Reservoir Commission is hereby re-established, with
the responsibilities and powers as are hereinafter set out. The John H. Moss
Reservoir Commission shall be an advisory committee to the Water Department.
   (B)   The Commission shall consist of seven members. Five of those members
shall be members as designated and appointed by the City Council in accordance
with the policy for City Council appointments to authorities, boards,
commissions and committees (appointments policy), all of which shall be
residents of the city and may not be members of the City Council. The remaining
two members of the Commission shall be designated and appointed by the Moss
Lake Property Owners Association. If no designation and appointment has been
made by the Moss Lake Property Owners Association within 60 days from the date
of the adoption of this section, then the City Council may itself then
designate and appoint Moss Reservoir residents, as the members to fill those
seats. The terms of office shall be staggered in accordance with the
appointments policy. If there shall be a vacancy which shall occur during a
term of membership for any reason, then if a vacancy shall occur in a member
that was appointed by City Council, then City Council may fill that vacancy to
complete the remainder of the unexpired term. If a vacancy might occur as to
one appointed by the Moss Lake Property Owners Association, then the Moss Lake
Property Owners Association may appoint a member to complete the unexpired
term; however, if a seat shall remain vacant for a period of 60 days, then the
City Council may fill the vacancy by appointment of a Moss Reservoir resident.
The city shall acknowledge the appointment and terms of the Commission members.
   (C)   Subsequent to the appointments to the Commission, the Water Director
shall cause the first meeting of the Commission to be scheduled. At the first
meeting to be conducted by the Commission after the adoption of this section,
the Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice- Chairperson. The
Chairperson shall appoint a Secretary who will facilitate the meetings. The
Chairperson and the Vice- Chairperson shall be members of the Commission; but
the Secretary shall be either a member of the Commission or an employee of the
City Water Department.
   (D)   The Commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business
and shall keep records of its members in attendance and further as to any of
its discussions and recommendations. All records of the meetings shall be
public records. The Commission shall further hold at least one meeting
quarterly, with its meeting being open to the public. If it is determined by
the Chairperson that there is insufficient business to be acted upon, then he
or she may delay the meeting for one month. For all business which may be
conducted by the Commission, it shall require a quorum of four members to be
present for the conduct of the business.
   (E)   The Commission shall forward to the Water Director copies of the
minutes of each of its meetings within seven days subsequent to the date of its
meetings.
   (F)   The Commission shall prepare, recommend and submit a proposed annual
budget and a Moss Reservoir user fee schedule to the Water Director for the
operation of and use for the John H. Moss Reservoir and the adjoining Moss
Reservoir area. Further, the Commission may recommend to the Water Director,
proposed policies which will promote the development of the Moss Reservoir area
and bodies of water, and further for the regulation and control of use of the
John H. Moss Reservoir and adjoining area. Further, the Commission shall
conduct business as is referred to it by the Water Director and, after its
study or consideration, then the Commission shall make recommendations to the
Water Director for possible action to be taken.
   (G)   This section shall be and remain in full force and effect from and
after the date of its adoption.
(Ord. 09-26, passed 9-29-2009; Ord. 19-01, passed 2-26-2019; Ord. 19-21, passed
11-26-2019)
RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ 92.15 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL UNIT. A unit of measure used to compare the amount of manure produced
by different types of animals to the amount produced by a slaughter steer or
heifer.
   BOATHOUSE. A storage structure constructed outside of the control strip to
store and protect a boat.
   CLUSTER MOORING FACILITY. A fixed or floating pier for use as boat landing
place or berth for more than one boat.
   CLUSTER MOORING FACILITY (PRIVATE). A fixed or floating pier located on land
adjacent to the front footage of land owned by persons using the cluster
facility such as a condominium.
   CLUSTER MOORING FACILITY (PUBLIC). A fixed or floating pier located on land
adjacent to the front footage of land owned by the city and operated as a full-
service marina.
   COVE. A small sheltered arm of the lake usually fed by a small stream or wet
weather drainage ditch.
   DREDGING/EXCAVATION. Removal of soil below or above the 736.0 contour line.
   LAKE COMMISSION. The Moss Lake Commission authorized by the City Council in
accordance with Ord. 1991-33.
   MARINA. See CLUSTER MOORING FACILITY (PUBLIC).
   MARKERS (FLOATING). Navigational or warning signs installed with polystyrene
floatation.
   MARKERS (STATIONARY). Navigational or warning signs installed at fixed
elevations.
   MOORING FACILITY. A fixed or floating pier for use as a boat landing place
or berth.
   PERMIT. Written request of approval for construction of structures on the
control strip or beyond the shoreline.
   PIERS (FLOATING). See MOORING FACILITY.
   PIERS (STATIONARY). See MOORING FACILITY.
   RAMP (LAUNCHING). Ramp constructed to allow launching and removal of boats
to the lake.
   RIP-RAP. Quarry stone or field stone classified as either Class 1 or Class 2
and in conformance with §§ 876-2 and 1042-1 of the 2006 edition of Standard
Specifications for Roads and Structures, published by the State Department of
Transportation, and as amended from time to time.
   SEAWALL (GRAVITY). A wall built to retain the soil from eroding into the
lake, where the weight of the structure prevents it from overturning.
   SEAWALL (CANTILEVER). A wall built to retain the soil from eroding into the
lake, where the footing is designed to support the wall, and acts as a
counterweight to prevent the wall from overturning.
   SHORELINE. Line where the land and water meet at elevation 736.0 feet MSL.
   STRUCTURE (FLOATING). Piers or mooring facilities constructed beyond the
shoreline which rise and fall on the lake water level using polystyrene
floatation.
   STRUCTURE (STATIONARY). Piers, mooring facilities, launching ramps or
seawall constructed on the control strip or beyond the shoreline.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT FACILITY. A plant constructed to receive and treat
wastewater before discharging to the waters of the lake in accordance with the
State Division of Environmental Management.
   WETLANDS. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. WETLANDS
generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas.
(Prior Code, § 14-49) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992)
§ 92.16 APPLICABILITY OF STATE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   All ordinances, rules and regulations of the City Council made pursuant to
this chapter shall be in accordance with the subject to the rules and
regulations of the state.
(Prior Code, § 14-50) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
§ 92.17 MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   The operation and parking of off-road vehicles, as set forth in
division (B) below, is prohibited on roadways of the Moss Lake area at those
locations and at times designated and marked by the posting of appropriate
signs.
   (B)   The operation of off-road vehicles including, but not limited to,
motorcycles, minibikes, trail bikes, snowmobiles, dune buggies, all-terrain
vehicles and other motor vehicles designed for or capable of cross-country
travel on natural terrain, when operated off the roadways of the Moss Lake area
is prohibited, except at locations and at times designated by the City Council.
   (C)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle including off-road vehicles
in a careless, negligent or reckless manner or as to endanger any person or
property.
(Prior Code, § 14-51) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.18 BOATS.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of these regulations to operate any boat for a
fee or profit upon the water of Moss Lake unless the operation is authorized by
lease, license or concession contract with the City Council.
   (B)   No boat shall be operated in prohibited areas of a lake, reservoir or
other body of water. The areas shall be designated by the City Council and
marked by the posting of appropriate signs.
   (C)   No person shall operate any boat or manipulate any water skis, jet
skis or other similar device in a careless, negligent or reckless manner so as
to endanger any person or property. While water skiing a person will wear an
approved life jacket. The operator and passenger of any personal watercraft or
sail boards must wear an approved life jacket. Personal watercraft may not be
operated without the lanyard-type engine cutoff switch attached to the body,
clothing or personal flotation device.
   (D)   No jet skis or similar device or craft shall be operated by a person
under the age of 16. No machine-powered boat shall be operated by a person
under the age of 16 unaccompanied by an adult in the boat.
   (E)   No person operating or responsible for the operation of a vessel shall
permit it to enter any marked swimming area.
   (F)   No person shall operate any motorboat or vessel at greater than no-
wake speed within 50 yards of any boat launching area, dock, pier, marina, boat
storage structure, boat service area, swimming area or bank fishing area, which
has been properly marked and approved by the executive director of the State
Wildlife Resources Commission or the Director’s representative.
   (G)   The Police Department is designated a suitable agency for placement
and maintenance of markers implementing this rule.
(Prior Code, § 14-52) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991; Ord. 93-7, passed 3-30-1992)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.19 STRUCTURES.
   (A)   The construction of floating or stationary mooring facilities in the
Moss Lake or on the shoreline property owned by the city is prohibited, except
on those areas leased by the city for the development of marinas, launching
ramps, camping facilities and related commercial facilities open to the public.
   (B)   Any other structure of any kind shall be subject to approval, plans
and specifications and fee as set by the City Council.
   (C)   All vessels when not in actual use shall be removed from the lake,
reservoir or other body of water unless securely moored at mooring facilities
permitted by the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-53) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.20 AIRCRAFT.
   (A)   The operation of aircraft on lands or waters other than at authorized
landing areas designated by the city is prohibited. The designated areas shall
be marked by the posting of appropriate signs.
   (B)   Except in extreme emergencies involving the safety of human life or
threat of serious property loss, the air delivery of any person or thing by
parachute, helicopter or other means without written permission of the city is
to be prohibited.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to aircraft
engaged on official business of the federal government or used in emergency
rescue in accordance with the directions of the city or forced to land due to
circumstances beyond the control of the operator.
(Prior Code, § 14-54) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.21 SWIMMING.
   (A)   Swimming or skiing within 200 feet of any public launching area is
prohibited.
   (B)   Boating or skiing within 200 feet of any roped-off public swimming
area is prohibited.
   (C)   Diving from bridges, public or private, is prohibited.
   (D)   Swimming shall be permitted in private areas subject to the following
rules. The swimming area must not project out into the lake any further than is
allowed for piers; the swimming area must be buoyed with the Coast Guard
approved buoys and well marked; the swimming areas must be adjacent to land
leased.
   (E)   Swimming in other than an approved swimming area is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 14-55) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.22 PICNICKING.
   Picnicking is prohibited, except in those areas designated by the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-56) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.23 CAMPING.
   (A)   Camping is prohibited, except in areas designated by the city. The
designated areas shall be marked by the posting of appropriate signs.
   (B)   Camping at a fee site without payment of designated fees is
prohibited.
   (C)   The length of stay at all campgrounds shall be limited to 14
consecutive days. Occupancy of any campsite for a period greater than 14
consecutive days is prohibited without written permission of the city.
   (D)   Camping equipment or other property left unattended at a campsite for
the purpose of holding the site for future occupancy is prohibited.
   (E)   The digging or leveling of any ground or the construction of any
facility without written permission of the city is prohibited.
   (F)   Camping equipment shall be completely removed and the sites cleaned
before the departure of the campers.
(Prior Code, § 14-57) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.24 HUNTING, FISHING, TRAPPING AND WILDLIFE.
   (A)   Hunting and trapping are prohibited on the Moss Lake area.
   (B)   Fishing shall be allowed on Moss Lake in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the State Wildlife Resources Commission and the city.
   (C)   Where feasible, fishing shall be permitted from private piers.
   (D)   Bank fishing is allowed in designated areas.
   (E)   Unlawful feeding of waterfowl.
      (1)   The feeding of migratory and non-migratory waterfowl is hereby
prohibited on city property surrounding Moss Lake, City Lake and Davidson Lake.
      (2)   No person shall create or foster any condition, or allow any
condition to exist or continue, that results in the congregation or congestion
of domestic or migratory waterfowl in residential areas on property owned by
the city.
      (3)   For the purpose of this division:
         (a)   MIGRATORY AND NON-MIGRATORY WATERFOWL shall be those species
defined by the North Carolina Wildlife Department as any and all waterfowl in
the Anatidae family, including native, non-native and domestic ducks and geese,
and any crossbreeds or hybrids of these birds;
         (b)   FEED shall mean to give, place, expose, deposit or scatter any
edible material; and
         (c)   PROPERTY OWNED BY THE CITY shall mean property within the limits
of the control strip.
      (4)   No violation should be deemed to occur unless signs giving notice
of the prohibition set forth in this division are posted in a conspicuous
location surrounding the area, and a law enforcement officer has provided a
prior warning that continued feeding of wildlife will result in a violation of
this division.
(Prior Code, § 14-58) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991; Ord. 19-20, passed 11-26-2019)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.25 SANITATION.
   (A)   Dumping or disposal in any manner of refuse, garbage, rubbish, trash,
debris or litter of any kind into the waters of or onto any land owned by the
city is prohibited, except at locations and in receptacles provided for those
purposes.
   (B)   It shall be a violation to bring onto any Moss Lake area rubbish,
trash, debris or litter of any kind for dumping or in any other manner
disposing of refuse, garbage, rubbish, trash, debris or litter of any kind into
the waters of or onto any city owned land.
(Prior Code, § 14-59) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.26 FIRES.
   (A)   Gasoline and other fuels, except that which is contained in storage
tanks of vehicles, vessels, camping equipment or hand portable containers,
shall not be stored within the Moss Lake areas without written permission of
the City Council.
   (B)   Fires shall be confined to fireplaces, grills or other facilities
designed for this purpose and shall in addition be confined to those areas
designated by the city.
   (C)   The gathering of wood for use as fuel at campsites or picnic areas is
prohibited, except for gathering of dead material on the ground.
(Prior Code, § 14-60) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.27 CONTROL OF HORSES, DOGS, CATS AND PETS.
   (A)   No person shall bring or have horses in camping, picnic, swimming,
beach or other similar areas, or developed recreation areas.
   (B)   No person shall bring dogs, cats or other pets into developed
recreation areas unless penned, caged, on a leash not longer than six feet in
length, or otherwise under physical restrictive controls at all times.
(Prior Code, § 14-61) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.28 RESTRICTIONS; NOISE, EMERGENCIES, INTOXICATING BEVERAGES.
   (A)   The city may establish a reasonable schedule of visiting hours for all
or portions of a project area and close or restrict the public use of all or
any portion of a project area by the posting of appropriate signs indicating
the extent and scope of closure. All persons shall observe the posted
restrictions.
   (B)   Quiet shall be maintained in all public use areas between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Excessive noise during those times, which unreasonably
disturbs persons, is prohibited.
   (C)   The operation or use of any audio or other noise-producing device
including, but not limited to, communications media and motorized equipment or
vehicles in a manner as to unreasonably annoy or endanger persons is
prohibited.
   (D)   In an emergency or at any time deemed necessary, the Chief of Police
or his or her authorized representative may close all or part of the lake
property to the public.
   (E)   There shall be no public display or consumption of intoxicating
beverages on lake property.
(Prior Code, § 14-62) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.29 EXPLOSIVES, FIREARMS, OTHER WEAPONS AND FIREWORKS.
   (A)   The possession of loaded firearms, ammunition, projectile, firing
devices, bows and arrows, crossbows and explosives of any kind is prohibited
unless:
      (1)   In the possession of a law enforcement officer or government
employee on official duty; or
      (2)   Written permission has been received from the Chief of Police.
   (B)   The possession or use of fireworks is prohibited unless written
permission has been received from the Chief of Police.
(Prior Code, § 14-63) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.30 PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Destruction, damage, defacement or removal of public property, including
natural formations, historical and archeological features and vegetative growth
is prohibited without written permission of the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 14-64) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.31 LOST AND FOUND ARTICLES.
   All lost articles shall be deposited by the finder at the Park Ranger’s
office or patroller.
(Prior Code, § 14-65) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
§ 92.32 ADVERTISEMENTS.
   Advertising by the use of billboards, signs, markers, audio devices or any
other means whatever is prohibited unless permission has been received from the
City Council.
(Prior Code, § 14-66) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.33 COMMERCIAL ACTIVITIES.
   The engaging or solicitation of business without the express written
agreement of the City Council is prohibited.
(Prior Code, § 14-67) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.34 COMPLIANCE WITH TERMS OF PERMITS.
   It shall be a violation of these regulations to refuse to comply with the
terms or conditions of any permit issued by the city.
(Prior Code, § 14-68) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
§ 92.35 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   Special events such as water carnivals, boat regattas, music festivals,
dramatic presentations or other special recreation programs are prohibited
unless a permit therefor has been issued by the City Council. The public shall
not be charged any fee by the sponsor of the event unless the City Council has
approved in writing the proposed schedule of fees as part of its permit
issuance procedure.
(Prior Code, § 14-69) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.36 BOATING PERMITS.
   No vessels shall be operated on Moss Lake, Davidson Lake, or City Lake
without a valid permit issued by the city. Such permit must be displayed on the
vessel on the starboard side before the state registration number.
(Prior Code, § 14-70) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991; Ord. 15-06, passed 3-31-2015)
Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.37 CUTTING TREES.
   The cutting of trees or shrubs on the city-owned land surrounding the
reservoir is prohibited unless a special use permit has been issued by the City
Manager or the City Manager’s agent. Said permit shall consider mitigation of
non-point source pollution and other factors such as habitat, aesthetics, and
maintenance.
(Prior Code, § 14-71) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991; Ord. 93-26, passed 9-28-1993;
Ord. 15-06, passed 3-31-2015) Penalty, see §
92.99
§ 92.38 SHORELINE ALTERATIONS.
   No alterations shall be made to the natural shoreline of the reservoir such
as filling, grading, lagooning, dredging or constructing a retaining wall
unless it is the opinion of the Moss Lake Commission that the water of the
reservoir is responsible for serious erosion of the bank and unless a special
use permit is authorized by the Moss Lake Commission for specific alterations.
(Prior Code, § 14-72) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991; Ord. 93-26, passed 9-28-1993)
§ 92.39 SHORELINE USE.
   A permit issued by the city shall be required for private use of city owned
shoreline property by residents or owners of property adjacent to the same city
owned shoreline property. The regulations outlined above shall not be altered
by the issuance of a permit for private use.
(Prior Code, § 14-73) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
§ 92.40 PERMIT TO CONSTRUCT.
   (A)   All structures, including stationary and floating docks, launching
ramps and mooring facilities, which are proposed for construction either on or
in the waters of Moss Lake, or upon or over the city’s control strip of land
adjacent to the lake (generally between the 736.0-foot and 744.0-foot above
mean sea level elevations), must be approved and inspected by the city’s
Building Inspector. Permit approval is required before construction can begin
on structures or dredging. Application for the permits may be obtained either
from the Park Ranger’s office or the Building Inspector’s office.
   (B)   Structure permits shall be submitted with a complete set of plans,
signed and sealed by a registered engineer, architect or landscape architect,
showing the proposed stationary pier, floating structure, launching ramp,
cluster mooring facility or seawall. The plans shall show the relationship of
the structure to the property lines, the projection of the property corners and
the materials of construction. The permit fee for structures shall be
recommended by the Moss Lake Commission and approved by resolution of the City
Council.
   (C)   Dredging permits shall be submitted with a complete set of plans
showing all elevation changes and required erosion protection (i.e., rip-rap,
seawall or similar measures). Documentation must be submitted for any required
permits from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the State Department of
Environment, Health and Natural Resources, Division of Land Resources, Land
Quality Section. The permit fee for dredging shall be recommended by the Moss
Lake Commission and approved by resolution of the City Council. A deposit shall
be collected prior to issuance of a dredging permit, as required by §
92.41(A).
   (D)   Final approval of the construction of any structure (stationary or
floating) shall require an as-built survey and certification of the registered
engineer, architect or landscape architect that the structure was built
substantially in accordance with the approved plans. All approved structures,
upon final inspection, shall have a permanent permit attached to the structure
to indicate it is an approved structure. All existing structures deemed in
compliance with the regulations contained in this chapter, also shall have the
permanent permit attached following an inspection by the Building Inspector or
the Park Ranger. Thereafter, any structure not having a permanent permit
attached shall be considered in violation of this chapter.
   (E)   The City Manager or the City Manager’s designee shall have the
authority to condemn piers, docks and any other structures built on the lake or
within the city’s control strip. However, the City Manager or the City
Manager’s designee must afford the property owner a hearing before the City
Manager or the City Manager’s designee, and determine from the evidence
presented whether repair or condemnation is required, giving the owner a
reasonable time period to comply with the City Manager or the City Manager’s
designee’s determination. All structures must be maintained properly by the
owner(s). A property whose structure is in disrepair, and following
notification to repair by the Building Inspector shall fail to do so within the
prescribed time, may have his or her lease agreement revoked by the City
Manager or the City Manager’s designee. The city may remove, or have removed,
any such structure in disrepair which the owner refuses to repair or remove
within the required time, and bill the property owner for the cost of said
removal. All structures and improvements shall be subject to periodic
inspections for the purpose of determining conformance with the chapter and
with this section. To that end the lease shall allow access into a structure
and make all engineering and architectural drawings available to the lessor.
      (1)   Other structures. In accordance with this section, no other
structures may be installed on the control strip. It is the spirit and intent
of this chapter to provide and preserve for safety, protection of the
watershed, protection of the reservoir, and enjoyment of a lake setting. For
example, no gazebos, picnic shelters and pergolas are allowed. Structures for
storage purposes such as “yard barns” and garages are not allowed. Other
structures that are not transitory in nature such as swimming pools, hot tubs,
house additions, and saunas are not allowed.
      (2)   Limits of projection.
         (a)   Stationary and floating pier structures may project into the
lake to a depth of ten feet below the normal water level. The maximum
projection of any structure into the lake shall be 60 feet from the 736 contour
line (normal pool). All projections shall normally be perpendicular to the
shoreline and shall be within the confines of the lake front lot being served.
         (b)   A projection may be established at each of the two property
corners located at the control strip. Each projection should be perpendicular
to a line connecting two points on the 744.0 contour line (control strip) where
a ten-foot radius from that property corner intersects that contour line, as
shown on Figure 1 attached to Ord. passed 3-31-1992, which is hereby adopted by
reference as part of this section.
         (c)   In cove areas, no structure shall project beyond the one-third
point of the width of the cove, as measured from the shoreline at the point of
proposed construction to the closest point on the opposite shore. The Moss Lake
Commission may grant variances to a property owner for unusual horizontal or
vertical configurations of the shoreline in coves or peninsulas which may
prevent a property owner fair access and use of the lake. In such cases, the
Moss Lake Commission will make a recommendation to the City Council for the
entire area affected. At least one-third of the waterway must be left
unobstructed.
         (d)   Where, due to existing non-conforming piers on nearby property
or to unusual property configuration, a pier cannot be constructed as described
above, the Moss Lake Commission may grant a variance from this requirement. The
Moss Lake Commission shall ensure that the proposed pier construction has no
effect on existing facilities.
      (3)   Material of construction.
         (a)   Materials of construction for pilings shall include reinforced
concrete, hot dipped galvanized steel, aluminum or pressure treated wood.
Materials of construction for decking shall include reinforced concrete, hot
dipped galvanized steel, aluminum fiberglass and treated wood. Floating
structures shall be constructed of hot dipped galvanized steel and polystyrene
floatation. Steel drums are prohibited. Anchorage for the floating structure
shall be of galvanized steel cables secured to reinforced concrete anchorage or
steel anchor piles in firm ground beyond the shoreline or approved pilings with
appropriate connections. The Building Inspector shall approve materials of
construction during permit review. The City Engineer may approve materials of
construction not listed above, if he or she determines that they will not
negatively impact water quality.
         (b)   All piers and docks shall have white reflectors located at least
six inches above full pool elevation, on the furthermost corners of the
extension of the pier into the water, which reflects light parallel to the
shoreline in each direction and directly across the lake. White reflectors
shall be placed on each side of the pier at intervals of 15 feet or less,
beginning at its outermost extensions into the water and extending to the 736
contour of the shoreline.
      (4)   Stationary piers. Stationary piers shall conform to divisions (E)
(1) and (2) above. Stationary structures may be covered, but no siding or wall
surfaces are permitted.
      (5)   Floating structures. Floating structures including ramps or bridge
sections used for access to the floating structure shall conform to divisions
(E)(1) and (2) above. The ramp or bridge shall be designed to accommodate any
rise or fall in water level.
      (6)   Boathouses.
         (a)   Boathouses may be constructed on private property, outside the
control strip, for use by lake front property owners in accordance with the
Cleveland County Zoning Ordinance of the Buffalo Creek Reservoir area. The Lake
Moss Commission exercises no jurisdiction or control over the materials or
design of boathouses, but recommends that materials for construction and the
design be compatible with the residence.
         (b)   A permit shall be obtained for the launching ramp or tram rails
which will facilitate the launching or withdrawing of the boat. The boat dolly
or other launching mechanism shall be withdrawn from the water, after the boat
is launched. The rail shall be galvanized steel pipe or rolled rail steel and
shall be securely anchored in concrete piers.
      (7)   Launching ramps. Launching ramps shall be constructed of 3,000 psi
minimum concrete with a minimum slab thickness of four inches. The ramp shall
not be less than 12 feet wide with a six- inch by six-inch curb. The concrete
ramp should begin approximately six feet from the shoreline and be sloped
approximately one inch per foot to drain toward the lake. The ramp shall then
be sloped along the lake floor approximately one and one-half inches to one and
three-fourths inches per foot until a water depth of two feet is reached or
approximately 14 feet. The ramp shall then slope approximately two inches per
foot to a water depth of four feet or approximately 12 feet. Where more than
one launching ramp is required at one site, they should be spaced approximately
six feet apart and separated by a four-foot wide stationary pier.
      (8)   Cluster mooring facilities (private). Cluster facilities shall be
installed where permitted by the Moss Lake Commission, for use by and for the
convenience of owners and residents of interior lots contained in residential
subdivisions of land bordering on the Moss Lake Reservoir area. Cluster
facilities shall conform to the requirements contained herein for stationary
and floating structures. These facilities may extend beyond the ten-foot depth
and beyond the 60-foot projection from the existing 736.0 contour line which is
specifically applicable to facilities constructed for use by the individual
owner of a lake front lot; provided that, a minimum distance of 300 feet
between the proposed projection and the opposite shore exists. The width of the
cluster facility shall be kept within the confines of the lake frontage of the
lot of land as described in division (E)(1) above.
      (9)   Cluster mooring facilities (public). A public mooring facility is
to be a full-service marina designed to serve the needs of the boater who is
permitted the use of the lake. It shall be designed in conjunction with other
lakeside recreational facilities to be located on property owned by the city.
Materials of construction shall conform to division (E)(2) above. Restrictions
to positioning, projection limits and water depth are not applicable to this
facility, but shall be determined by the City Council, following receipt of a
recommendation from the Moss Lake Commission.
(Prior Code, § 14-74) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992; Ord. 14-01, passed 2-25-2014)
§ 92.41 SHORELINE IMPROVEMENT.
   Property owners are prohibited from increasing or decreasing the existing
shoreline of the lake. Owners of property contiguous to the lake may make, at
their own cost, shoreline improvements if approved by the Moss Lake Commission.
Plans for the improvements must be submitted to the Building Inspector, and
shall include the following: existing site plan; new and proposed contours with
profile showing existing and proposed improvements; and location and details of
rip-rap and seawall. The plans shall be reviewed by the Building Inspector for
compliance with the chapter, and forwarded to the Moss Lake Commission. In
determining whether the improvements should be allowed, the Moss Lake
Commission shall weigh the applicant’s need for shoreline improvement against
the aesthetic appeal of an unhardened (natural) shoreline. It is the policy of
the city to give preference to maintaining the natural shoreline whenever
possible, while preserving the property of the contiguous property owner.
   (A)   Dredging.
      (1)   Boating access may be improved by removal of earth from the lake
bottom below elevation 736.0 feet MSL. The Moss Lake Commission may require
this new slope be rip-rapped from elevation 733.0 to elevation 739.0 to prevent
erosion. No excavation is permitted to alter the existing 736.0 contour. The
shoreline may be graded back from the 736.0 contour to the 744.0 elevation at a
slope not steeper than two to one unless a retaining wall is allowed and
constructed.
      (2)   Earth removed from the lake bottom shall be disposed of in an
approved manner. Disposed material shall be stabilized, seeded, fertilized and
mulched in a manner which will prevent erosion and silting of the lake or
adjacent streams. No dredged material may be disposed of within the city’s
control strip.
      (3)   Before excavating, the property owner must notify the State
Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources, Division of Land
Resources, Land Quality Section, Post Office Box 950, Mooresville, North
Carolina 28115, phone (704) 663-1699 and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
Regulatory Field Office, Room 75, Grove Arcade Building, 37 Battery Park
Avenue, Asheville, North Carolina 28801, phone (704) 259-0857, in order to
determine if any wetlands will be affected or permits required. Correspondence
from the state and corps must be submitted to the Moss Lake Commission with the
appropriate plans and lake dredging application.
      (4)   A deposit or performance bond equal to 100% of the contract price
to perform the dredging will be required prior to the property owner initiating
work. The deposit will be returned upon completion of the excavation, if work
is in accordance with the permit and approved plans. If the property owner
fails to complete the work proposed to the satisfaction of the Moss Lake
Commission or other approving agency, the Moss Lake Commission shall seize the
deposit or performance bond, and the City Engineer is authorized to hire a
contractor to complete the job according to the approved plans and all
applicable permits.
   (B)   Rip-rap. Stone for rip-rap shall conform to NCDOT Class 1 or Class B
for erosion control. The depth of any allowed rip-rap shall not be less than
one foot and shall extend from elevation 733.0 to 739.0.
   (C)   Concrete. Any allowed concrete lining for shoreline protection shall
consist of 3,000 psi minimum concrete not less than four inches in thickness,
and shall extend from elevation 733.0 to 739.0. The bottom edge shall attach to
a toe-footing extending not less than one foot, vertically into the lake bottom
and having a thickness of not less than six inches.
   (D)   Seawall.
      (1)   A seawall, or retainer wall for erosion control, if permitted, must
be constructed on the existing 736.0 contour. Earth fills below the 736.0
contour are prohibited.
      (2)   A gravity type seawall shall be constructed of stone or mass
concrete (3,000 psi minimum). Mortar used in seawall construction shall consist
of one part portland cement, one-fourth part hydrated lime, three and three-
quarters parts sand (maximum) with no more water than necessary to make a
workable mixture. The use of concrete building blocks is not permitted.
      (3)   Properly designed steel or aluminum sheet piling systems are
acceptable alternative construction materials.
(Prior Code, § 14-75) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992; Ord. 14-01, passed 2-25-2014)
§ 92.42 WASTE WATER TREATMENT AND FUEL STORAGE TANKS.
   (A)   All wastewater treatment facilities shall meet all requirements of the
State Department of Environment, Health and Natural Resources Division of
Environmental Management. Plans of any wastewater treatment facility shall be
submitted to the Building Inspector for review and submitted to and approved by
the appropriate state and county agencies.
   (B)   Septic tanks and drainage fields shall be located a minimum of 100
feet from the existing 736.0 contour line of the lake. Under no circumstances
shall any treatment facility, or any part of a treatment facility be located in
the city control strip.
   (C)   In order to insure the integrity of the water quality in the John H.
Moss Reservoir, all property owners with existing fuel tanks are prohibited
from dispensing gasoline or oil across the city control strip, via hose, pipe
or other devises, because of the potential for a major accidental spill.
Gasoline or oil must be carried across the control strip in approved containers
of six gallons or less.
   (D)   Any tank larger than 1,100 gallons must meet the requirements of NCAC
15A-02N. Fuel storage tanks, under or above ground, are not allowed on the
city’s control strip, or on any structure built over the lake.
   (E)   The Moss Lake Commission shall inventory all existing tanks and advise
owners of their responsibility to protect the water quality of the lake.
(Prior Code, § 14-76) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992)
§ 92.43 ADOPTED WATERSHED PROTECTION CLASSIFICATIONS AND MANAGEMENT CRITERIA.
   (A)   (1)   The State Environmental Management Commission (EMC) has adopted
watershed protection classifications and management criteria for the entire
state. John H. Moss Lake has received a classification of WS III. Since
Cleveland County has jurisdiction in the lake watershed, the county is required
to adopt and enforce ordinances that will meet or exceed the requirements of
this act.
      (2)   The ordinance will limit density of development, control storm
water runoff, establish a buffer around the water supply reservoirs and
maintain an inventory of hazardous materials in the watershed.
      (3)   The EMC has established water quality standards to protect WS III
classified waters. To meet these standards, no trees, stumps, brush or other
vegetative matter shall be allowed in the lake.
      (4)   If concentrations in the lake exceed these limits, the city shall
immediately investigate and eliminate its sources.
   (B)   Any lakefront property owner may apply for permission-to withdraw
water from the lake for irrigation of lakefront property only. The permit
expires annually on April 30. The Moss Lake Commission reserves the right to
cancel the property owners permit at any time. There shall be no extension of
the irrigation line beyond the property of the permittee and there shall be no
resale of any lake water by the permittee. The installation and maintenance of
the pump and suction line is the responsibility of the property owner. Neither
the City Council nor the Moss Lake Commission will be responsible for the lake
level dropping below the pump suction and causing damage to the property
owner’s equipment. All irrigation pumps shall have a backflow preventer or of a
double check valve assembly and shall be inspected for such by the city prior
to the initial permit and each subsequent annual renewal.
   (C)   No livestock or other animals raised commercially may be allowed
access to the city’s control strip or the lake.
   (D)   All markers, location and installation shall be reviewed and approved
by the Park Ranger. The federal-uniform marking system adopted by national
boating organizations for use in both ocean and inland waters shall be
followed. Markers shall be mounted on polystyrene floatation and anchored with
a galvanized steel cable attached to concrete weight. Stationary markers shall
be mounted on galvanized steel posts driven firmly into the lake bottom.
   (E)   The regulations set out in this chapter are supplemental to, and do
not in any way negate or void, any other applicable statute, ordinance, rule or
regulation of the federal, state or county governments or any agencies thereof.
(Prior Code, § 14-77) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992)
USAGE OF RAW WATER
§ 92.55 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Any person who shall engage in the taking or usage of raw water impounded
within Moss Lake shall first obtain a permit therefor.
(Prior Code, § 14-80) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
§ 92.56 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   An application for a permit to engage in the usage or taking of raw water
from Moss Lake shall be made to the Moss Lake Commission.
(Prior Code, § 14-81) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991; Ord. 93-26, passed 9-28-1993)
§ 92.57 CONDITIONS FOR ISSUANCE.
   A permit shall be issued for the taking or usage of raw water from Moss
Lake, upon compliance with any and all rules and regulations governing the
same, if it shall appear that the use or taking shall not pose any hazardous,
unhealthful, improper or unsanitary condition to Moss Lake or the water
impounded therein. The fee for the usage shall be set by the City Council.
(Prior Code, § 14-82) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
§ 92.58 VIOLATIONS; TERMINATION OF PERMIT.
   Violation of these regulations or the failure to comply with the terms or
conditions of any permit issued, shall cause an immediate termination of any
permit issued.
(Prior Code, § 14-83) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
§ 92.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be enforced by the
Park Ranger or any other sworn law enforcement officer through the use of
either criminal or civil enforcement procedures, or both, as provided in §
10.99. Those procedures shall include the power to arrest for the violations.
Persons other than sworn law enforcement officers, who have been designated by
the city, are authorized to enforce any provision of this chapter by the use of
civil penalties, or the seeking of an equitable remedy, injunctive relief or an
order of abatement issued from a court of competent jurisdiction, or any
combination of the enforcement procedures as prevailing law may allow, all as
provided in §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating the provisions of §
92.24(E) shall be subject to a civil fine of $50 or be guilty of a Class 3
misdemeanor, with a fine not to exceed $250 pursuant to G.S. 14-4.
(Prior Code, § 14-79) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991; Ord. 19-20, passed 11-26-2019)
CHAPTER 93: UTILITY POLES AND CONDUITS
Section
   
93.01   Permit required to install poles
   
93.02   Limitation on number of poles
   
93.03   Reservation of use to city
   
93.04   Reservation of use of duct for cablevision
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 PERMIT REQUIRED TO INSTALL POLES.
   No poles for electric, telegraph, telephone or other purposes shall be
placed on any street of the city, without a permit therefor being obtained from
the Public Works and Electric Director.
(Prior Code, § 16-132) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989) Penalty, see §
93.99
§ 93.02 LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF POLES.
   No permit shall be issued for the erection of utility poles on any street
where there already exists a line of the poles on the street.
(Prior Code, § 16-133) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 93.03 RESERVATION OF USE TO CITY.
   One duct in all underground conduit systems shall be provided for the city,
free of charge, for the city police or fire alarm telegraph system when
required, and the city shall have the use of all poles on streets for those
purposes.
(Prior Code, § 16-136) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 93.04 RESERVATION OF USE OF DUCT FOR CABLEVISION.
   One duct in all underground conduit systems shall be provided for the
installation of cables used for the transmission of television signals.
(Prior Code, § 16-137) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who shall violate any provision within this chapter shall be
subject to a civil penalty of $50, to be recovered in a civil action in the
nature of a debt if not paid voluntarily within 72 hours after having been
cited for the violation. Each day the violation shall continue to exist after
the aforementioned 72 hours shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
subject to a civil penalty of $10 per day, in addition to the original civil
penalty of $50 for the violation. This provision is adopted pursuant to and in
accordance with G.S. § 160A-175 and may be enforced by any one, all or a
combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 16-141) (Ord. passed 9-26-1989)
CHAPTER 94: LIBRARIES
Section
Board of Trustees
   
94.01   Creation
   
94.02   Appointment
   
94.03   Terms
   
94.04   Compensation
   
94.05   Removal from office; vacancies
   
94.06   Duty to advise
Statutory reference:
   Compliance with capital outlay laws, see G.S. § 125-13
   Taxation for libraries, see G.S. § 160A-209(c)(20)
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
§ 94.01 CREATION.
   There is hereby created in and for the city a board of nine trustees for the
government of the Mauney Memorial Library established by the city.
(Prior Code, § 10-1) (Ord. 19-21, passed 11-26-2019)
§ 94.02 APPOINTMENT.
   (A)   The members of the Library Board of Trustees shall be appointed in
accordance with the policy for City Council appointments to authorities,
boards, commissions and committees (appointments policy). The majority of the
Board shall consist of citizens at large within the city; however, any
remaining seats after the majority (five) has been met by city residents may be
filled by residents within the Cleveland County Schools Kings Mountain Service
Zone.
   (B)   Not more than one member of the governing body shall be a member of
the Library Board of Trustees at any one time.
(Prior Code, § 10-2) (Ord. 19-21, passed 11-26-2019)
§ 94.03 TERMS.
   The terms of office shall be staggered in accordance with the appointments
policy.
(Prior Code, § 10-3) (Ord. 19-21, passed 11-26-2019)
§ 94.04 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Library Board of Trustees shall serve without compensation.
(Prior Code, § 10-4) (Ord. 19-21, passed 11-26-2019)
§ 94.05 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE; VACANCIES.
   (A)   The governing body shall have the power to remove any member of the
Library Board of Trustees for incapacity, unfitness, misconduct or for neglect
of duty.
   (B)   All vacancies on the Library Board of Trustees shall be immediately
reported by the Trustees to the governing body, which shall fill the vacancies
by appointment for the unexpired term.
(Prior Code, § 10-5) (Ord. 19-21, passed 11-26-2019)
§ 94.06 DUTY TO ADVISE.
   It shall be the duty of the Board of Trustees to advise the City Manager and
the city librarian on the operation and management of the library.
(Prior Code, § 10-6)
CHAPTER 95: CEMETERIES
Section
Mountain Rest Cemetery
   
95.01   Management
   
95.02   Duties of governing body
   
95.03   Powers of governing body
   
95.04   Rules and regulations apply; use restricted
   
95.05   Price of lots and fees for services as prescribed
   
95.06   Record of lots sold
   
95.07   Reservation of lots by installment payments
   
95.08   Deeds
   
95.09   Potter’s field
   
95.10   Burial of war veterans
   
95.11   Transfer of interest in lots
   
95.12   Abandonment of lots
   
95.13   Burial certificate required
   
95.14   Restriction on interments
   
95.15   Notice prior to interment
   
95.16   Disinterments
   
95.17   Record of interments and disinterments
   
95.18   Performance of work generally
   
95.19   Funeral processions
   
95.20   Use of entrance gate; hours open
   
95.21   Malicious mischief
   
95.22   Livestock prohibited
   
95.23   Dogs prohibited
   
95.24   Persons with firearms
Perpetual Care
   
95.35   Extent of care
   
95.36   Trust fund established
   
95.37   Lots sold subject to perpetual care
   
95.38   Lot markers
   
95.39   Enclosures
   
95.40   Trees and shrubbery
   
95.41   Iron work and the like
   
95.42   Approval of stone and marble work
   
95.43   Monuments generally
   
95.44   Monument foundations; size
   
95.45   Grave markers
   
95.46   Material to be used in monuments and markers
   
95.47   Vaults
   
95.48   Mounds; grade of lots
Statutory reference:
   Authority of city to acquire, establish and maintain cemeteries and regulate
burials, see G.S. §§ 160A-341 et seq.
   Authority to tax therefor, see G.S. § 160A-209(c)(8)
MOUNTAIN REST CEMETERY
§ 95.01 MANAGEMENT.
   Subject to the orders of the City Manager or designee, the cemetery shall be
under the direct control and management of a Superintendent appointed by the
City Manager, who shall have absolute charge of the cemetery, and who is
authorized to enforce the rules, to maintain order, to supervise all workers,
visitors and drivers, to expel from the grounds any persons guilty of indecent
conduct or those who violate the applicable provisions of this chapter and the
cemetery rules, and to refuse admission to any persons or materials when deemed
necessary; and to employ persons as may be required to carry out the provisions
hereof.
(Prior Code, § 5-20)
§ 95.02 DUTIES OF GOVERNING BODY.
   It shall be the duty and right of the governing body from time to time to
lay out and alter the avenues and walks, and to make the rules and regulations
for the government of the grounds of the cemetery as it may deem requisite and
proper, and not inconsistent with this chapter, and calculated to secure and
promote the general object of the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 5-21)
§ 95.03 POWERS OF GOVERNING BODY.
   The governing body may alter or amend this chapter insofar as the general
government and administration of the cemetery is concerned; but may not change
the division and arrangement of the cemetery into burial lots, driveways,
paths, reserved spaces for ornamental planting, parks; or other purposes; nor
materially alter or amend any restriction or condition under which any lot is
sold or to be sold as provided in this chapter; nor shall it sell or dispose of
any lot or space within the cemetery, except the numbered lots (not including
Lot No. 4317 in Section No. 4, this being reserved for memorial site or other
public purpose) as shown on the map; nor sell any lot, except by form or deed;
purchasers of burial lots therein being guaranteed that this cemetery shall be
developed and forever maintained as a cemetery in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 5-22)
§ 95.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS APPLY; USE RESTRICTED.
   All lots in the cemetery shall be sold subject to the rules and regulations
of the cemetery. The cemetery shall be used for no other purpose than for the
burial of the human dead.
(Prior Code, § 5-23)
§ 95.05 PRICE OF LOTS AND FEES FOR SERVICES AS PRESCRIBED.
   (A)   Lots in the cemetery shall be sold at such prices as may be determined
by the governing body from time to time.
   (B)   The service fees for opening and closing shall be as prescribed by
resolution adopted from time to time by the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 5-24)
§ 95.06 RECORD OF LOTS SOLD.
   The Superintendent shall keep a record of all lots sold in the cemetery, the
record showing the date of sale, lot numbers, purchaser’s names, prices and
other pertinent information, copies of which shall be forwarded to the Finance
Officer each month.
(Prior Code, § 5-25)
§ 95.07 RESERVATION OF LOTS BY INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS.
   Purchasers may reserve lots by the payment of 25% of the purchase price, and
the lots will be reserved only so long as the purchaser makes additional
payments of not less than 25% each at intervals of not more than 12 months
thereafter until full payment has been made. The deed will not be given and no
interments or other use of the lot may be made until the balance of the
purchase price has been paid, either in cash or other negotiable instrument
(bearing 6% interest from date) acceptable to the Finance Officer both as to
maturity dates and security covering same, which security must be ample to
protect the city’s interest and must not be on any cemetery lot. The Finance
Officer will give a receipt for the reservation payments, which receipt shall
be surrendered when payment in full has been made, and a deed executed and the
reservation receipts are also to be surrendered in case the purchaser wishes to
surrender the purchaser’s reservation, in which case, and in case reservation
is cancelled for failure to make payment as above provided, all payments of
principal will be refunded.
(Prior Code, § 5-26)
§ 95.08 DEEDS.
   The following shall be the form used in the purchase and sale of any lot
within the cemetery:
 
DEED FOR CEMETERY LOT
 
State of North Carolina
Cleveland County
City of Kings Mountain
 
   Know all men by these presents, that the City of Kings Mountain, in the county and state aforesaid, in consideration of           dollars, to the city paid by                 of Kings Mountain, in the state aforesaid,
has granted, bargained, sold and released, and by these presents does grant, bargain, sell and release unto the said                all of that certain lot of land situated in the City of Kings. Mountain, North Carolina,
in Mountain Rest Cemetery, known and designated as Lot No.          , Section No.            , Block No.           as shown on map made by E. S. Draper, dated January 1924, and recorded in office of Register of Deeds,
Cleveland County, Shelby, North Carolina; to have and to hold the lot unto said              , h             , heirs and assigns forever:
 
   Provided always, and these presents are on the express condition that said                 shall use said lot for no other purposes, and in case said          , or h              heirs or assigns, shall use or attempt
to use the same for any other purpose whatever, then this deed shall become inoperative, null and void; provided further, that this conveyance is hereby made subject to and with full notice of the ordinance governing
Mountain Rest Cemetery; all the provisions, conditions and stipulations of which are accepted by the grantee and are recognized as covenants running with the land; and all together with such other rules and regulations
as may be hereafter adopted by the governing body of said city, pursuant with said ordinance, are made a part hereof, and binding upon the grantee, h         heirs and assigns, and upon said city.
 
   In witness whereof, the said City of Kings Mountain has caused these presents to be signed by the Mayor of said City and countersigned by its Clerk, and its corporate seal to be affixed, this       day of         ,
        .
 
 
(SEAL)                                 CITY OF KINGS MOUNTAIN
Signed, Sealed and Delivered in the presence of         By                                      Mayor.
                                                                  Attest:
                                                                                                              
Clerk
 
 
 
(Prior Code, § 5-27)
§ 95.09 POTTER’S FIELD.
   (A)   Graves in potter’s field will be furnished in the locations as the
governing body may designate at $3 per grave for children under ten years of
age and at $5 per grave for all others, plus regular charges for digging
graves, furnishing grave markers and the like; provided, however, that, poor
and destitute persons will be buried in this field without charge when the
governing body shall certify to the circumstances and approve the action as a
proper obligation of the city.
   (B)   Title and control of graves furnished in potter’s field shall always
remain with the city and the graves shall receive the same care as those in
other parts of the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 5-28)
§ 95.10 BURIAL OF WAR VETERANS.
   Any veteran of the Spanish American War, World Wars I or II, Korean or
Vietnam conflicts, who shall have been a resident of the city at the time of
induction into the armed forces or who shall have been a resident at least ten
years preceding the time of death regardless of place of induction into the
armed forces; provided, however, that, the person shall have received an
honorable discharge, shall upon death from any cause have the privilege of
having the person’s last bodily remains laid at their final resting place in
the memorial plot of the Mountain Rest Cemetery in recognition of the service
which the person rendered to the country in its hour of need.
(Prior Code, § 5-29)
§ 95.11 TRANSFER OF INTEREST IN LOTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own any lot in the cemetery to
transfer any interest whatsoever in the lot to any other person without having
first obtained the express, written consent of the governing body. The consent
of the governing body, if obtained, shall be in the form of an endorsement upon
the transfer or assignment of interest.
(Prior Code, § 5-30) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.12 ABANDONMENT OF LOTS.
   (A)   When any lot in this cemetery has been abandoned, the same shall
revert to the city and may be resold by the city, or otherwise used for
cemetery purposes in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   A lot in the cemetery shall be deemed to have been abandoned when:
      (1)   No interments have been made therein for 20 years after date of
removal of body or bodies which may have been interred in the lot; or
      (2)   No interments have been made therein and the owner has died and
been buried elsewhere and is without heirs or assigns.
   (C)   Provided that, written notice to the city by the lawful owner of a lot
that the lot is still claimed by the owner, shall reestablish the person’s
ownership to the lot and, for the purpose of this section, the date of the
notice shall be considered to be in lieu of the date of purchase, or date of
adoption of this chapter, as the case may be; provided, the notice is received
before the expiration of the time hereinbefore specified as constituting an
abandonment of the lot; and, provided, the city has given notice in a local
newspaper 30 days prior to the date it intends to reclaim a lot under the
provisions of this section.
(Prior Code, § 5-31)
§ 95.13 BURIAL CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   No interment will be permitted, nor body received, unless a burial
certificate is furnished; giving the name and residence of the deceased, the
name of the nearest relative and the time, place and cause of death and other
information as the city may require; and after there has been compliance with
all state laws relating thereto.
(Prior Code, § 5-32)
§ 95.14 RESTRICTION ON INTERMENTS.
   All interments in lots of the cemetery shall be restricted to the members of
the family of the lot owner. Only one interment shall be made in any one grave;
except that, a mother and infant or two children may be interred together.
(Prior Code, § 5-33)
§ 95.15 NOTICE PRIOR TO INTERMENT.
   Eight hours’ daylight notice shall be given the Superintendent prior to any
interment in the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 5-34)
§ 95.16 DISINTERMENTS.
   No disinterments shall be made, except by cemetery employees; and then only
with the written consent of the City Manager, upon the written request of the
lot owner, and there has been compliance with after all state laws relating
thereto.
(Prior Code, § 5-35)
§ 95.17 RECORD OF INTERMENTS AND DISINTERMENTS.
   The Superintendent shall cause a complete record to be kept of all
interments or disinterments in the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 5-36)
§ 95.18 PERFORMANCE OF WORK GENERALLY.
   (A)   No work shall be done in the cemetery, except by cemetery employees,
except by permission of the City Manager.
   (B)   No material shall be allowed to remain in the cemetery longer than is
reasonably necessary for any construction work.
   (C)   No work shall be started on Saturday which cannot be completed on that
day.
   (D)   No heavy vehicles will be allowed in the cemetery in wet weather.
(Prior Code, § 5-37)
§ 95.19 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   Funeral processions, upon entering the cemetery, shall be under the control
and subject to the directions of the Mayor or his or her representative.
(Prior Code, § 5-38)
§ 95.20 USE OF ENTRANCE GATE; HOURS OPEN.
   No person shall enter the cemetery, except through the gates or provided
entrances, which shall be open during daylight hours (sunrise to sunset) or
other hours as may be fixed by the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 5-39)
§ 95.21 MALICIOUS MISCHIEF.
   It shall be unlawful to tamper with, remove or otherwise damage any tree,
shrub, flower or other ornament, or any monument, marker, corner-post or other
fixture, or anything within or appurtenant to the cemetery without the express
permission of the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 5-40) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.22 LIVESTOCK PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or permit any cow, horse, mule,
bull or other livestock owned, kept or harbored by the person to graze or be at
large upon the cemetery grounds or property.
(Prior Code, § 5-41) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.23 DOGS PROHIBITED.
   No dogs shall be permitted within the cemetery grounds.
(Prior Code, § 5-42) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.24 PERSONS WITH FIREARMS.
   No person with firearms, except those persons authorized by the
Superintendent, shall be permitted within the cemetery grounds.
(Prior Code, § 5-43) Penalty, see §
10.99
PERPETUAL CARE
§ 95.35 EXTENT OF CARE.
   Perpetual care shall include ordinary and reasonable care of the cemetery as
a whole and of the several burial lots therein, including the care of
shrubbery, trees, flowers and the like, but does not include the furnishing and
planting of shrubbery, trees, flowers and the like, on the several burial lots,
except such as the city may wish to furnish and plant to carry out the cemetery
landscape plans.
(Prior Code, § 5-50)
§ 95.36 TRUST FUND ESTABLISHED.
   It shall be the duty of the Finance Officer to set aside 90% of the purchase
price for all lots hereafter sold in the cemetery to cover the cost of
developing the cemetery and the various lots therein, or otherwise used as the
governing body may direct; and to set aside the remaining 10% of the purchase
price of the lots, and together with one-tenth the sums received for furnishing
graves in potter’s field of the cemetery, and place all of the sums of money
into a trust fund, invested as the governing body from time to time may direct,
to be known as the Mountain Rest Cemetery Perpetual Care Trust Fund and which
shall be kept separate and apart from all other funds of the city, and to place
the income from the trust fund to the credit of the General Cemetery
Maintenance Fund or Account, the Maintenance Fund to be expended as the
governing body may direct.
(Prior Code, § 5-51) (Ord. 97-14, passed 6-24-1997)
§ 95.37 LOTS SOLD SUBJECT TO PERPETUAL CARE.
   All lots in the cemetery shall be sold subject to ordinary perpetual care
and all work thereon will be done under the direction of the City Manager, or
the Superintendent, by cemetery employees, except when permission is otherwise
given.
(Prior Code, § 5-52)
§ 95.38 LOT MARKERS.
   The boundaries of the lots in the cemetery subject to perpetual care shall
be marked by corner-posts, which will be set by and at the expense of the
cemetery, with the centers on the lines bounding the lot. The lot number shall
be indicated by markers set by and at the expense of the cemetery on the front
line of each lot. Corner-posts and markers shall not project above the ground
and shall not be altered or removed.
(Prior Code, § 5-53)
§ 95.39 ENCLOSURES.
   No enclosures of any kind or nature, such as fences, copings, hedges,
ditches and the like shall be allowed around any lot subject to perpetual care
in the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 5-54)
§ 95.40 TREES AND SHRUBBERY.
   No trees, shrubs or plants shall be planted or removed without the consent
of the Superintendent. The Superintendent shall have the authority to plant,
remove or transplant any tree, shrub, plant or anything upon a lot, when the
Superintendent may consider such a course necessary to the best interests of
the cemetery and other lot owners.
(Prior Code, § 5-55)
§ 95.41 IRON WORK AND THE LIKE.
   No iron or wire work and no seats or vases will be allowed on lots, except
by permission of the Superintendent, and when any article so placed begins to
rust or otherwise becomes unsightly, the same shall be removed from the
cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 5-56)
§ 95.42 APPROVAL OF STONE AND MARBLE WORK.
   All stone and marble work for monuments, headstones and the like must be
accepted and approved by the Superintendent as being in conformity with the
rules and regulations of the cemetery before being taken into the cemetery.
(Prior Code, § 5-57)
§ 95.43 MONUMENTS GENERALLY.
   Only one monument will be permitted on a family burial lot. The monument
shall not be less than four feet high, but less than eight feet, nor two-thirds
the width of the lot in height, and shall be of stone or approved metal. No
monument shall cover more than 7% of the ground space of the lot, and no
monument shall be erected on a lot less in area than 280 square feet and not
then on a lot which the governing body at or prior to time of purchase, may
designate as a non-monument lot and it is so stated in the deed. Designs for
monuments must be submitted to and approved by the Superintendent before they
may be erected.
(Prior Code, § 5-58)
§ 95.44 MONUMENT FOUNDATIONS; SIZE.
   (A)   Foundations for all monuments, headstones and the like shall be built
by the cemetery at the expense of the lot owner. Fifteen days’ notice shall be
given for the building of any foundation. The cost for same must be paid for in
advance. Exceptions to these requirements may be made by the Superintendent;
provided, the work is done in accordance with cemetery rules and specifications
and is inspected and accepted by the Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 5-59)
   (B)   Every monument foundation shall be at least as wide and as long as the
base stone resting upon it and shall not project above the surface of the
ground. Foundations shall extend as low as the bottom of the grave and be built
as the Superintendent may require for safety and permanence.
(Prior Code, § 5-60)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.45 GRAVE MARKERS.
   Only one stone or marker shall be allowed for each grave, and shall be
placed at the head of the grave. All markers must be of granite or marble; not
less than five inches high; not less than eight, nor more than 12, inches in
thickness and not more than 24 inches in width; the top being set with and
following the contour of the ground. No double marker, covering more than one
grave, will be allowed. Graves, monuments and the like will be placed on the
lots facing the front line of the lot and located as directed by the
Superintendent.
(Prior Code, § 5-61) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.46 MATERIAL TO BE USED IN MONUMENTS AND MARKERS.
   No monument, grave marker, headstone or coping, and no portion of any vault
above-ground, shall be constructed of material other than cut stone or approved
metal. No artificial material shall be permitted.
(Prior Code, § 5-62) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.47 VAULTS.
   The building of vaults in the cemetery shall be discouraged and shall not be
permitted unless the designs for the same are exceptionally good and the
construction is solid and thorough. The designs shall be submitted to the
Superintendent, and shall not be approved unless the structure would, in the
Superintendent’s judgment, be an architectural ornament to the cemetery. Vaults
will be permitted only on lots as the Superintendent may determine to be
suitable for the purpose and then only on a lot of twice the area to be covered
by the vault. The vault shall be located in center of and facing the front line
of the lot.
(Prior Code, § 5-63)
§ 95.48 MOUNDS; GRADE OF LOTS.
   Grave mounds shall not be allowed, nor shall stone or other enclosure around
graves be permitted, within the cemetery. No lots shall be raised above nor
lowered below the established grade.
(Prior Code, § 5-64) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 96: HEALTH AND SANITATION; NUISANCES
Section
General Provisions
   
96.001   County Health Officer
   
96.002   Nuisances generally
   
96.003   Appliances constituting danger to children; leaving outside;
abandoning
   
96.004   Noise
Mosquito Control
   
96.015   Definition
   
96.016   Presumption of violation
   
96.017   Enforcement
   
96.018   Breeding places prohibited; exception
   
96.019   Methods of treatment
Rodent Control
   
96.030   Definitions
   
96.031   Business buildings to be rat-proof
   
96.032   Individual liability for maintenance
   
96.033   Authority of Health Officer
   
96.034   Feed bins, food containers to be rat-proof
   
96.035   Elevation of storage racks for lumber, boxes and the like
Air Pollution
   
96.050   Definitions
   
96.051   Inspection of fuel burning equipment
   
96.052   Right of entry
   
96.053   Smoke indicators, mirrors or devices required for certain fuel burning
plants
   
96.054   Standard for grading shade or density of smoke
   
96.055   General restrictions on discharge of smoke, dust and fumes
   
96.056   Restrictions on emission of smoke
   
96.057   Restrictions on discharge of dust
   
96.058   Sealing equipment responsible for violation
   
96.059   Violating seal placed on equipment
   
96.060   Appeals
   
96.061   Liability
Smoking
   
96.075   Definition
   
96.076   Smoking prohibited in municipal buildings
   
96.077   Smoking prohibited in municipal vehicles
   
96.078   Exemptions
 
   
96.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Growth of vegetation constituting mosquito harborage, see §
97.11
   Health certificate for massage establishment employees, see
Ch. 114
   Overgrowth of vegetation as breeding places for rodents, see §
97.11
   Prohibited sewage discharge, see §
53.115
   Use of water from John H. Moss Reservoir, see
Ch. 92
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate for preservation of public health, see G.S. § 160A-174
   State air pollution control, see G.S. §§ 143-215.105 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.001 COUNTY HEALTH OFFICER.
   (A)   Enforcement responsibilities. The County Health Officer shall be
responsible for the enforcement of every provision of this chapter and shall
personally or through assistants make all investigations required herein and
issue or approve all permits required.
(Prior Code, § 9-1)
   (B)   Right-of-entry; correcting unsafe conditions. The County Health
Officer is hereby authorized to enter upon and inspect all premises within the
corporate limits of the city to see that the same are kept in sanitary
condition and a safe condition from fire hazard and in compliance with this
chapter. The Health Officer shall have authority to notify the owners of
property to require them to remedy any unlawful conditions which he or she may
observe or see on or about the premises. The notice to be given to the owner or
to the person in charge of the property. The Officer shall have authority and
power, in a lawful manner to cause the owner or occupant of the premises to
remedy the conditions or be prosecuted. The special Officer shall be entitled
to wear and exhibit a badge as special officer, with power and authority as
herein specified.
(Prior Code, § 9-2)
   (C)   Hindering, obstructing by others. It shall be unlawful for any person
to hinder, obstruct or delay the County Health Officer or any of the Officer’s
assistants in the lawful discharge of their duties.
(Prior Code, § 9-3)
Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.002 NUISANCES GENERALLY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to create a nuisance on the
person’s lot or a lot occupied by the person, or to allow a nuisance to remain
on the person’s lot or a lot occupied by the person.
   (B)   Anything that causes an offensive odor or that causes injury or damage
to the health or life of any other person or anything that interferes with the
peaceful enjoyment of one’s property is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Prior Code, § 9-4) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.003 APPLIANCES CONSTITUTING DANGER TO CHILDREN; LEAVING OUTSIDE;
ABANDONING.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside any
building in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator or
container, as defined in division (B) below.
      (2)   This law shall not apply to any appliance, refrigerator or
container which has been placed on or adjacent to the rear of the building and
is crated, strapped or locked to an extent that it is impossible for a child to
obtain access to any air-tight compartment thereof.
(Prior Code, § 9-5)
   (B)   (1)   Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to discard,
abandon, leave or allow to remain in any place any icebox, refrigerator or
other container, device or equipment of any kind with an interior storage area
of more than one and one-half cubic feet of clear space which is air-tight,
without first removing the door or doors or hinges from the icebox,
refrigerator, container or equipment.
      (2)   Applicability. This section shall not apply to any icebox,
refrigerator, container, device or equipment, not in violation of division (A)
above, which is being used for the purpose for which it was originally
designed, or is being used for display purposes by any retail or wholesale
merchant, or is crated, strapped or locked to an extent that it is impossible
for a child to obtain access to any air-tight compartment thereof.
(Prior Code, § 9-6)
Penalty, see §
96.999
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned vehicles, see
Ch. 101
Statutory reference:
   Discarding or abandoning iceboxes, refrigerators and similar containers,
precautions required, see G.S. § 14-318.1
§ 96.004 NOISE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to create, assist in
creating, permit or continue to permit the continuance of any unreasonable
loud, disturbing or unnecessary noises in the city, excluding city sponsored
events or festivals.
      (2)   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud,
disturbing, annoying and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but
the enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
         (a)   To use or permit to be used any automobile, truck, bus,
motorcycle or other vehicle, engine, stationary or moving, instrument, device
or other thing so out of repair, so loaded, or in a manner as to create loud
and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise; or to create any
loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of any
vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates or containers;
         (b)   To sound any horn or signal device in any other manner or
circumstances or for any other purpose than required by the laws of the state;
         (c)   The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle, other than
police, fire or other emergency vehicles;
         (d)   To race the engine of any motor vehicle while the vehicle is not
in motion, except when necessary so to do in the course of repairing, adjusting
or testing the same;
         (e)   To drive a motor vehicle in a manner to cause a tire or tires to
spin, skid, slide or slip and thereby make loud or excessive noise. This
includes, but is not limited to, the operation of a motor vehicle in such a
manner that the friction between the tires and pavement create or make a loud,
disturbing or unnecessary noise. This is commonly known as “burning rubber” or
“scratching off”;
         (f)   The playing of any radio, phonograph or other musical instrument
in a manner or with a volume, particularly during the hours between 10:00 p.m.
and 7:00 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any
person or persons in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or venue,
excluding city sponsored events or festivals;
         (g)   The keeping of any animal or bird, which, by causing frequent or
long-continued noise, shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the
vicinity;
         (h)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary
boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or to stop work, or as a
warning of danger;
         (i)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam
engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle or motor boat
engine, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent
loud or explosive noises therefrom;
         (j)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air
unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced;
         (k)   The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or
repair of any building in a residential or business district other than between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on weekdays, except in the case of urgent
necessity in the interest of public safety and then only with a permit from the
Building Inspector, which permit may be renewed for a period of three days, or
less, while the emergency continues;
         (l)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to
any school, institution of learning or court while the same are in session, or
within 150 feet of any hospital, where the noise would unreasonably interfere
with the working of the institution; provided, conspicuous signs are displayed
in the streets indicating that the same is a school, court or hospital street;
         (m)   The creation of any excessive noise on Sundays on any street
adjacent to any church; provided, conspicuous signs are displayed in the street
adjacent to churches indicating that the same is a church street;
         (n)   The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with
loading or unloading any vehicle, or the opening and destruction of bales,
boxes, crates and containers;
         (o)   The sounding of any bell or gong attached to any building or
premises which disturbs the quiet or repose of persons in the vicinity thereof;
         (p)   The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device
for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any
performance, show or sale or display of merchandise;
         (q)   The use of any mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks
or other moving vehicles for advertising or other purposes;
         (r)   The conducting, operating or maintaining of any garage or
filling station in any residential district in a manner as to cause loud or
offensive noises to be emitted therefrom between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 7:
00 a.m.; and
         (s)   The firing or discharging of a gun, squib, cracker, gunpowder or
other combustible substance in the streets, or elsewhere, for the purpose of
making noise or disturbance, except by permit from the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 9-7)
   (B)   (1)   Factors to consider. The standards which shall be considered in
determining whether a violation of division (A) above exists shall include, but
shall not be limited to, the following:
         (a)   The volume of the noise;
         (b)   The intensity of the noise;
         (c)   Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;
         (d)   Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;
         (e)   The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any;
         (f)   The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;
         (g)   The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise
emanates;
         (h)   The density of inhabitation of the area within which the noise
emanates;
         (i)   The time of day or night the noise occurs;
         (j)   The duration of the noise;
         (k)   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent or constant; and
         (l)   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or non-commercial
activity.
      (2)   Tables.
Table I — Limiting Levels for Use Districts
Octave band—Maximum Permissible Sound Pressure
Center frequency—Levels in Decibels re 0.0002 Microbars
Cycles per Second Residential Use District Commercial Manufacturing
Table I — Limiting Levels for Use Districts
Octave band—Maximum Permissible Sound Pressure
Center frequency—Levels in Decibels re 0.0002 Microbars
Cycles per Second Residential Use District Commercial Manufacturing
Below 75          65          79                      80
75—150          60          74                      75
150—300         55          66                      70
300—600         55          59                      64
600—1,200       45          53                      58
1,200—2,400     45          47                      53
2,400—4,800     40          41                      49
Above 4,800       40          49                      46
NOTE TO TABLE:
If the noise is not smooth and continuous, 1 or more of the corrections in
Table II below shall be added to or subtracted from each of the decibel
levels given in Table I.
 
 
Table II — Type of Operation in Character of Noise (Correction in Decibels)
Noise source operated less than 20% of any 1-hour period plus 5*
Noise source operated less than 5% of any 1-hour period  plus 10*
Noise source operated less than 1% of any 1-hour period  plus 15*
Noise of impulsive character (hammering and the like)    minus 5
Noise of periodic character (hum, screech and the like)  minus 5
NOTES TO TABLE:
*Apply one of these corrections only.
 
If the noise occurs between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on Monday
through Saturday or at any time on Sunday or a holiday, 7 shall be subtracted
from each of the decibel levels given in Table I.
 
      (3)   Motorized vehicles. It shall be unlawful to operate a motorized
vehicle within the city limits which creates a noise or sound which exceeds the
noise level limits set out in Table III below.
Table III — Limiting Noise Levels from Vehicles
Table III — Limiting Noise Levels from Vehicles
Trucks and buses
   Over 10,000 pounds
      93 dB(A) measured at 50Maximum allowable limit
      97 dB(A) measured at 25Maximum allowable limit
   Under 10,000 pounds
      80 dB(A) measured at 50Maximum allowable limit
      86 dB(A) measured at 25Maximum allowable limit
Passenger cars
   78 dB(A) measured at 50 feet Maximum allowable limit
   84 dB(A) measured at 25 feet Maximum allowable limit
Motorcycles, including other vehicles
   87 dB(A) measured at 50 feet Maximum allowable limit
   93 dB(A) measured at 25 feet Maximum allowable limit
 
(Prior Code, § 9-8) (Ord. 21-15, passed 4-27-2021)
Penalty, see §
96.999
Cross-reference:
   Creation of noise in advertising, see §
112.01
   Driving in quiet zones, see §
72.04
   Noise at John H. Moss Reservoir area, see §
92.28
Statutory reference:
   Authority as to noise, see G.S. § 160A-184
MOSQUITO CONTROL
§ 96.015 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, any COLLECTION OF WATER shall be held to
mean water contained in any ditch, pool, pond, (natural or artificial),
excavation, hole, depression, open cesspool, privy vault, fountain, cistern,
tank, shallow well, barrel, trough (except horse troughs in frequent use), urn,
can, box, bottle, tub, bucket, defective house roof gutter, tank or flush
closet or other similar container.
(Prior Code, § 9-20)
§ 96.016 PRESUMPTION OF VIOLATION.
   The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall
be evidence that mosquitoes are there, and failure to prevent the breeding
within three days after notice by the Health Officer shall be deemed a
violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-21)
§ 96.017 ENFORCEMENT.
   Should the person responsible for the condition giving rise to the breeding
of mosquitoes fail or refuse to take necessary measures to prevent the same,
within three days after due notice has been given to the person, the city is
hereby authorized to do so, and all necessary cost incurred by it for this
purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person offending,
as the case may be.
(Prior Code, § 9-22)
§ 96.018 BREEDING PLACES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION.
   It shall be unlawful to have, keep, maintain, cause or permit within the
city any collection of standing or flowing water in which mosquitoes breed or
are likely to breed, unless the collection of water is treated so as to
effectually prevent the breeding.
(Prior Code, § 9-23) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.019 METHODS OF TREATMENT.
   The method of treatment of any collection of water directed toward the
prevention of breeding of mosquitoes shall be approved by the Health Officer
and may be one or more of the following:
   (A)   Screening with wire netting of at least 16 meshes to the inch each way
or with any other material which will effectually prevent the ingress or egress
of mosquitoes;
   (B)   Complete emptying, every seven days, of unscreened containers,
together with their thorough drying or cleaning;
   (C)   Using an approved larvicide applied under the direction of the Health
Officer;
   (D)   Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other
obstructions and stocking with mosquito-destroying fish;
   (E)   Proper disposal by the removal or destruction of tin cans, boxes,
broken or empty bottles and similar articles likely to hold water; and
   (F)   Effective drainage of all impounded water in ditches, pools, ponds,
excavations, holes, depressions and marshes.
(Prior Code, § 9-24)
RODENT CONTROL
§ 96.030 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS BUILDING. Any structure, whether public or private, regardless of
the type of material used in its construction, located within the city that is
adapted to occupancy for transaction in business, whether vacant or occupied,
for the rendering of professional services, for the display, sale or storage of
goods, wares or merchandise, or for the performance of work or labor, including
hotels, rooming houses, apartment houses, beer parlors, office buildings,
public buildings, theaters, stores, markets, restaurants, warehouses, grain
elevators, abattoirs, work shops, factories and all public or private
structures, where domestic or other animals are kept.
   OCCUPANT. The person that has the use of or occupies any business building
or any part thereof, whether the actual owner or tenant. In the case of vacant
business buildings or any vacant portion of a business building, the owner
thereof shall have the responsibility of or be deemed the tenant thereof.
   OPENING. Any opening in the foundation, sides or walls, ground or first
floors, basements and roofs, including chimneys, eaves, grills, windows,
ventilators, sidewalk grates and elevators, and around any pipe, wire or other
installation connecting with a building through which a rat may enter.
   OWNER. The actual owner of the business building whether an individual,
partnership or corporation, or agent of the building or other person having
custody of the building, or to whom rent is paid. In the case of business
buildings leased with a covenant in the lease specifying that the lessee is
responsible for maintenance and repairs, the lessee will be considered in such
cases as the OWNER for the purpose of this subchapter.
   PREMISES. All business buildings, sheds, barns, animal pens or shelters,
garages, docks, wharves, piers, grain elevators and abattoirs, whether public
or private used in connection with the operation of any business building, as
herein defined.
   RAT ERADICATION. The removal, killing, destruction, extermination of rats by
systematic use of traps or of poisons and by other methods.
   RAT HARBORAGE. Any condition which provides shelter or protection for rats,
thus favoring their multiplication and continued existence in, under or outside
of a structure of any kind.
   RAT STOPPAGE or RAT-PROOFING. Applies to a relatively inexpensive form of
rat-proofing to prevent the ingress of rats into business buildings from the
exterior or from one building or business establishment to another. It consists
essentially of the closing or protection of all openings in the exterior walls,
ground or first floors, basements, roofs and foundations with material
impervious to rat gnawing in such a manner as to prevent rats from gaining
entrance.
(Prior Code, § 9-30)
§ 96.031 BUSINESS BUILDINGS TO BE RAT-PROOF.
   (A)   In the interest of the public health and to prevent the spread of
typhus fever and other rat-borne diseases and infections it is hereby required
and ordered that all business buildings within the city be made rat-proof in
order to prevent entry of rats into and upon the premises and the business
buildings shall be kept and maintained in a rat-free condition.
   (B)   All newly constructed business buildings and additions to existing
business buildings shall be rat-proofed during the process of construction.
   (C)   The owners of all rat-proofed business buildings shall maintain the
same in a rat-proof condition and repair all breaks or leaks that may occur in
the rat-proofing, and the occupants of all rat-proofed business buildings shall
take action as may be necessary and appropriate to eradicate all rats from the
buildings and to keep the same free from rats.
(Prior Code, § 9-31) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.032 INDIVIDUAL LIABILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for the occupant, owner, contractor, public utility
company, plumber, electrician or any other person to remove the rat-proofing
from any business building for any purpose and fail to restore the same in a
satisfactory condition or make any new openings and fail to close and seal same
against the entrance of rats.
(Prior Code, § 9-32) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.033 AUTHORITY OF HEALTH OFFICER.
   The Health Officer is empowered to make unannounced inspections of the
interior and exterior of business buildings as, in the Officer’s opinion, may
be necessary to determine full compliance with this subchapter, and the Health
Officer shall make periodic inspections of all rat-proofed buildings to
determine evidence of rat-infestation and the existence of new breaks or leaks
in their rat-proofing. Whenever evidence is found indicating the presence of
rats or openings through which rats may again enter business buildings, the
Health Officer shall serve the owner with notices and orders to abate the
conditions found, and a failure to remedy the conditions within three days
after notice shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-33)
§ 96.034 FEED BINS, FOOD CONTAINERS TO BE RAT-PROOF.
   All food and feed kept for feeding chickens, cows, pigs, horses and other
animals shall be kept and stored in rat-free and rat-proof containers,
compartments or rooms unless kept in a rat-proofed building.
(Prior Code, § 9-34) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.035 ELEVATION OF STORAGE RACKS FOR LUMBER, BOXES AND THE LIKE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit to accumulate on any premises,
improved or vacant, any lumber, boxes, barrels, bricks, stones or similar
materials unless the same be placed on open racks that are elevated not less
than 18 inches above the ground and evenly piled or stacked so that these
materials will not afford harborage for rats.
(Prior Code, § 9-35) Penalty, see §
96.999
AIR POLLUTION
§ 96.050 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DUST. Gas-borne particles larger than ten microns in mean diameter.
   DUST SEPARATING EQUIPMENT. Any device for separating dust from the gas
medium in which it is carried.
   FUEL BURNING EQUIPMENT. Any furnace, incinerator, refuse-burning equipment,
boiler, apparatus, device, mechanism, stock or structure used in the process of
burning fuel or combustible material.
   FUMES. Gases or vapors that are of a character as to create an unclean,
destructive, offensive or unhealthful condition.
   INTERNAL COMBUSTION ENGINE. An engine in which combustion of a gaseous
liquid or pulverized solid fuel takes place within one or more cylinders.
   OPEN FIRE. Any fire wherein the products of combustion are emitted into the
open air and are not directed thereto through a stack or chimney.
   RINGELMANN SMOKE CHART. The Ringelmann chart with instructions for use as
published by the U.S. Bureau of Mines, 1945.
   SMOKE. Small gas-borne particles consisting essentially of carbonaceous
material in sufficient number to be observable.
   SOOT. Agglomerated particles consisting essentially of carbonaceous
material.
   STACK or CHIMNEY. Flue, conduit or opening arranged for emitting gases into
the open air.
   VOLATILE. The gaseous constituents of solid fuels as determined by the
standard A.S.T.M. procedure amended or revised to date.
(Prior Code, § 9-40)
§ 96.051 INSPECTION OF FUEL BURNING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   An inspection of any fuel burning equipment within the city under the
provisions of this subchapter, and whether or not a previous certificate of
operation allowing the use of the plant has been issued by the city, may be
made at any time to see that the equipment and plant can be operated in
conformity with the provisions of this subchapter. Upon notice that the
equipment has been found to comply with the provisions of this subchapter, the
City Manager shall issue a certificate of operation which shall be posted in a
conspicuous place within the plant.
   (B)   If, at the time of the first inspection, or of any inspection
subsequent to the issuance of the certificate of operation, it is found that
the equipment is in a condition that it cannot be operated within the
provisions of this subchapter, the City Manager shall give notice in writing to
the person owning, operating or in charge of the equipment of the defects found
and an order to correct, repair or replace the defective equipment, and it then
becomes incumbent upon the owner or operator to comply with the orders. Failure
to comply with the order within 30 days from its date shall be a violation of
this section and the City Manager is hereby authorized to seal the equipment.
Each day of failure to comply after the 30 days shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 9-41)
§ 96.052 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   No person shall, in any manner, hinder, obstruct, delay, resist, prevent or,
in any way, interfere or attempt to interfere with the officers or employees of
the city in the performance of any duty required under the provisions of this
subchapter; nor shall any person refuse to permit the inspectors to perform
their duty by refusing any of them entrance to the premises at reasonable
hours.
(Prior Code, § 9-42) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.053 SMOKE INDICATORS, MIRRORS OR DEVICES REQUIRED FOR CERTAIN FUEL BURNING
PLANTS.
   All newly constructed or reconstructed solid or liquid fuel burning plants
having more than 500 square feet of boiler heating surface (50 H.P.) or its
equivalent shall be equipped with smoke indicators, mirrors or similar devices,
approved by the City Manager to enable the firefighter to observe the top of
the stack from the boiler room at all times, unless the top of the stack is
readily visible to the firefighter from the boiler room without the use of the
devices. In plants where a firefighter is not in constant attendance in the
boiler room, the smoke indicator shall be of a type which will sound an alarm
or flash a signal to attract the attention of the firefighter. Any existing
plant which emits unlawful smoke may be required to install the indicating
devices.
(Prior Code, § 9-43) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.054 STANDARD FOR GRADING SHADE OR DENSITY OF SMOKE.
   For the purpose of grading the shade or density of smoke, the Ringelmann
chart as now published and used by the U.S. Bureau of Mines, which is hereby
made a part of the article by reference, shall be the standard.
(Prior Code, § 9-44)
§ 96.055 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS ON DISCHARGE OF SMOKE, DUST AND FUMES.
   No person who operates or is responsible for the operation of any fuel
burning equipment, internal combustion engine, locomotive, vehicle, premises,
open fire or stack shall cause, suffer or allow to be discharged therefrom any
smoke, dust or fumes that are a nuisance to any person not being therein or
thereupon engaged or that are a detriment or injurious to the health, welfare
or property of others.
(Prior Code, § 9-45) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.056 RESTRICTIONS ON EMISSION OF SMOKE.
   (A)   The emission of smoke at any time within the corporate limits of the
city of the shade or density greater than number 2 of the Ringelmann chart
shall be a violation of this subchapter.
   (B)   No person who operates or is responsible for the operation of any fuel
burning equipment, internal combustion engine, premises, open fire or stack
shall cause, suffer or allow to be discharged therefrom, smoke the shade or
density of which is equal to or greater than number 2 of the Ringelmann chart
for a period aggregating four minutes or more in any 30 minutes; except smoke
the shade or density of which is equal to number 2 and not greater than number
3 of the Ringelmann chart may be emitted for a period or periods aggregating
three minutes in any 15 minutes for the following reasons only: when building a
new fire, cleaning a fire or when breakdown of equipment occurs which makes it
evident that the emission was not reasonably preventable.
   (C)   No person who operates or is responsible for the operation of any
locomotive or vehicle shall cause, suffer or allow to be discharged therefrom
smoke, the shade or density of which is equal to or greater than number 2 of
the Ringelmann chart for a period or periods aggregating more than one minute
in any 15 minutes; except smoke the shade or density of which is equal to
number 2 and not greater than number 3 of the Ringelmann chart, may be emitted
for a period or periods aggregating three minutes in any 15 minutes for the
following reasons only: when building a new fire, when cleaning fires or when
the breakdown of equipment occurs which makes it evident that the emission was
not reasonably preventable.
(Prior Code, § 9-46) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.057 RESTRICTIONS ON DISCHARGE OF DUST.
   No person who operates or is responsible for the operation of any fuel
burning equipment shall cause, suffer or allow to be discharged therefrom or to
pass any convenient measuring point in the stack thereof, dust in the gases to
exceed eighty-five hundredths of a pound per 1,000 pounds of gases, adjusted to
12% CO2 content. The amount of solids in the gases, shall be determined
according to the test code for dust-separating apparatus of the American
Society of Mechanical Engineers, revised and amended to date, which hereby is
made a part of this chapter by reference.
(Prior Code, § 9-47) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.058 SEALING EQUIPMENT RESPONSIBLE FOR VIOLATION.
   (A)   After any person who has been previously notified of three or more
violations of this subchapter within any consecutive 12-month period, in
respect to the emission of smoke, dust or fumes, that the person shall be
notified to show cause before the City Manager on a specified day to be not
less than ten days from the date of notice, why the equipment causing the
violations should not be sealed.
   (B)   The notice herein provided for may be given by mail directed to the
last known address of the person to be notified, or if the address or the
whereabouts is unknown, then by posting a notice on or near the premises at
which the violations shall have occurred. Upon the date specified, the person,
or representative of the person, may appear and be heard.
   (C)   Upon the hearing, if the Hearing Officer finds that adequate
corrective means and methods have not been employed to correct the complained
of condition, then it shall be the officer’s duty to seal the equipment until
the time as a new operating certificate as provided under this subchapter has
been applied for and issued.
   (D)   An appeal from the order may, within ten days, be made to the
governing body and the appeal shall act as a stay of the decision pending the
decision of the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 9-48)
§ 96.059 VIOLATING SEAL PLACED ON EQUIPMENT.
   No person shall violate the seal on any fuel burning equipment that has been
placed thereon by or at the direction of the City Manager unless first
authorized in writing by the officer to do so.
(Prior Code, § 9-49) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.060 APPEALS.
   Any person taking exceptions to any decision, ruling, regulation or order of
the City Manager made or promulgated under the provisions of this subchapter
may appeal to the governing body. The appeal shall be taken within ten days
after the decision, ruling, regulation or order complained of, by filing, in
writing, with the City Manager a notice of appeal directed to the governing
body, specifying the grounds thereof and the relief sought. A deposit of $10
shall be posted by the appellant at the time of the appeal to cover the cost of
the hearing. The City Manager shall forthwith furnish to the governing body all
the papers relating to the decision, ruling, regulation or order which is
appealed. The governing body shall set a date not less than five days and not
more than ten days after the date of filing of the appeal for the hearing and
shall give notice thereof by mail to all interested parties. The appellant may
appear at the hearing in person or may be represented by agent or by attorney.
The governing body shall affirm, modify or set aside the decision of the City
Manager or shall make other disposition of the matter as, in the opinion of the
governing body, the good of the city may require. The decision of the governing
body in any case shall be final. If the decision of the City Manager is
reversed by the governing body, the cost of the hearing shall be borne by the
city and the bond or deposit refunded.
(Prior Code, § 9-50)
§ 96.061 LIABILITY.
   All persons owning, operating or in charge or control of any equipment who
shall cause or permit or participate in any violation of any of the provisions
of this subchapter, either as proprietors, owners, lessees, tenants, managers,
superintendents, constructors, installers, mechanics, repairers, captains,
janitors, engineers, firefighters or otherwise shall be individually and
collectively liable for any fines, penalties or punishment which may be imposed
for the violation of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 9-51)
SMOKING
§ 96.075 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SMOKING. The inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying of a lighted pipe,
cigar, cigarette or other combustible tobacco product.
(Ord. 93-24, passed 8-31-1993)
§ 96.076 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any building or
facility or portion of a building or facility now or hereafter owned, leased,
operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the city, except in specially
designated smoking areas. The City Council shall have the authority to
designate by resolution smoking areas within each city building or facility. An
area within any building or facility may be designated as a smoking area only
if the ventilation of the area is sufficient, any adverse impact on municipal
employees and members of the public is minimal, and no fire or other safety
hazard will be created by smoking in the area.
   (B)   There shall be a ban, restriction and prohibition against the use and/
or smoking of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or other combustible tobacco
product at the walking tracks (Watterson Street and Cleveland Avenue); all Deal
Street Park facilities, the park and playing fields; the Jake Early Complex in
its entirety; Davidson Soccer Complex and all fields; and Patriot’s Park.
(Ord. 93-24, passed 8-31-1993; Ord. 09-30A, passed 10-27-2009) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.077 SMOKING PROHIBITED IN MUNICIPAL VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any vehicle now or hereafter
owned or leased by the city.
(Ord. 93-24, passed 8-31-1993) Penalty, see §
96.999
§ 96.078 EXEMPTIONS.
   This subchapter shall not apply to individual dwelling units in public
housing complexes.
(Ord. 93-24, passed 8-31-1993)
§ 96.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Violation of §§
96.075 through
96.078 shall subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount of $25 to be
recovered by the city. Violators will be issued a written citation which must
be paid to the city within five working days of receipt of the citation.
Violation of §§
96.075 through
96.078 shall not constitute a misdemeanor or infraction punishable under G.S. §
14-4.
(Ord. 93-24, passed 8-31-1993)
CHAPTER 97: GARBAGE AND TRASH; WEEDS AND JUNK
Section
General Provisions
   
97.01   Definitions
   
97.02   Administration and enforcement
   
97.03   Right of entry
   
97.04   Abatement
   
97.05   Interference with personnel
   
97.06   Responsibility of owners and agents
   
97.07   Littering
   
97.08   Blockage of storm drains
   
97.09   Accumulations generally
   
97.10   Junk
   
97.11   Weeds, grass and other vegetation
   
97.12   Vehicles transporting loose materials; cover required
   
97.13   Private transportation equipment requirements for refuse collection;
identification
   
97.14   Tracking of streets by vehicles
   
97.15   Receptacles at construction and demolition sites; cleanup
   
97.16   Receptacles at loading and unloading areas
   
97.17   Receptacles at parking lots
Collection Service
   
97.30   Receptacles and containers generally
   
97.31   Placement for collection
   
97.32   Commercial service
   
97.33   Bulk
   
97.34   Fifty-five gallon drums prohibited
   
97.35   Residential service
   
97.36   Non-resident use of collection services, city landfill; fees; hours
   
97.37   Roll-out containers; responsibility to maintain
   
97.38   Bulk items service
   
97.39   Dead animals
   
97.40   Yard trash
   
97.41   Building materials, landscaping wastes, tree and shrubbery trimmings
and yard trash
   
97.42   Ashes
   
97.43   Cardboard boxes and cartons
   
97.44   Industrial waste
   
97.45   Hazardous, liquid waste; combustible industrial waste
   
97.46   Hazardous or dangerous refuse
   
97.47   Contagious disease refuse
   
97.48   Medical waste
   
97.49   Reserved
   
97.50   Sanitation fees
   
97.51   Tires, batteries and paint cans
   
97.52   Grass clippings and leaves
   
97.53   Improved property waste collection
   
97.54   Obligation of solid waste collection contract
 
   
97.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Littering at community market, see §
111.12
   Nuisances generally, see §
96.002
   Scattering handbills, see §
112.22
Statutory reference:
   Solid waste management, see G.S. § 130A-290
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL WASTE. The by-product of animals which is subject to decomposition,
decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odors,
or which during or after decay may serve as breeding or feeding material for
flies or other insects or animals.
   BUILDING OR STRUCTURAL MATERIALS. Materials such as lumber, bricks, plaster,
roofing, lumber and other substances accumulated as a result of repairs to or
construction of buildings or structures.
   BULK CONTAINER. A metal container of not less than four cubic yards nor more
than eight cubic yards of storage capacity.
   COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any office in or from which is conducted a
service; retail or wholesale stores; bottling plants; printing establishments;
religious, charitable or governmental offices; private clubs; hospitals;
restaurants.
   COVERED. Encased by a tarpaulin, camper cover, metal cover, rigid cover,
plastic, canvas or other suitable material, which is secured to prevent
spillage, leakage or materials blowing from the vehicle. Solid waste in plastic
bags shall not be considered COVERED.
   CURBSIDE. The space in front of the property in the grass strip between the
street and the sidewalk, where the strips exist or that space immediately
adjacent to that portion of the street right-of-way normally used by vehicles,
whichever is applicable.
   GARBAGE. Waste food, tin cans, paper, small paper boxes, glass, plastic and
similar non-bulky items commonly generated as waste through normal household
activities. GARBAGE does not include liquid that may be drained into the sewer,
large quantities of newspaper, building materials, lawn and garden waste (not
resulting from food preparation), medium and large paper boxes, dead animals,
non- acceptable refuse, and bulky items.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Waste generated from manufacturing operations or
industrial processing.
   MEDICAL WASTE. Includes, but is not limited to, microbiological waste,
pathological waste, regulated and non-regulated medical waste, remains and
sharps (including needles).
   NON-ACCEPTABLE REFUSE. Poisons, acids, caustics, infectious materials,
explosives, chemical liquids, whole trees, large tree limbs, tree stumps, tires
and rubber waste and refuse or similar materials for waste.
   ROLL-OUT CONTAINER (RESIDENTIAL). A container required and approved by the
city to collect residential garbage.
   SMALL DEAD ANIMALS. Cats, dogs, small household pets or other animals of
similar size. Not included are animals in excess of 75 pounds in weight.
   TRASH. All waste other than garbage, industrial waste and non-acceptable
refuse.
   YARD TRASH. Accumulation of lawn, grass or shrubbery cuttings or clippings,
bushes, limbs and dry leaf rakings free of dirt, rocks, large branches and
bulky or non-contestable material. YARD TRASH cannot exceed one-half ton in
total per resident per week.
   WHITE GOODS. Includes, but is not limited to, water heaters, microwaves,
washers, dryers and similar large, bulky appliances.
(Prior Code, § 8-1) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000; Ord. 06-11, passed 6-27-
2006)
§ 97.02 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   The administration of the provisions of this subchapter shall be the
responsibility of the Department of Public Works. It shall be the duty of the
Sanitation Division or other public officials to enforce all the provisions of
this subchapter and to make any and all inspections necessary to determine
whether or not the provisions of this chapter are being met.
(Prior Code, § 8-2) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000)
§ 97.03 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Officers, employees or representatives of the city shall have the authority
to enter upon property, to obtain an administrative search warrant if
necessary, to issue a notice of violation, to enter upon or authorize an agent
to enter upon and clean up the premises if there is no compliance with the
notices of violation and to file a lien against the property in the event that
the city seeks to secure the cost of bringing the property into compliance with
this code.
(Prior Code, § 8-3) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000)
§ 97.04 ABATEMENT.
   (A)   If the owner, occupant or tenant of any premises shall fail to remove
the weeds, trash, garbage, grass or other objects that cause the land to be
nuisance on the city within three days of notification, the city shall have the
authority to enter onto the land and clean the same; and to charge the cost or
expense of the action, plus administrative cost, against the owner, occupant
and/or tenant in that event, the charge or expense shall constitute a lien
against the properly, which lien may be collected in the same manner as the
collection of a tax lien.
   (B)   The Code’s enforcement officer shall enforce the provisions of this
section and is hereby authorized to use either city equipment or private
contractors, at the officer's discretion.
(Prior Code, § 8-4) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000)
§ 97.05 INTERFERENCE WITH PERSONNEL.
   It shall be unlawful to any person to interfere, harass or otherwise impede
any city inspector, employee or agent carrying out official duties, when acting
within the scope of official duties, or when the inspector, employee or agent
has authority to conduct an investigation under the authority of a lawfully
issued administrative search warrant and when carrying out the enforcement
provisions of this subchapter after a notice of violation has been issued and
the time for compliance has expired.
(Prior Code, § 8-5) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.06 RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS AND AGENTS.
   The owner, agent, tenant, occupant or leasee of all residential, commercial,
industrial, institutional or governmental establishments shall be responsible
for compliance with this chapter. OWNER, AGENT, OCCUPANT, TENANT or LESSEE, as
used in the section, shall mean anyone owning or occupying a dwelling, building
or premises for seven or more consecutive days and who is, thus, also
responsible for correcting the violation.
(Prior Code, § 8-6) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000)
§ 97.07 LITTERING.
   (A)   No person shall throw, dispose of or sweep any garbage, trash,
industrial waste or non- acceptable refuse into any street, storm drain,
manhole or median strip.
   (B)   No garbage or offensive or disease-producing materials shall be dumped
for any purpose in, or allowed to accumulate on, any lot or space within the
city limits.
(Prior Code, § 8-10) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000) Penalty, see §
97.99
Statutory reference:
   Littering, see G.S.§ 14-399
§ 97.08 BLOCKAGE OF STORM DRAINS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place any refuse, trash, refuse
receptacles or containers on, upon or over any storm drain or so close thereto
as to be drawn by the elements into the storm drain.
(Prior Code, § 8-11) Penalty, see §
97.99
Cross-reference:
   Obstruction of gutters, drains, see §
90.024
§ 97.09 ACCUMULATIONS GENERALLY.
   It shall be unlawful tor any person to maintain premises and private
property, including vacant lots or land upon which trash, garbage, appliances,
unbagged grass clippings, unbagged leaves, dead animals or miscellaneous
refuse, or any substance which causes foul odor, is permitted or caused to
accumulate in any manner which is or may become a nuisance, or which may damage
neighboring property. The owner and/or occupant of the property shall remove
any substance, vegetation or solid waste or correct any condition within seven
days after appropriate notice from the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-12) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.10 JUNK.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to have on his or her premises materials
that would create a littered condition such as dilapidated furniture,
appliances, machinery, equipment, building material, automobile parts, tires or
any other items which are in a wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked,
dismantled or inoperative condition, which are not completely enclosed within a
building or dwelling. This shall not apply to junk and salvage yards in
compliance with the city’s zoning ordinance.
(Prior Code, § 8-13) (Ord. passed 8-27-1991; Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000)
Penalty, see §
97.99
Cross-reference:
   Abandoned vehicles, see
Ch. 101
   Appliances, refrigerators, see §
96.003
§ 97.11 WEEDS, GRASS AND OTHER VEGETATION.
   It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or occupant of property to fail to
cut grass, weeds and other overgrowth on the property when the grass, weeds or
overgrowth is of a greater height than one foot on the average, or to permit
the property to serve as a breeding place for mosquitoes, as a refuge for rats
and snakes, as a collecting place for trash and litter, or as a fire hazard,
any of one of which situation is declared to be a nuisance. Vacant lots
adjacent to approved property shall be kept cut within 100 feet of the improved
property, the rest of which shall be cut at least three times per year during
the growing season (April through September).
(Prior Code, § 8-14) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.12 VEHICLES TRANSPORTING LOOSE MATERIALS; COVER REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a responsible person, as described in this
chapter, to operate a vehicle transporting loose materials within the city
without a suitable cover. This section shall not apply to the transportation of
poultry or livestock, or silage or other feed grain used in the feeding of
poultry or livestock, these being the only allowed exception. Any other
responsible person arriving at the city landfill and operating an uncovered
vehicle in violation of the above shall be allowed access to the landfill only
after being issued a first notice of violation. All violations of this section
following the first shall be subject to a citation to be issued by the Police
Department.
(Prior Code, § 8-15)
   (B)   Any person collecting and transporting solid waste generated on his or
her own property for disposal at an approved disposal site shall be required to
comply with this division (B). In addition, any person hauling solid waste must
specifically comply with the following:
      (1)   Spillage prohibited. The vehicles or containers used for the
collection and transportation of solid waste, shall be loaded and removed in a
manner that the contents will not fall, leak or spill from the vehicles or
containers. Materials spilled by any person shall be picked up immediately by
the person and returned to the vehicle or container and the area properly
cleaned.
      (2)   Cover requirements.
         (a)   Vehicles shall be covered by effective means during
transportation to prevent blowing of materials from the vehicle.
         (b)   EFFECTIVE MEANS shall include, but not be limited to, durable
heavy plastic or canvas, tied down or secured to cover all the load. Loads
consisting of bulky waste, white goods, lumber, pallets and crates do not have
to be covered, but shall be secured with rope or tie-downs to assure spillage
does not occur.
         (c)   Upon entrance into any designated facility gate, any removal of
covers on solid waste shall be prohibited until the destination in the
designated facility disposal area is reached.
      (3)   Enforcement. In addition to those who are authorized under the code
of ordinances for the city for enforcement of ordinances as to collection and
disposal of solid waste; those who are authorized as enforcement officers for
Cleveland County shall also have jurisdiction for the enforcement of this
division (B) within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 06-11, passed 6-27-2006)
Penalty, see §
97.99
Cross-reference:
   Spillage from vehicles, see §
90.016
§ 97.13 PRIVATE TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR REFUSE COLLECTION;
IDENTIFICATION.
   (A)   All collectors of refuse who desire to haul refuse over the streets of
the city shall use a water- tight vehicle provided with a tight cover and so
operated as to prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and refuse from being
dropped, blown or spilled.
(Prior Code, § 8-16)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any responsible person to operate, park,
stand or use upon any public street any vehicle used to transport loose
materials for a commercial purpose, unless the vehicle is properly identified
by lettering on both sides indicating the name of the company or person.
(Prior Code, § 8-17)
Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.14 TRACKING OF STREETS BY VEHICLES.
   No person shall operate on any street, public property or private property a
vehicle with mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter on its
wheels or other parts if the operation results in the depositing or tracking of
mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter onto any street or
public property or private property. No person being owner of real property or
a prime contractor in charge of construction site shall maintain the property
or construction site so that vehicles upon the property or construction site
pick up mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter and deposit or
track the mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter onto any
street or public property or private property. Where mud, dirt, concrete,
sticky and other substances, litter or foreign matter have been tracked or
deposited on any street, public property or private property in violation of
this section, it shall be immediately removed by the person responsible. The
term RESPONSIBLE PERSON, as used in this section, shall mean the driver of the
vehicle which deposited or tracked the mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter onto the street or the driver’s employer or the owner of the
real property or prime contractor in charge of a construction site from where
it originated. In addition to any other remedy, the Police Department is hereby
empowered to issue a citation to violators and assess a civil penalty based on
costs of cleanup as provided by G.S. § 160A-175(c).
(Prior Code, § 8-18) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.15 RECEPTACLES AT CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION SITES; CLEANUP.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any construction and/or demolition contractor
to fail to provide on-site refuse receptacles, bulk containers or detachable
containers for loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap building
material and other trash produced by those working on the site. All material
shall be containerized by the end of each day and the site shall be kept in a
reasonably clean and litter-free condition.
   (B)   The number of refuse receptacles, bulk containers or detachable
containers shall be determined by the size of the job. Dirt, mud, construction
materials or other debris deposited upon any public or private property as a
result of the construction or demolition shall be immediately removed by the
contractor.
   (C)   Construction sites shall be kept clean and orderly at all times.
(Prior Code, § 8-19) Penalty, see §
97.99
Cross-reference:
   Collection of building materials, see §
97.49
§ 97.16 RECEPTACLES AT LOADING AND UNLOADING AREAS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining a loading or unloading area
to fail to provide refuse receptacles for loose debris, paper, packaging
materials and other trash. The number of containers necessary for each area
shall be as required to maintain clean, neat and sanitary premises as directed
by the Sanitation Department.
(Prior Code, § 8-20) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.17 RECEPTACLES AT PARKING LOTS.
   All parking lots and establishments with parking lots shall provide refuse
receptacles distributed within the parking area. The Sanitation Department
shall be the authority to determine the number of receptacles necessary to
provide proper containerization. The receptacles shall be weighted or attached
to the ground as necessary to prevent spillage. It shall be the responsibility
of the owner or the manager of the parking lot to collect the refuse and trash
deposited in containers and store this material in an approved location for
collection. It shall be the obligation of all persons using the parking lot
areas to use the refuse receptacles or containers as hereinabove provided for
the purpose intended, and it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to
dump, scatter or throw upon the parking lot area any refuse, garbage or trash
of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 8-21) Penalty, see §
97.99
COLLECTION SERVICE
§ 97.30 RECEPTACLES AND CONTAINERS GENERALLY.
   (A)   All households shall be provided the necessary receptacles for refuse
subject to removal by the Sanitation Division of the Public Works Department.
The receptacles shall be assigned to the property owner (individual property
owner or landlord) or his or her designee (tenant). The roll-out container is
not to be removed from the premises to which it is assigned. Upon removal of
container, the property owner shall be billed for a new container. All roll-out
containers shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works or
his or her representative.
   (B)   Every person shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner
by placing it in bags before putting it in the roll-out container.
   (C)   Additional containers shall be stocked by the city and can be
purchased at cost upon request if one 95-gallon can is not sufficient to
contain the amount of garbage a household generates. No more than two
containers per household are permitted. Additional containers are subject to
extra landfill charges.
(Prior Code, § 8-30) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.31 PLACEMENT FOR COLLECTION.
   Refuse containers shall be placed for collection at ground level on the
property and with access without the need for walking or carrying a refuse
container over, under or around some yard or property obstacle. No refuse shall
be collected where refuse containers cannot be reached by city sanitation
personnel without unlocking or opening a door, gate or similar obstacle,
encountering a dog or otherwise being denied reasonable access by parked
vehicles, yard tools and equipment or other similar objects. Refuse which is
not inside a receptacle will not be collected.
(Prior Code, § 8-31) (Ord. passed 6-25-1991) Penalty, see §
97.99
Cross-reference:
   Containers at construction sites and loading areas and parking lots, see §§
97.15 through
97.17
§ 97.32 COMMERCIAL SERVICE.
   Commercial service shall be limited to four 95-gallon roll-out receptacles.
Collection shall be made on the regular schedule for residential collection in
the area where the establishment is located.
(Prior Code, § 8-32) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.33 BULK.
   (A)   Non-city-served. All non-city-served bulk containers and detachable
units shall at all times be kept in a place easily accessible to private
contractors and shall at all times be kept clean, neat, painted and in a good
state of repair. However, no bulk container or detachable unit shall be stored
in front of a business, residence, in front of the building line closest to the
street or on a public right-of-way. Commercial establishments leasing the
containers or units shall be responsible for notifying the company from whom
they are leasing the containers or units that they are in need of repair.
Owners or lessees of bulk containers or portable packing units shall be
responsible for notifying their service contractor of any damaged conditions.
The containers and units shall at all times be kept clean, neat, painted and in
a good state of repair.
   (B)   Residential apartment buildings.
      (1)   Requirements and specifications. Subject to the further provisions
of this section, owners of residential apartment buildings, mobile home park or
a group of residential apartment buildings in the same complex, wherein there
are more than seven living units either in a single building or the complex
treated as a unit, are hereby required to install and maintain for each
residential apartment building or mobile home park which contain more than
seven living units for each residential apartment or mobile home park group or
complex, which group or complex contains in the aggregate more than seven
living units, bulk refuse containers according to the following specifications:
         (a)   A minimum six cubic yards’ capacity bulk refuse container for
each residential apartment building or mobile home park which contains more
than seven and less than 17 units, and for each residential apartment group or
mobile home park or complex which group or complex contains in the aggregate
more than seven and less than 17 living units;
         (b)   A minimum eight cubic yards’ capacity bulk refuse container for
each residential apartment building which contains more than 16 and less than
25 living units, and for each residential apartment group or complex which
group or complex contains m the aggregate more than 16 and less than 25 living
units;
         (c)   Where a residential apartment building or a residential
apartment group or complex contains in excess of 24 living units, additional
bulk refuse containers are hereby required to be installed and maintained as a
minimum in the same ratio as herein set forth in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (b)
above; and
         (d)   Where a government subsidy housing group or complex exists, the
Public Works Director or his or her representative shall have the authority to
regulate the use of bulk containers or roll- out containers.
      (2)   Applicability to new construction. All of the provisions of
division (B)(1) above shall apply to all new construction, alteration or
conversion of residential apartment buildings, and any residential apartment
group, any mobile home park or complex for which any building permit shall be
or has been issued after the adoption of this section were the residential
apartment building or residential apartment group or mobile home park or
complex of buildings will contain more than seven living units; and no building
permit shall be issued after the adoption of this section for construction,
alteration or conversion of a building or group or complex of buildings falling
within the application of this section unless and until a plan approved in
writing by the Director of Public Works or his or her representative showing
adequate provision for installation of containerization of refuse as required
by this section, shall be furnished by the owner or developer; and no
residential apartment building or group or complex of residential apartment
buildings to which this section applies shall be constructed, altered or
converted after the adoption of this section without providing for the time and
maintenance of bulk refute containers as required by this section.
      (3)   Location. The location of required bulk refuse containers shall be
so as to permit convenient and safe access by the servicing truck and equipment
using all-weather streets or alleys of adequate strength to minimize as far as
reasonable permitted excessive walking distances for tenants and occupants; and
to be as aesthetically pleasing as the circumstances will reasonably allow, in
order to conveniently permit servicing of the bulk refuse containers. The
location shall be determined by the Director of Public Works or his or her
representative. However, no bulk container or detachable unit shall be stored
in front of a business, residence, in front of a building line closest to the
street or on a public right-of-way. Commercial or industrial establishments
leasing the containers or units shall be responsible for notifying the company
from whom they are leasing the containers or units that they are in need of
repair. Owners or lessees of bulk conferment or portable packing units shall be
responsible for notifying their service contractor of any damaged conditions.
The containers and units shall be at all times kept in a place safely
accessible to collection personnel and shall at all times be kept clean, neat,
painted and in a good state of repair.
(Prior Code, § 8-33) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.34 FIFTY-FIVE-GALLON DRUMS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Fifty-five-gallon drums are prohibited from use as receptacles for
refuse collection by city personnel.
   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the person in possession, charge or
control of the premises where the containers are being used for that purpose to
discontinue or refrain from the use.
(Prior Code, § 8-34) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.35 RESIDENTIAL SERVICE.
   (A)   All garbage and most trash will be collected from the curb once each
week, except for disruptions caused by inclement weather, holidays or
unavoidable circumstances.
   (B)   Roll-out containers shall be placed at the curb no later than 7:30
a.m. on the day of the scheduled pickup. Roll-out containers and other
receptacles shall be removed from the curb by midnight on the day of scheduled
pickup; it is the responsibility of the householder to pick up loose debris
around the collection area.
   (C)   The Sanitation Superintendent shall determine the area considered to
be the refuse collection pickup for roll-out containers.
   (D)   Back-door service is available for household garbage only on a once-
per-week basis for those persons who are unable to use the roll-out container.
This service is subject to the approval of the Public Works Director or his or
her designee and requires a doctor's certification.
(Prior Code, § 8-35) (Ord. passed 6-25-1991; Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000)
§ 97.36 NON-RESIDENT USE OF COLLECTION SERVICES, CITY LANDFILL; FEES; HOURS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person not a resident of the city to deposit or
cause to be deposited for collection by the city, other than in receptacles
provided for that purpose at food service establishments, any garbage, trash or
refuse in any container within the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-36) (Ord. passed 6-25-1991) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.37 ROLL-OUT CONTAINERS; RESPONSIBILITY TO MAINTAIN.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the householder or commercial
establishment to take proper care of the roll-out container. If the roll-out
container is stolen or damaged from improper use or neglect, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner or landlord or commercial establishment to replace
the container. The Public Works Director or his or her representative shall
have the authority to determine when a container becomes unserviceable and
advise the property owner of the appropriate action needed.
   (B)   The following types of material may cause damage to the roll-out
container and shall not be deposited in the container, no vehicle or motor
parts, batteries, concrete blocks, tree stumps, ashes, charcoal, paints,
solvents or other flammable materials.
   (C)   No person or persons shall interfere or otherwise deter the normal
refuse collection process by tampering with refuse containers or their contents
unless by permission of the Public Works Director or his or her representative,
nor shall any person place any hazardous refuse in any collection receptacle.
(Prior Code, § 8-37) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.38 BULK ITEMS SERVICE.
   Household furniture and/or large, bulky appliances shall not be placed at
the curb except as herein stated: upon request and payment, the city may
collect normal household discarded furniture and/or appliances including, but
not limited to sofas, chairs, beds, washers, dryers, water heaters and similar
items. Refrigerators and other appliances that may contain hazardous gas are
required to be tagged following the removal of the gas by a qualified person/
company. Additionally, the doors of any appliances must be removed prior to
pick up. All mattresses shall be wrapped in plastic for collection. Unwrapped
mattresses will be issued a notice of violation (door hanger) and the mattress
will not be collected until the mattress is wrapped. Residents, including
tenants or lessees, requesting this service of the Solid Waste Department will
be given a date for pick up upon payment of the fee. Items for collection shall
be placed at the curbside no earlier than the day preceding the scheduled
collection. An occupant of a multiple-residential unit must request bulk
service prior to vacating the unit or such removal becomes the responsibility
of the rental agency or owner of the property and at the agency/property
owner’s expense.
(Prior Code, § 8-38) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000; Ord. 17-02, passed 1-31-
2017; Ord. 24-02, passed 1-11-2024) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.39 DEAD ANIMALS.
   Small dead animals will be picked up without charge during normal working
hours of the Public Works Department. Owners of large dead annuals shall be
responsible for their removal and disposal.
(Prior Code, § 8-39) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000)
Cross-reference:
   Removal of dead animals, see §
99.08
§ 97.40 YARD TRASH.
   It shall be unlawful to store yard trash in receptacles or containers,
except as herein described. Yard trash may be combined in a receptacle for
backyard collection; provided, the contents of the receptacles or containers
shall not extend above the rim thereof, and shall be contained by tight-fitting
lids or sealed enclosure to prevent the carrying or depositing thereof by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk or public or private property. Total
capacity collected in the backyard shall be limited to three receptacles for a
total capacity of 64 gallons or one 90-gallon container; provided, all material
is placed in plastic bags. Receptacles and containers of yard trash shall be
placed at curbside for collection no earlier than noon on the day next
preceding the collection date. Any receptacle placed at curbside must be
removed by midnight on the day of collection.
(Prior Code, § 8-40) (Ord. passed 6-25-1991) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.41 BUILDING MATERIALS, LANDSCAPING WASTES, TREE AND SHRUBBERY TRIMMINGS
AND YARD TRASH.
   Building materials and landscaping shall be collected, removed and disposed
of by the city as set forth below:
   (A)   Tree and shrubbery branches, limbs and trimmings cut by landscape or
tree service contractors or other commercial workmen or resulting from land
being cleared by a contractor shall not be collected by the city.
   (B)   The city shall at no time remove or assist in the removal of tree
stumps (including any root ball or log remaining attached to a root ball)
resulting from the clearing of property of any kind. It shall be unlawful for
any person to place or deposit or to otherwise cause to be placed or deposited
any tree stump on city property at any time.
   (C)   The city shall assist homeowners in removing larger piles of tree
trimmings, if approved by the Public Works Director. This service shall be
available to residential areas only. The residents, including tenants or
lessees, requesting this service shall be billed at a rate of employee overtime
labor multiplied by 1.67 plus equipment and landfill charges for piles larger
than 5 feet x 5 feet x 5 feet. Prices will be quoted and agreed to in writing
prior to work being performed by the city. Rates may be subject to change.
(Prior Code, § 8-41) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000; Ord. 17-02, passed 1-31-
2017; Ord. 24-02, passed 1-11-2024) Penalty, see §
97.99
Cross-reference:
   Refuse receptacles, see §
97.16
§ 97.42 ASHES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to place ashes or live coals in containers unless
the ashes or coals have been wetted and are cool to the touch prior to
collection.
   (B)   Containers shall be of a size that they weigh not more than 75 pounds
and are capable of being handled by one person.
(Prior Code, § 8-42) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.43 CARDBOARD BOXES AND CARTONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person disposing of cardboard boxes, cartons or
crates to fail to collapse same prior to depositing refuse for collection.
(Prior Code, § 8-43) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.44 INDUSTRIAL WASTE.
   Tires and other rubber wastes, which are generated by businesses for which
these are the commercial products, shall dispose of this material by private
means.
(Prior Code, § 8-44) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000)
§ 97.45 HAZARDOUS, LIQUID WASTE; COMBUSTIBLE INDUSTRIAL WASTE.
   Hazardous or liquid waste or highly combustible industrial waste shall not
be collected by the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-45)
§ 97.46 HAZARDOUS OR DANGEROUS REFUSE.
   It shall be unlawful to place hazardous refuse in any receptacle used for
collection by the city. It shall be unlawful to place dangerous trash items and
all waste materials of injurious nature such as broken glass, light bulbs,
sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes and television tubes in containers
unless they are securely wrapped and marked so as to prevent injury to the
collection personnel.
(Prior Code, § 8-46) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.47 CONTAGIOUS DISEASE REFUSE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to remove clothing, bedding or other refuse from
homes or other places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed unless
performed under the supervision and direction of the County Health Department.
   (B)   The refuse shall not be placed in containers for city collection.
(Prior Code, § 8-47) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.48 MEDICAL WASTE.
   Medical waste shall not be collected by the city and shall not be included
in garbage to be collected by the city.
(Prior Code, § 8-48) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.49 RESERVED.
§ 97.50 SANITATION FEES.
   (A)   There shall be a schedule of sanitation fees as established by the
City Council. The fees so collected must be deposited in the Sanitation Fund
(formerly entitled the Landfill Disposal Fund), and used solely to pay any
costs associated with residential and commercial refuse collection, including
leaf collection and recycling. The fees shall be applied to two classes of
sanitation customers: residential and non-residential.
   (B)   A RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER is defined for purposes of the fee system as
the occupant(s) of any single residential dwelling unit. A dwelling unit may be
a single house on a single lot; part of an apartment, townhouse or condominium
complex; or a manufactured home (whether on a single lot or as part of a
manufactured home park).
   (C)   A NON-RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER is defined for purposes of the fee system
using the definition of a “city-served non-residential establishment” contained
in §
97.01. However, if a non- residential establishment can be serviced using only
one 90-gallon rollout container as provided by §
97.30, with the normal twice-weekly pickup, the establishment will be
transferred to the residential collection route and billed as a residential
customer.
   (D)   Any non-residential customer requiring an additional pickup beyond the
number normally billed, shall pay a surcharge of 20% of the normal monthly bill
for each additional pickup requested. The additional pickups must be approved
by the Public Works Superintendent, who shall notify the Finance Director of
the additional charges. The Finance Director shall have the additional charges
billed on the customer's next monthly utility bill.
(Prior Code, § 8-51) (Ord. passed 6-25-1991; Ord. 93-09, passed 5-18-1993)
§ 97.51 TIRES, BATTERIES AND PAINT CANS.
   (A)   The city will not pick up tires on rims and batteries. These items
must be taken by the owner to either the county landfill or a county maintained
refuse and recycling center.
   (B)   Paint cans will not be picked up by the city unless they have dirt,
sand or paper stuffed in them to eliminate paint being dropped on city streets
following compaction.
(Prior Code, § 8-52) (Ord. passed 8-27-1991; Ord. 05-15, passed 6-28-2005)
Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.52 GRASS CLIPPINGS AND LEAVES.
   (A)   The city will collect grass clippings and leaves at curbside, under
the following conditions.
      (1)   Grass clippings and leaves must be bagged, except leaves, will be
collected at curbside un-bagged from October 1, through February 15.
      (2)   At no time shall grass clippings or leaves be placed in the curb or
street. Placement shall be behind the curb, but (as a point of reference,
within the city-owned right-of-way or easement).
   (B)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to violations and
penalties as outlined in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-53) (Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000; Ord. 24-02, passed 1-11-
2024) Penalty, see §
97.99
§ 97.53 IMPROVED PROPERTY WASTE COLLECTION.
   All owners of improved property located within the corporate limits of the
city shall make use of and participate in solid waste collection services being
provided by and operated by the city excepting as to industrial waste which is
governed by §
97.44.
(Prior Code, § 8-54) (Ord. 98-01, passed 1-20-1998)
§ 97.54 OBLIGATION OF SOLID WASTE COLLECTION CONTRACT.
   That if any person, firm, association, corporation or entity, upon the date
of the adoption of this chapter, shall have a contract to provide solid waste
collection services which are being regulated herein, then it shall be the
obligation of that person, firm, association, corporation or entity to provide
evidence of such contract or agreement to the city or cease the provided of
such services. That such evidence as mentioned herein shall be a copy of the
contract with such having been entered into prior to January 20, 1998.
(Prior Code, § 8-55) (Ord. 98-01, passed 1-20-1998)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   The city may take one or more of the following course of action
in enforcing any violation of this chapter, except where otherwise provided:
         (a)   A civil penalty of $25 may be levied against any person who
violates any section of this chapter (with the exception of §§
97.10,
97.12 and
97.16 or where otherwise indicated), and who has been issued a citation in
accordance with division (B) below. A penalty of $10 may be levied against any
person who violates §
97.30 or any of §§
97.37,
97.46 and
97.50. A penalty of $50 may be levied for any violation of §§
97.10,
97.12 and
97.16. Any person in violation of §§
97.38 and
97.41 of this chapter, after five days of receipt of any written citation,
shall be subject to the following penalty, as calculated using the overtime
rate and landfill load charges, which apply at the time of pickup.
         (b)   The violator may be charged with a misdemeanor and be subject to
a penalty as prescribed by §
10.99.
         (c)   The city may apply to the appropriate court for an injunction
and order of abatement, which would require that a violator correct any
unlawful condition relating to this chapter on the person’s property.
         (d)   A lien will be levied against the property owner for the cost of
removal of solid waste, weeds or grass by city personnel or private contractor
as provided by the authority of the city.
         (e)   If the owner fails to pay the bill within 30 days, the city may
place a statutory notice of lien against the property for the cost of bringing
the property into compliance with this chapter. The city is authorized to
cancel any notice of lien filed pursuant to this chapter that has been
satisfied or that resulted from a clerical error. A property owner may
challenge the filing of a lien by appeal to the governing body within 30 days
of receipt of the written notice of violation. The governing body has the
authority to cancel the lien if it finds that the alleged violation of the
specific provision causing the filing of the lien did not exist.
(Prior Code, § 8-7)
      (2)   (a)   A written notice will be delivered or sent by certified mail
in the event that the person who has allowed the trash, garbage, refuse,
leaves, weeds, grass or overgrowth to accumulate on the property. It shall be
unlawful for any person, upon receipt of the notice to fail to comply within
three days.
         (b)   Enforcement officers are empowered to issue citations to any
person if there is reasonable cause to believe that the person has violated any
provision of this chapter. These citations may be delivered in person to the
violator, or if the violator cannot be readily found, the citation may be
mailed. The citation shall direct the violator to appear before the city
inspector in the Citizen Service Center, within ten days of the date of the
citation or, alternatively, pay the citation by mail. The violation must be
corrected by the time the citation is paid. Otherwise, another citation will be
issued.
         (c)   If the violator does not appear or does not pay the citation by
mail within ten days of its issuance, a delinquency charge of $10 shall be
added to the amount shown on the citation and a notice thereof will be mailed
to the violator. This notice shall inform the violator that a criminal summons
will be issued if the citation and delinquency charge are not paid within five
days from the date of the delinquency notice.
         (d)   If a violator fails to respond to the citation and delinquency
notice, the enforcement officer shall have a criminal summons issued against
the violator. The summons shall be for the violation of a section or a specific
provision of this chapter. Upon conviction, the violator shall be subject not
only to the citation and delinquent charge prescribed by the citation, but also
to any criminal penalty the court may impose pursuant to §
10.99 and to court costs.
         (e)   All citation forms shall be serially numbered in triplicate.
Records of all citations shall be maintained so that all forms shall be capable
of being accounted for. The Finance Officer shall periodically investigate
records of the Department for the purpose of determining the disposition of the
citations.
(Prior Code, § 8-8)
      (3)   All proceeds received from the collection of penalties shall be
deposited into the General Fund.
(Prior Code, § 8-9)
   (B)   (1)   Any person violating the terms of §
97.12(B) shall pay the following:
         (a)   For the first violation, a fine of $25;
         (b)   For the second violation, a fine of $50; and
         (c)   For the third and each subsequent violation, a fine of $100.
      (2)   If a citation shall be written for a violation by an enforcement
officer for the city, then the city shall be the recipient of the fines or
penalties which may be paid; and if the citation shall have been written by an
enforcement officer for Cleveland County, then Cleveland County shall be the
recipient of the fine or penalty paid.
(Ord. 00-26, passed 6-19-2000; Ord. 06-11, passed 6-27-2006; Ord. 24-02, passed
1-11-2024)
CHAPTER 98: FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
98.01   Chief of Fire Department; duties and functions
   
98.02   Inspection of hazards upon complaint
   
98.03   Right of entry; inspections
   
98.04   Use of methods to extinguish fires
   
98.05   Obstruction of firefighters at scene of fire
   
98.06   False alarms
   
98.07   Obstructing fire hydrants
   
98.08   Fire limits
Fire Prevention Code
   
98.20   Adoption
   
98.21   Scope
   
98.22   Bureau of Fire Prevention; establishment and duties
   
98.23   Inspections
Fire Lanes
   
98.35   Authority to designate
   
98.36   Factors to be considered; approval
   
98.37   Erection of signs and markings
   
98.38   Enforcement
   
98.39   Recorded fire lanes; schedule
Emergency Services Cost Recovery
   
98.45   Title
   
98.46   General purpose
   
98.47   Fee collection authorized
   
98.48   Fees and charges
 
   
98.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Allowing weeds and the like to become fire hazard, nuisance, see §
97.11
   Fires at city lakes, see §
92.26
   Storage of flammable materials in junkyards, see §
113.07
   Visibility of top of stacks at certain fuel burning plants, see §
96.053
Statutory reference:
   Condemnation of unsafe buildings, see G.S. §§ 160A-426 et seq.
   Establishment of fire limits, see G.S. § 160A-435
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 98.01 CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT; DUTIES AND FUNCTIONS.
   It shall be the responsibility of the Chief of the Fire Department to carry
out or have carried out all duties and functions enumerated in this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-1) (Ord. 92-26, passed 12-15-1992)
§ 98.02 INSPECTION OF HAZARDS UPON COMPLAINT.
   Whenever any person shall make written complaint to the Chief of the Fire
Department that any business or premises constitutes a fire hazard, it shall be
the duty of the Chief to have the same inspected immediately.
(Prior Code, § 7-2)
§ 98.03 RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTIONS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department, and any member of the Fire Department when
so directed by the Chief, shall have the right to enter any building or
premises within the city at any reasonable hour for the purpose of making any
inspection provided for by this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 7-6)
§ 98.04 USE OF METHODS TO EXTINGUISH FIRES.
   Any member of the Fire Department, or any person acting under the orders of
the Chief, shall have the right to go upon the premises of any person and to
enter any building or room and insert a fire hose and turn on the water or to
do any other act which may be necessary to extinguish or control any fire on or
in the premises, whenever, in the judgment of the Chief, it shall be necessary.
(Prior Code, § 7-7)
§ 98.05 OBSTRUCTION OF FIREFIGHTERS AT SCENE OF FIRE.
   No person other than a bona fide member of the Fire Department shall ride on
a fire truck either to or from any fire; in any way interfere with the
firefighters in their duties; or take hold of or handle any fire hose, except
when the person may have been called on or deputized to aid at a fire by the
Chief of the Fire Department or an acting Chief.
(Prior Code, § 7-8) Penalty, see §
98.99
§ 98.06 FALSE ALARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make a false alarm of fire
by ringing a fire bell, alarm signal, or other method which may be used by the
Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 7-9) Penalty, see §
98.99
Statutory reference:
   False fire alarms, see G.S. § 14-286
§ 98.07 OBSTRUCTING FIRE HYDRANTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any hydrant or fire plug in
a manner as to interfere with the easy approach to or the convenient use of the
same by the Fire Department.
(Prior Code, § 7-10) Penalty, see §
98.99
Statutory reference:
   Obstructing fire hydrant with vehicle, see G.S. § 20-162
§ 98.08 FIRE LIMITS.
   The fire limits are as set out from time to time by the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-2) (Ord. 93-11, passed 5-25-1993)
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
§ 98.20 ADOPTION.
   (A)   (1)   The Fire Department’s mission is to minimize the risk of fire
and other hazards to the life and property of the citizens of the city.
      (2)   To accomplish this mission, and for the purpose of prescribing
regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire,
explosion or exposure to hazardous materials, the city hereby adopts by
reference, as fully as though set forth herein, the most current edition of the
State Building Code, Fire Prevention,(herein referred to as “the Fire
Prevention Code”) as enacted and published by the State Building Code Council,
and as amended from time to time, and as adopted by ordinance in §
150.01 of this code.
   (B)   A copy of the Fire Prevention Code shall be maintained in the office
of the Fire Chief and in the office of the City Clerk.
(Prior Code, § 7-20) (Ord. 92-26, passed 12-15-1992)
§ 98.21 SCOPE.
   (A)   With the exception of one- and two-family dwellings, the provisions of
the Fire Prevention Code shall apply to the repair, equipment, use, occupancy
and maintenance of existing buildings and structures, and to the installation
of fire prevention systems for new buildings and structures.
   (B)   The Fire Prevention Code shall apply within the corporate limits of
the city and also within the boundaries of its extraterritorial jurisdiction,
established by the city for the enforcement of municipal regulatory powers
conferred by G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 19.
(Prior Code, § 7-21) (Ord. 92-26, passed 12-15-1992)
§ 98.22 BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION; ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention in the Fire Department, under the supervision of the Fire Chief. The
Fire Marshal in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be appointed by
the Fire Chief, who may also name qualified members of the Department as
inspectors from time to time as necessary. All fire inspectors must be
certified as fire inspectors by the State Department of Insurance.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Bureau of Fire Prevention to enforce all
laws and ordinances of the city covering the following:
      (1)   The prevention of fires;
      (2)   The storage, sale and use of combustible, flammable or explosive
materials;
      (3)   The maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm systems and fire
extinguishing equipment;
      (4)   The maintenance of fire escapes;
      (5)   The maintenance of exits in case of fire from factories, schools,
hotels, lodging houses, asylums, hospitals, churches, halls, theaters,
amphitheaters and all other places in which numbers of persons live, work or
congregate, from time to time and for any purpose;
      (6)   The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fires;
and
      (7)   The maintenance of fire cause and loss records.
   (C)   The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have other powers and perform
other duties as are set forth in the Fire Prevention Code and this chapter, and
as may be further conferred and imposed from time to time by law.
(Prior Code, § 7-22) (Ord. 92-26, passed 12-15-1992)
§ 98.23 INSPECTIONS.
   The storage of flammable and combustible liquids shall comply with all State
Building Codes and NFPA 30.
(Prior Code, § 7-23) (Ord. 92-26, passed 12-15-1992; Ord. 93-17, passed 6-29-
1993)
FIRE LANES
§ 98.35 AUTHORITY TO DESIGNATE.
   In accordance with the State Fire Code (Fire Code), as amended from time to
time, fire lanes are required within the city as set forth within this
subchapter. The Fire Marshal of the city, under the direction and supervision
of the Fire Chief, shall be the responsible party and shall have authority to
designate fire lanes necessary for fire apparatus accessibility within the
city.
(Ord. 96-15, passed 7-30-1996)
§ 98.36 FACTORS TO BE CONSIDERED; APPROVAL.
   (A)   In exercising his or her authority to designate fire lanes at a
particular location, the Fire Marshal shall consider the following factors:
      (1)   The availability of alternative areas of access by firefighting
vehicles to the particular property of facility involved in the case of fire,
without the need for a fire lane;
      (2)   The susceptibility of the property or facility involved to fire
damage and the effect of the damage on the public; and
      (3)   The gravity of the harm that would be caused to persons and
property in case of fire at the particular structure, property or facility
around which fire lanes are designated.
   (B)   Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of this
subchapter, the Fire Marshal may attach reasonable conditions to the approval
of the fire lanes as deemed necessary to further the purposes of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 96-15, passed 7-30-1996)
§ 98.37 ERECTION OF SIGNS AND MARKINGS.
   All designated fire lanes shall be marked as specified by the Fire Marshal.
A “No Parking” sign of the type specified by the Fire Marshal shall be
installed adjacent to the fire lane at the beginning and end of the fire lane
perimeter. Additional signs shall be posted at intervals not exceeding 75 feet.
The owner or occupant of the property shall furnish the signs adjacent to his
or her structure as required by the Fire Marshal. The sign shall be of metal no
less than 18 inches by 12 inches with the wording “No Parking, Fire Lane”. The
lettering shall be at least three inches high and no less than one-fourth inch
wide. The wording shall start at the top of the 18-inch length and proceed down
the length of the sign. The background color of the sign shall be white with
red lettering. Signs already in place shall remain until replacement is needed.
The mounting method, materials and height of the sign shall be as required by
the Fire Marshal to clearly indicate the designation and to put the drivers of
vehicles on notice of restrictions.
(Ord. 96-15, passed 7-30-1996)
§ 98.38 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Fire Code as referenced herein shall be principally enforced by the
Bureau of Fire Prevention of the Fire Department. All designated enforcement
officials of the city shall be certified by the State Code Officials
Qualifications Board. Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, the
authority of law enforcement officers to enforce the provision of this section
is clearly authorized and permitted.
(Ord. 96-15, passed 7-30-1996)
§ 98.39 RECORDED FIRE LANES; SCHEDULE.
   A copy of the required fire lanes shall be listed on a schedule of fire
lanes to be compiled and maintained by the Fire Marshal. Copies of this
schedule shall be filed with the Fire Chief, Police Chief and City Clerk for
their records, files and use in the administration of the city code and Fire
Codes of the city and state.
(Ord. 96-15, passed 7-30-1996)
EMERGENCY SERVICES COST RECOVERY
§ 98.45 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the Kings Mountain/
Cleveland and Gaston County Emergency Services Cost Recovery subchapter.
(Ord. 16-28, passed 7-26-2016)
§ 98.46 GENERAL PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is adopted in order to provided reimbursement to the city
for a portion of the costs incurred by the Fire Department for certain
emergency services provided.
(Ord. 16-28, passed 7-26-2016)
§ 98.47 FEE COLLECTION AUTHORIZED.
   The owner or occupant of a structure, vehicle, or property to which the Fire
Department or other department of the city/county provides fire suppression,
emergency management services, vehicle extrication, hazardous material
mitigation, or other Fire Department services, (collectively referred to in
this subchapter as “Emergency Response Services”) or any person or entity
causing the need for the fire or emergency services department to respond and/
or provided any emergency response service (the “Responsible Party”) shall pay
the cost of such service. Cost recovery fees are set forth in Exhibit A
attached to Ordinance 16-28 and are hereby found to not exceed the city/
county’s actual expense in providing such emergency response services. The fees
enacted herein apply to any services rendered by any city/county department to
whatever property or person, whether within the city/county or if requested by
any other entity, or if supplied by the city/county pursuant to any interlocal
cooperation agreement.
(Ord. 16-28, passed 7-26-2016)
§ 98.48 FEES AND CHARGES.
   The cost recovery fees will be collected in the amounts found in Exhibit A
attached to Ordinance 16-28, which may be revised periodically by the adoption
of a resolution by the City Council.
(Ord. 16-28, passed 7-26-2016)
§ 98.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   The parking of motor vehicles, or otherwise obstructing an officially
designated fire lane, shall be prohibited at all times per §§
98.35 through
98.39 as referenced herein. Any person who shall park in a fire lane shall be
subject to a $50 civil citation issued either by the Office of the Fire
Marshal, or by an officer of the City Police Department. All other legally
enforceable sanctions and penalties for violations as permitted by law may
otherwise be levied against a violator.
(Ord. 96-15, passed 7-30-1996)
CHAPTER 99: ANIMAL SERVICES
Section
General Provisions
   
99.01   Definitions
   
99.02   Exclusions
   
99.03   Territorial application of chapter
   
99.04   Presumption of ownership
   
99.05   Nuisance
   
99.06   Impoundment
   
99.07   Animals on sidewalks
   
99.08   Sanitation; animal waste
   
99.09   Restraint of dogs; penalty
   
99.10   Livestock running at large
   
99.11   Fowl running at large
   
99.12   County ordinance adopted
   
99.13   County ordinance; enforcement
   
99.14   County ordinance; conflict
   
99.15   Additional remedies
 
   
99.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 99.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL SERVICES OFFICER. Any employee by delegation of the Cleveland County
Animal Services Director that performs duties related to the investigation and
enforcement of violations of animal control activities carried out by the
county.
   DOG LOT. Any area enclosed or limited by any type of fence, wall, barrier or
other form of enclosure, and which is used at any time to confine or limit the
mobility of any dog.
   DOG SHELTER. Any type of structure or construction whatsoever which is used
to provide any form or degree of shelter from the natural elements for any dog.
   INTEGRAL PART. Any structure or any part, portion, division or area of any
structure which is connected, joined or in any manner attached to the principal
or larger portion of a residence.
   KEEPER. Any person, not an owner, who shall have possession or control of
any dog by permission of and with knowledge of the dog's owner, and who shall
be charged by the owner, either explicitly or implicitly, with the care of such
dog, either gratis or for compensation.
   KEEPING MAINTENANCE. Allowing a dog to remain on or about one's premises or
providing food, shelter, protection, personal care or any combination of such
activities to such dog.
   NEIGHBORING RESIDENTS. Any persons who shall reside, work or regularly
remain for substantial periods of time within any area wherein disturbing or
annoying sounds emitted or caused by any dog may be heard by such persons.
   OWNER. That person or any of those persons who shall either list such dogs
as a possession for any tax purposes; or shall obtain for such dogs any type of
preventive or remedial medical care; or shall provide to any dog on a periodic
basis either food, shelter or protection.
   PERSON IN CONTROL OF A DOG. The owner, keeper or any other person possessing
actual physical control over the conduct, whereabouts, care or behavior of a
dog by permission of the owner, by force of law or otherwise.
   TETHER. Any rope, chain, cable, leash, line or other pliable device which is
firmly attached to a fixed location at some point and which shall be firmly
attached to a dog at another point and which acts to confine a dog to a
specific geographical area.
   THREATENING DISPOSITION. A demonstrated tendency to threaten or a habit of
threatening imminent attack by charging; advancing upon; snarling, snapping or
lunging at; or otherwise apparently attempting to injure or intimidate any
person or animal without reasonable provocation or justification.
   VICIOUS. A predisposition or tendency to attack, bite, snap at, injure or
display overt aggression toward humans or animals without reasonable
provocation or justification.
(Ord. 22-02, passed 1-25-2022)
§ 99.02 EXCLUSIONS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any person acting in the
course of his or her normal duties as an employee of the city, the county or
the state.
(Ord. 22-02, passed 1-25-2022)
§ 99.03 TERRITORIAL APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   This chapter shall apply only within the corporate boundaries of the city,
as they may now exist and as may be hereafter amended.
(Ord. 22-02, passed 1-25-2022)
§ 99.04 PRESUMPTION OF OWNERSHIP.
   The listing as personal property for any tax purposes; the purchase of
rabies or any other vaccinations for any dog; or the affixing to any dog of any
type of collar, harness, choke chain, tax tag, rabies vaccination tag or any
form of identification tag or device bearing such person's name, address or
phone number or other means of identification, by any person, shall constitute
prima facie evidence of the ownership, keeping or control of such dog by such
person.
(Ord. 22-02, passed 1-25-2022)
§ 99.05 NUISANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to allow an animal under their
control to be a nuisance. The following actions or conditions, whether
occurring singularly or in combination, are declared to be a public nuisance:
   (A)   The owning, keeping or maintenance of any dog which is allowed to be
or remain unrestrained at any time by either a tether or enclosure adequate to
confine such dog, if off the premises of its owner;
   (B)   The owning, keeping or maintenance of any dog which habitually or
repeatedly barks, howls, whines, yelps or otherwise produces any sounds which
cause serious annoyance to neighboring residents, or which interfere with the
reasonable use and enjoyment of the premises occupied by such residents, or
which interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of public streets,
sidewalks or other public areas;
   (C)   The owning, keeping or maintenance of any dog which habitually or
repeatedly snaps at, attacks or threatens imminent attack toward any person
upon public sidewalks, streets or other public areas, or in any other manner
exhibits a vicious or threatening disposition;
   (D)   The owning, keeping or maintaining any dog which overturns or removes
material from trash or garbage containers, or which damages gardens, flowers,
vegetables or any other cultivated plants, or which otherwise conducts itself
at any time or in any place so as to constitute or create a public nuisance;
   (E)   The location of a shelter, cage or dog lot, or groups of shelters,
cages or dog lots housing one or more dogs over the age of six months within 25
feet of any residence, other than the residence of the owner of such dog,
except in the case of townhouses, condominiums, small parcels of land whereby
the 25-foot limit is impossible, and other such circumstances; and
   (F)   The owning, keeping or maintenance of any dogs within the corporate
limits of the city that, by reason of numbers being kept, creates conditions
that are unsanitary or noisy, or cause serious annoyance to neighboring
residents, or which interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of the
premises occupied by such residents.
(Ord. 22-02, passed 1-25-2022)
§ 99.06 IMPOUNDMENT.
   Animal Services officers are authorized to impound all animals and fowl
found running at large within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 22-02, passed 1-25-2022)
§ 99.07 ANIMALS ON SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, lead or drive or cause to be
ridden, led or driven any horse or other animal, except dogs, upon any curb or
sidewalk or footway in the city, except for the purpose of crossing such
sidewalk at the entranceway to adjacent lots, and then only for the purpose of
going into or out of such lots.
(Ord. 22-02, passed 1-25-2022)
§ 99.08 SANITATION; ANIMAL WASTE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain an animal in such a
manner as to constitute a nuisance. A violation of division (B) below is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to remove feces deposited
by a dog who is under the charge or control of that person or to allow any dog
who is under their charge or control to deposit feces on any public street,
sidewalk, gutter, park or other publicly owned property or private property,
unless the owner of the property has given permission allowing such use of the
property. This section shall not apply to visually impaired persons, who have
charge, control or use of guide dogs or persons using dogs in conjunction with
activities of the Police Department for the city.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of anyone reporting a violation of division (B),
as aforementioned, to reveal his or her identity to the Police Department when
making such a report. Anonymous reports of a violation of this section shall
not be investigated solely on the basis of the anonymous report.
   (D)   A violation of this section shall result in a civil penalty being
issued to such individual found to be in violation, in the amount of $50 for
the first offense; $100 for the second offense; and the sum of $500 for the
third or subsequent offenses. The civil penalties shall be paid directly to the
city within ten days of the issuance of a citation for such violation.
(Ord. 22-02, passed 1-25-2022)
§ 99.09 RESTRAINT OF DOGS; PENALTY.
   (A)   No dog shall be kept, maintained or allowed off the premises owned or
controlled by its owner or keeper unless it is then controlled by a tether,
leash or similar device.
   (B)   In addition to all other penalties prescribed by law, a dog is subject
to impoundment and all other applicable provisions of the Cleveland County
Animal Services Ordinance, if the dog is found off the premises of its owner or
keeper and unrestrained as provided for in division (A) above.
(Ord. 22-02, passed 1-25-2022)
§ 99.10 LIVESTOCK RUNNING AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having in his or her care or
custody any horse, mule, cow, calf, ox, hog, pig, sheep, lamb, goat or any
other animal to permit any such animal to run at large upon the streets or
sidewalks or the property of another, including any property owned by the City
of Kings Mountain.
(Ord. 22-02, passed 1-25-2022)
§ 99.11 FOWL RUNNING AT LARGE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having in his or her care or
custody any chicken or another fowl to permit such fowl to run at large upon
the streets and sidewalks or the property of another, including any property
owned by the City of Kings Mountain.
(Ord. 22-02, passed 1-25-2022)
§ 99.12 COUNTY ORDINANCE ADOPTED.
   The Cleveland County Animal Services Ordinance, as from time to time
amended, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set out
here.
(Ord. 22-02, passed 1-25-2022)
§ 99.13 COUNTY ORDINANCE; ENFORCEMENT.
   The Cleveland County Animal Services Ordinance shall be applicable within
the corporate limits of the city. The Cleveland County Animal Services
Department as established and governed by the county ordinance shall enforce
such county ordinance with the city limits with the full cooperation of the
city.
(Ord. 22-02, passed 1-25-2022)
§ 99.14 COUNTY ORDINANCE; CONFLICT.
   Where any conflict appears between the provisions of this chapter and such
county ordinance, the more restrictive shall apply and control.
(Ord. 22-02, passed 1-25-2022)
§ 99.15 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   In addition to the penalties provided in the chapter, enforcement of the
chapter may be by injunction, restraining order, or order of abatement from a
court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by G.S. 160A-175(d) and (e).
(Ord. 22-02, passed 1-25-2022)
§ 99.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The penalties for violations of this chapter shall be as follows:
      (1)   First violation - $100; and
      (2)   Second and subsequent violation - $200.
   (B)   The Cleveland County Animal Services Department is authorized to
collect, at the time of redemption, an appropriate penalty if the animal was
impounded due to a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   For the purpose of determining how many offenses have been committed,
and for determining the appropriate penalty, each offense shall remain on the
record of the Cleveland County Animal Services Department for a period of ten
years. Subsequent to the expiration of ten years, an offense shall be removed
from the record and no longer used for purposes of calculation of penalties.
(Ord. 22-02, passed 1-25-2022)
CHAPTER 100: SIGNS
Section
   
100.01   Signs within public rights-of-way and on public property; exceptions;
violations
   
100.02   Signs, banners across streets
   
100.03   Billboards near streets
   
100.04   Posting on property of others, consent required
   
100.05   Posting on poles prohibited
   
100.06   Mutilation of signs
 
   
100.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Advertising license and regulations, see
Chs. 110 and
112
§ 100.01 SIGNS WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY AND ON PUBLIC PROPERTY; EXCEPTIONS;
VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Restricted. It shall be unlawful for any person to attach, place,
paint, print, write, stamp or paste any sign, advertisement or other matter
within any public right-of-way of any public street, or upon any sidewalk,
overhead sidewalk or curb, or upon any post, pole, tree, tree stake or guard,
shrub, or fire hydrant in the public rights-of-way, or upon any bridge or
overpass within the city limits, except as provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the following signs:
      (1)   Signs regulating traffic;
      (2)   Signs required to be posted by law;
      (3)   Warning signs and no trespassing signs;
      (4)   Signs indicating bus stops, taxi stands and similar transportation
facilities;
      (5)   Signs not exceeding four square feet in area giving information
concerning the location or use of accessory off-street parking facilities or
loading and unloading facilities;
      (6)   Signs established by governmental agencies; and
      (7)   Signs permitted by the State Board of Transportation along state-
maintained streets. Proof of permission must be shown upon request.
   (C)   House numbers on curbs. Nothing in this section shall apply to the
painting of house numbers on curbs done with the prior approval of the
Engineering Department.
   (D)   Plaques and the like. Nothing in this section shall apply to the
installation of a plaque, statue or monument on public property with the
approval of the Board of Commissioners.
(Prior Code, § 13-40) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.02 SIGNS, BANNERS ACROSS STREETS.
   No person shall erect or place any sign or banner of wood, cloth, metal or
other material across any street or sidewalk in the city without permission by
the City Manager; provided, however, that, the governing body shall have power
to revoke any permit to erect or maintain any sign.
(Prior Code, § 13-41) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.03 BILLBOARDS NEAR STREETS.
   No billboard shall be erected unless placed 50 feet or more from any
sidewalk or street, and then it shall not be erected without a permit from the
city.
(Prior Code, § 13-42) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.04 POSTING ON PROPERTY OF OTHERS, CONSENT REQUIRED.
   No person shall post any bill, sign, poster or advertisement on any
building, fence, pole or other property belonging to another without the
consent of the owner thereof. The consent shall be secured in writing and the
written consent shall be exhibited by the person having the same to any police
officer on demand.
(Prior Code, § 13-43) Penalty, see §
100.99
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful posting of advertisements, see G.S. § 14-145
§ 100.05 POSTING ON POLES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall post any bills, posters, signs or advertisements on any
telegraph, telephone, electric light or other pole along any of the streets of
the city; provided that, this section shall not be construed to include street
signs, placed on the poles by the city for designating names of streets. Each
sign, poster, bill or advertisement posted in violation of this section shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Prior Code, § 13-44) Penalty, see §
100.99
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful posting of advertisements, see G.S. § 14-145
§ 100.06 MUTILATION OF SIGNS.
   It shall be unlawful to tear, deface, mutilate, take down or in any manner
destroy any advertisement, legal, public or private notice posted for public
view within the corporate limits; except that, the owner of the property, upon
which the advertisement or notice has been posted without the owner’s
permission may remove the same.
(Prior Code, § 13-45) Penalty, see §
100.99
§ 100.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   (1)   Violation of §
100.01 shall subject the violator to a penalty of $10 for each sign and the
City Inspector or any law enforcement officer shall be authorized to issue a
citation penalty of $10 for each sign in violation against any person
responsible for placing the sign or causing it to be placed. The issuance of
citations shall be in accordance with this code. If a violator has removed the
sign within seven days of a citation, then the city inspector shall have the
authority to declare the citation null and void. In addition, any person shall
be subject to all applicable punishment, penalties and equitable relief
provided for in §
10.99. Each violation shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Nothing
in §
100.01 shall preclude the issuance of an arrest warrant when appropriate.
      (2)   In addition to the enforcement described above, authorized city
personnel shall have the authority to summarily remove any notice, sign or
written material found in violation of §
100.01.
(Prior Code, § 13-40)
CHAPTER 101: ABANDONED, JUNKED AND NUISANCE VEHICLES
Section
   
101.01   Administration
   
101.02   Definitions
   
101.03   Abandoned vehicle unlawful; removal authorized
   
101.04   Nuisance vehicle unlawful; removal authorized
   
101.05   Junked vehicle unlawful; removal authorized
   
101.06   Removal; pre-towing notice requirements
   
101.07   Exceptions to pre-towing notice requirement
   
101.08   Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements
   
101.09   Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of
vehicle
   
101.10   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings
   
101.11   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle
   
101.12   Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property
   
101.13   Protection against criminal or civil liability
   
101.14   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle
   
101.15   Exceptions
§ 101.01 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Police Department and the Inspections and Codes Department shall be
responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. The Police
Department shall be responsible for administering the removal and disposition
of vehicles determined to be abandoned vehicles on the public streets and
highways within the corporate limits of the city and on property owned by the
city. The Inspections and Codes Department shall be responsible for
administering the removal and disposition of abandoned, junked, and nuisance
vehicles located on private property within the corporate limits of the city.
The city may, on an annual basis, contract with private tow truck operators or
towing businesses to remove, store and dispose of abandoned, junked, and
nuisance vehicles in compliance with this chapter and applicable state laws.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the legal authority of
officers of the City Police Department and Fire Department in enforcing other
laws or in otherwise carrying out their duties.
(Prior Code, § 8-60) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992; Ord. 24-49, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 101.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that:
      (1)   Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or
ordinance prohibiting parking;
      (2)   Is left on property owned or operated by the city for longer than
24 hours;
      (3)   Is left on private property without the consent of the owner,
occupant, or lessee thereof for longer than two hours; or
      (4)   Is left on any public street or highway for longer than seven days
or is determined by law enforcement to be a hazard to the motoring public.
   AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL. The supervisory employee of the Police Department or
the Codes Enforcement Officer of the Inspections and Codes Department,
respectively, designated to authorize the removal of vehicles under the
provisions of this chapter.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. A motor vehicle that does not display a current
license plate and that:
      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked;
      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it
originally was intended to move; or
      (3)   Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less than $500.
   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. All machines designed or intended to travel over
land or water by self-propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled
vehicle.
   NUISANCE VEHICLE. A motor vehicle on public or private property that is
determined and declared to be a health or safety hazard, a public nuisance, and
unlawful, including a vehicle found to be:
      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitos, other insects, rats, or
other pests;
      (2)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over
12 inches in height;
      (3)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water;
      (4)   A point of concentration of combustible items such as gasoline,
oil, other flammable or explosive materials including but not limited to boxes,
paper, old clothes, rags, refuse, or any other combustible material or objects
of a like nature;
      (5)   One which has parts thereof which may fall and injure members of
the public or one which may have parts which fall or be closed and become an
area of confinement which may not be released for opening from the inside;
      (6)   One which is so situated and located that there is a danger of the
vehicle falling, rolling, turning over, or creating an unsafe movement such as
unattended, blocked, or jacked vehicles;
      (7)   One which is a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal
waste, or any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind;
      (8)   One which has parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp edges
of metal or glass; or
      (9)   Any other vehicle specifically declared a health and safety hazard
and a public nuisance by the City Council.
   STRUCTURE. A building which is either a lawful, nonconforming use, or a
building erected pursuant to the lawful issuance of a building permit and which
has been constructed in accordance with all zoning and NC State Building Code
regulations.
   VEHICLE COVER. A product specifically designed by the manufacturer for the
purpose of covering vehicles. Covering material shall be non-transparent and
tight fitting to the contour of the vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 8-61) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992; Ord. 09-23, passed 8-25-2009; Ord.
24-49, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 101.03 ABANDONED VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Upon investigation, proper officials of the city may determine that a
vehicle is an abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a motor vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be abandoned.
(Prior Code, § 8-62) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992; Ord. 24-49, passed 12-10-2024)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 101.04 NUISANCE VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Upon investigation, the Code Enforcement Officer of the city may
determine and declare that a vehicle is a nuisance vehicle as defined herein
and order the vehicle removed.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the
real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle
to remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle.
(Prior Code, § 8-63) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992; Ord. 24-49, passed 12-10-2024)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 101.05 JUNKED VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   Upon investigation, the Code Enforcement Officer of the city may
determine and declare that a vehicle is a junked vehicle and order the vehicle
removed after finding in writing that the aesthetic benefits of removing the
vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the private property owner. Such
finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the apparent
owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or enhancing
community, neighborhood or area appearance. The following, among other relevant
factors, may be considered:
      (1)   Protection of property values;
      (2)   Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities;
      (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;
      (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the community;
      (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness, and emotional stability of
area residents; or
      (6)   Any other factor which is relevant to make this determination.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the register owner or person entitled to
possession of a motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee, or occupant of the
real property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle
to remain on the property after the vehicle has been declared a junked vehicle
and has been ordered removed.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any owner, person entitled to the possession
of a junked vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real property
upon which a junked vehicle is located to fail to comply with the following
location and concealment requirements.
      (1)   A single junked vehicle, in its entirety, can be located in the
rear yard if the vehicle is entirely concealed from public view from public
streets or from abutting premises by an acceptable vehicle cover, as the term
is defined herein. The Code Enforcement Officer has the authority to determine
whether any junked vehicle is adequately concealed as required by this
provision. The vehicle covering must remain in good repair and must not be
allowed to deteriorate.
      (2)   One or more junked vehicles can be located within a structure, as
defined herein, that provides a complete enclosure so that the vehicle(s)
cannot be seen from a public street or from abutting premises.
(Prior Code, § 8-64) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992; Ord. 24-49, passed 12-10-2024)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 101.06 REMOVAL; PRE-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as set forth in §
101.07, an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which is to be removed shall
be towed only after notice to the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of the vehicle. In the case of a nuisance vehicle or a junked
vehicle, if the names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person
entitled to the possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee or occupant of
the real property upon which the vehicle is located can be ascertained in the
exercise of reasonable diligence, the notice shall be given by first class mail
or personal delivery. The person who mails the notice(s) shall retain a written
record to show the name(s) and addresses(es) to which mailed, and the date
mailed. The notice shall state that the vehicle will be removed by the city on
a specified date, no sooner than seven days after the notice is mailed or
personally delivered, unless the vehicle is moved by the owner or legal
possessor prior to that time. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the first-
class mail is not returned by the post office within ten calendar days after
the mailing.
      (2)   If the names and addresses cannot be ascertained or if the vehicle
to be removed is an abandoned vehicle, notice shall be given by affixing on the
windshield or some other conspicuous place on the vehicle. The notice shall
state that the vehicle will be removed by the city on a specified date, no
sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed, unless the vehicle is moved
by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time.
   (B)   With respect to abandoned vehicles on private property, nuisance
vehicles and junked vehicles to which notice is required to be given, if the
registered owner or person entitled to possession does not remove the vehicle,
but chooses to appeal the determination that the vehicle is abandoned, a
nuisance vehicle or in the case of a junked vehicle that the aesthetic benefits
of removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens, he or she may submit a written
request of appeal to the Director of the Inspections and Codes Department
before the seven day period has expired. The appeal shall be heard by the City
Manager within 30 days of the appeal and further proceedings to remove the
vehicle shall be stayed until the appeal is heard and decided.
(Prior Code, § 8-65) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992; Ord. 99-08A, passed 4-27-1999;
Ord. 24-49, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 101.07 EXCEPTIONS TO PRE-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an
abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle may, as determined by the authorizing
official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a special need for
prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to otherwise maintain and
protect the public safety and welfare. The findings shall, in all cases, be
entered by the authorizing official in the appropriate daily records.
   (B)   Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior notice
includes:
      (1)   Vehicles abandoned on streets. For vehicles left on the public
streets and highways, the City Council hereby determines the immediate removal
of the vehicles may be warranted when they are:
         (a)   Obstructing traffic;
         (b)   Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting
parking;
         (c)   Parked in a no stopping or standing zone;
         (d)   Parked in loading zones;
         (e)   Parked in bus zones; or
         (f)   Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed
under code sections.
      (2)   Other abandoned or nuisance vehicles. With respect to abandoned or
nuisance vehicles left on city owned property other than the streets and
highways, and on private property, the vehicles may be removed without giving
prior notice only in those circumstances where the authorizing official finds a
special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health,
safety and welfare. By way of illustration and of limitation, the circumstances
include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to businesses and
residences, vehicles parked in a location or manner as to pose a traffic hazard
and vehicles causing damage to public or private property.
(Prior Code, § 8-66) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992; Ord. 24-49, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 101.08 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; POST-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which has been ordered
removed may, as directed by the city, be removed to a storage garage or area by
the tow truck operator or towing business contracting to perform the services
for the city. Whenever a vehicle is removed, the authorizing official shall
immediately notify the last known registered owner of the vehicle, the notice
shall include the following:
      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;
      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;
      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
      ( 4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and
      (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause
hearing on the removal.
   (B)   The city shall attempt to give notice to the vehicle owner by
telephone; however, whether or not the owner is reached by telephone, written
notice, including the information set forth in divisions (A)(l) through (A)(5)
above, shall also be mailed to the register owner's last known address, unless
this notice is waived in writing by the vehicle owner or his or her agent.
   (C)   If the vehicle is registered in the state, notice shall be given
within 24 hours. If the vehicle is not registered in the state, notice shall be
given to the registered owner within 72 hours from the removal of the vehicle.
   (D)   Whenever an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle is removed, and the
vehicle has not valid registration or registration plates, the authorizing
official shall make reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle
identification number, to determine the last known registered owner of the
vehicle and to notify him or her of the information set forth in divisions (A)
(l) through (A)(5) above.
(Prior Code, § 8-67) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992; Ord. 24-49, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 101.09 RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OR FINAL DISPOSITION OF
VEHICLE.
   After the removal of an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle, the owner or
other person entitled to possession is entitled to a hearing for the purposes
of determining if probably cause existed for removing the vehicle. A request
for hearing must be filed in writing with the County Magistrate designated by
the Chief District Court judge to receive the hearing request. The Magistrate
will set the hearing within 72 hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing
will be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the applicable state
general statutes.
(Prior Code, § 8-68) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992; Ord. 24-49, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 101.10 REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.
   At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of the removed vehicle by paying the
towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting a bond for double the
amount of the fees and charges to the tow truck operator or towing business
having custody of the removed vehicle. Upon regaining possession of a vehicle,
the owner or person entitled to the possession of the vehicle shall not allow
or engage in further violations of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-69) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992; Ord. 24-49, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 101.11 SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.
   Any abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle which is not claimed by the owner
or other party entitled to possession will be disposed of by the tow truck
operator or towing business having custody of the vehicle. Disposition of a
vehicle shall be carried out in coordination with the city and in accordance
with G.S. 44A-1 et seq.
(Prior Code, § 8-70) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992; Ord. 24-49, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 101.12 CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   As a general policy, the city will not remove a vehicle from private
property if the owner, occupant or lessee of the property could have the
vehicle removed under applicable state law procedures. In no case will a
vehicle be removed by the city from private property without a written request
of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those cases where a vehicle is a
nuisance or junked vehicle which has been ordered removed by the Code
Enforcement Officer. The city may require any person requesting the removal of
an abandoned, nuisance or junked vehicle from private property to indemnify the
city against any loss, expense or liability incurred of the removal, storage or
sale thereof.
(Prior Code, § 8-71) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992; Ord. 24-49, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 101.13 PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.
   No person shall be held to answer in any civil or criminal action to any
owner or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned,
nuisance or junked vehicle, for disposing of the vehicle, as provided in this
chapter.
(Prior Code, § 8-72) (Ord. passed 3-31-1992; Ord. 24-49, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 101.14 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any
storage facility designated by the city, any vehicle which has been impounded
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless and until all towing and
impoundment fees which are due, or bond in lieu of the fees, have been paid.
(Ord. 24-49, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 101.15 EXCEPTIONS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any vehicle which is:
   (A)   Located in a bona fide "automobile graveyard" or "junkyard" as defined
in G.S. 136-143, in accordance with the Junkyard Control Act, G.S. 136-141 et
seq;
   (B)   In an enclosed building;
   (C)   On the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a lawful
place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the
enterprise; or
   (D)   In an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a lawful
place and manner as permitted by the city.
(Ord. 24-49, passed 12-10-2024)
CHAPTER 102: ADDRESSING
Section
   
102.01   Purpose
   
102.02   Application
   
102.03   Assignment
   
102.04   Placement and display
   
102.05   Change of addresses
   
102.06   Liability
§ 102.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to define the process in which correct
structure addressing is determined, assigned and communicated within the city
in an effort to expedite the provision of emergency services of EMS, fire,
police, and other public services.
(Ord. 10-22, passed 9-28-2010; Ord. 23-33, passed 10-12-2023)
§ 102.02 APPLICATION.
   Any person or business owning property within the city limits on which an
“addressable structure” has been constructed and/or otherwise created should
adopt, properly display and maintain legible premises numbers on the structure
as designated or assigned by Development Services. Premises numbers shall be of
adequate size to be legible by the motoring public when viewed from the far
lane of the roadway.
(Ord. 10-22, passed 9-28-2010; Ord. 23-33, passed 10-12-2023)
§ 102.03 ASSIGNMENT.
   (A)   Internal.
      (1)   Addresses within the city shall be assigned by Development
Services. This assignment is made as part of the building permit process. After
the address has been made, notification of the new address will be forwarded to
appropriate agencies as listed on the address notification list.
      (2)   When assigning an address to a new structure, Development Services
will refer to a variety of information sources to assist in the correct address
assignment. These sources may include plats on file, the GIS address data base
and/or performing a field inspection in order to obtain the appropriate address
assignment.
      (3)   Methodology. The methodology used to determine the assignment of an
address to a location shall be as follows:
         (a)   The city shall be divided by a north-south and east-west plane.
Both the north-south and east-west plane shall originate at the intersection of
King Street and Piedmont Avenue, extending outward to the current and future
land boundaries of the city. The term AXIS found later in this chapter refers
to the intersecting of the two planes at King and Piedmont.
         (b)   The assignment of an address shall be at the federally
recommended standard of 5.82 feet or 25 feet; the decision of which will be
made by the assigned Development Services personnel after taking into account
surrounding parcels and expected future development.
         (c)   The range of addresses shall begin with the lowest number in
that range that is closest to the road of origin; this number shall increase in
value as distance from the road of origin also increases. Each block
constitutes a new series (i.e., 101, 201, 301 and so on).
         (d)   If the road that is being addressed does not have a discernable
point of origin but connects two roads (such as a local road between two
connector roads) the road closest to the central axis shall be considered the
road of origin.
         (e)   For all new roads, addresses shall be assigned with odd numbers
on the left and even on the right. In utilizing the terms “left” and “right”
when referring to the “road of origin,” directionality will be determined as
one travels away from the aforementioned central axis.
         (f)   For a new subdivision, address assignments will begin with
either an even or odd number but not both. If a right turn must be taken to
enter the subdivision from the road of origin, all address ranges will begin
with an even number. Just as well, if a left turn must be taken to enter the
subdivision, address ranges will begin with an odd number. Division (A)(3)(c)
applies to address assignments within subdivisions.
         (g)   In cul-de-sacs, the street numbers shall continue to increase
accordingly to the left and right of the street centerline while approaching
the back of the cul-de-sac. The building being the most perpendicular to the
centerline of the street at the back of the cul-de-sac shall have the highest
numerical number, whether it be an even or an odd number.
         (h)   Numbers shall run in an ascending order from east to west on
streets that are west of the north-south plane. Just as well, numbers shall run
in an ascending order from west to east on streets east of the north-south
plane. For roads that are north of the east-west plane, addresses shall be
assigned in ascending order from south to north. Roads that are south of the
east-west plane shall be addressed in ascending order from north to south.
         (i)   Roads which connect to both planes shall begin their numbering
on the end that originates from/closest to the north-south plane.
         (j)   All roads with a dead-end shall begin with numbers at the open
end, regardless of the direction they follow. Just as well, roads which do not
run north-south or east-west shall begin numbering at the end closest to the
center axis.
         (k)   Roads that have both ends opening from the same direction shall
begin numbering on the end closest to the axis.
      (4)   In the assignment of an address, there are certain situations where
an address may have to be modified, in some form, to facilitate multiple
businesses or residences located within one structure/location. Just as well,
certain special situations may allow the above described methodology to be
deviated from.
         (a)   For a multi-structure commercial development, such as a business
park, a singular address will be assigned to that particular parcel in
accordance with the standard methodology. However, the buildings associated
with that development will be provided building numbers. For example, parcel
number 12345 would be 100 Nowhere Ave. but buildings located at the address
will Building 1, Building 2, and so on.
         (b)   In instances where multiple addressable structures are placed on
one lot and this lot has street frontage and no interior named street exists,
an address will be assigned to the parcel in accordance with the above
described methodology. Structures within will be assigned a hyphenated number
behind the parcel address, this will go in ascending order starting with the
building closest to the road of origin (i.e., 100-1, 100-2, and the like).
         (c)   In instances where separate commercial and/or residential
establishments are located adjacent to each other in one continuous structure,
a new address may be assigned in accordance with division (A)(3)(b) in the
above described methodology if there is direct street access.
         (d)   In instances where separate commercial and/or residential
establishments are located within one structure that does not have direct
street contact, such as structures with a central atrium or apartment building,
each unit within shall receive a separate unit number assigned by the owner of
the establishment.
         (e)   In instances where a cell tower or a utility box requires an
address assignment, due to a telephone service on site that requires E-911
recognition, an address shall be assigned utilizing the above described
methodology. However, a hyphenated alphabetical value will be assigned after
the main address to denote its particular use. In instances where the cell
tower or utility box is placed on a lot that has an existing address, the
appropriate suffix shall be added to the existing site address. Cellular towers
shall have a “C” and utility boxes shall have an “U” after their assigned
address numbers.
         (f)   Any special circumstance not listed in the above section may be
presented to Development Services for further review. If a discrepancy is
discovered or a situation warrants clarification; a proposal for modification
of the addressing policy may be submitted.
   (B)   External.
      (1)   When an address is assigned during the permit process, it shall be
the responsibility of the
person applying for the permit to relay the assigned address information to the
owner or occupant after the permit has been approved and picked up. The
assigned street number shall be properly posted before occupancy.
      (2)   In instances where a new subdivision or new street is created, the
Post Office and the E-911 office shall be notified and provided with a site map
showing the new subdivision or new street. In order for the E-911 office to
effectively maintain their MSAG (Master Street Address Guide) address ranges,
they shall be provided with a list of the potential street number assignments.
The numbers provided during this process are unofficial until they have
undergone the permitting process.
      (3)   For new subdivisions, commercial developments, and other private
development projects that will include public right-of-ways to service
addresses within/around the development, a list of four potential street names
must be submitted to Development Services for review. Street names provided
must not be similar, in both pronunciation and spelling, to any other street
name in Kings Mountain or any street originating outside of city limits that
passes through. If no suitable street name is available from what is provided
by a developer or citizen, a list of potential street names shall be provided
by Development Services until an agreed upon street designation is reached.
(Ord. 10-22, passed 9-28-2010; Ord. 23-33, passed 10-12-2023)
§ 102.04 PLACEMENT AND DISPLAY.
   (A)   In instances of new construction, the owner, occupant or agent of each
house, building or other structure who was assigned a street number through the
permitting process shall place the assigned street number on the structure
prior to occupancy.
   (B)   Costs and installation of the street number is not the responsibility
of the city but rather the property owner. Residential district street numbers
must not be less than six inches in height. Commercial business district street
numbers must not be less than eight inches in height. Numbers on both
residential and commercial structures must have at least a minimum stroke width
of one inch (25.5 mm) and shall not be spelled out. All numbers must be made of
a durable, clearly visible material and must contrast with the color of the
surface on which they are mounted.
   (C)   Street numbers must be conspicuously placed immediately above, on or
to the side of the appropriate door so that the number is clearly visible from
the street. In cases where the structure is situated more than 50 feet from the
street, the assigned street number must also be placed near the walk, drive, or
common entrance to the structure location in a way that it is clearly visible
from the road. The numbers may also be placed upon a mailbox, gatepost, fence,
or other appropriate place so as to be clearly visible from the street of the
assigned address. U.S. Postal Regulations for Mail Receptacles, D041-2.3,
requires the assigned street number to be posted on any road-side mailbox.
   (D)   In instances where an address is assigned to one lot, using the
guidelines set forth in §
102.03(A)(4)(d), the assigned street number shall be placed at the main
entrance. Every unit or building in the complex shall be identified (posted)
with its assigned unit or building number.
(Ord. 10-22, passed 9-28-2010; Ord. 23-33, passed 10-12-2023)
§ 102.05 CHANGE OF ADDRESSES.
   (A)   To facilitate the emergency services and help ensure that public
services are accurately and safely provided, it sometimes becomes necessary to
change a previously assigned address which includes structure number and street
name. When the city must necessitate a change of an assigned address or
currently used street name, the property owners and/or lessees affected by the
change shall be notified, via certified mail, of the proposed change. They
shall then be given not less than 30 days to respond, in writing, to the
proposed change. All written responses challenging the proposed change shall be
weighed on their individual merit. Development Services may solicit the
expertise of the E-911 coordinator, Post Office Address Management, Police
Department, Fire Department, and/or Codes Department as needed, in order to
arrive at an educated decision. Development Services shall give written
notification of its final decision within 30 days of the initial response from
the property owner and/or lessee and this decision shall be final. If a
response, in writing, is not received from the property owner and/or lessees
within the 30-day time period challenging the proposed change, the property
owner and/or lessees shall be notified, via certified mail, that the change of
address is henceforth in effect and then 21 days from the date of receiving
this letter to post the correct street number.
   (B)   This policy change is, at times, in direct conflict with the
previously established method of addressing within the city. As such, changes
to existing addresses shall be made at times when the burden of change is
lessened for the property owner. An example of this may be when a change of
ownership occurs or a property with an addressable structure becomes available
for sale. It is during this time period that Development Services shall consult
multiple resources to determine if an address reassignment will be needed. If
so, the provisions set forth in §
102.05(A) shall apply.
   (C)   If a property owner(s) desires a road name changed, a petition must be
submitted to Development Services explaining the need for the change. The
petition must include three potentially non-duplicate and non-confusing names
and the signatures of all of the property owners accessible from the road. All
affected property owners must be in favor of the change and indicate so on the
petition. Name does not include the descriptor of the type of street (road,
street, lane, court, drive, trail, avenue, way, boulevard and the like). If the
road is included within a homeowner association neighborhood, the petition must
be signed by the president, as well as every member within the association.
      (1)   Changes initiated by a petition (property owner/owners) are
responsible for the cost of all new signs associated with the change.
      (2)   No renaming of roads will be considered that is a duplicate, or a
road that is deceptively or phonetically similar to any existing road
(regardless of type) in both Cleveland and Gaston Counties.
   (D)   The Codes, Customer Service, Utilities, Public Works, Fire, and Police
Departments shall be notified of any address change that is implemented as
indicated in the address notification list.
      (1)   The property owner and/or lessee shall make the appropriate changes
of address within 21 days after receiving final written notice from Development
Services.
      (2)   Other entities, relying on address data, shall be notified of any
address change as indicated in the address notification list.
(Ord. 10-22, passed 9-28-2010; Ord. 23-33, passed 10-12-2023)
§ 102.06 LIABILITY.
   The city, its officers, agents or employees, together with any person
following its instructions in rendering address assignment services, are not
liable for civil damages as a result of an act, omission or interpolation of
the sections as set forth under the street addressing policy for the city.
(Ord. 10-22, passed 9-28-2010; Ord. 23-33, passed 10-12-2023)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS
      
111.   COMMUNITY MARKETS
      
112.   ADVERTISING
      
113.   JUNK DEALERS
      
114.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
      
115.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
116.   TAXICABS
      
117.   ICE CREAM VENDORS
      
118.   ROOM OCCUPANCY
      
119.   CABLE TELEVISION
      
120.   SHORT-TERM LEASE, RENTAL OF VEHICLES
CHAPTER 110: OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Construction
   
110.03   License tax levied
   
110.04   License prerequisite to conduct business
   
110.05   Who is required to pay
   
110.06   When tax due
   
110.07   Proration of fee
   
110.08   Abatement; refund of tax
   
110.09   Separate business; separate place
   
110.10   Exemption from paying tax
   
110.11   Application
   
110.12   Issuance of license
   
110.13   Tax Collector to keep copy
   
110.14   Assignment of license restricted
   
110.15   Display
   
110.16   Duplicates
   
110.17   Change in business conducted by licensee during the license year
   
110.18   Revocation; suspension
   
110.19   License tax schedule
Specific Businesses
   
110.30   Alcoholic beverages
   
110.31   Auctions
   
110.32   Bankruptcy, salvage stock
   
110.33   Pawnbrokers
   
110.34   Pool rooms and billiard halls
 
   
110.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENT. A person acting or doing business for another.
   BUSINESS. Any business, trade, occupation, profession, avocation or calling
of any kind, subject by the provision of this chapter to a license tax.
   ENGAGED (OR ENGAGING) IN BUSINESS WITHIN THE TOWN. Engaging in business
activity of any type, either as owner or operator of the businesses:
      (1)   By maintaining a business location within the city;
      (2)   By soliciting business within the city; or
      (3)   By picking up or delivering merchandise or performing services with
the city.
   FISCAL YEAR. The period beginning with July 1 and ending with June 30 of the
following year.
   SEASONAL IN NATURE. A business in which is conducted for profit six months
out of the year or less.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008)
§ 110.02 CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   This subchapter is enacted for revenue purposes only.
   (B)   Therefore, it should be construed to require payment of the maximum
fee permitted under its terms.
   (C)   In addition, issuance of a privilege license in accordance with this
subchapter does not excuse a licensee from compliance with the applicable
ordinance or statute.
   (D)   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall be construed to prevent the
governing body from imposing from time to time other license taxes as are not
specifically herein defined or required, from increasing or decreasing the
amount of any license tax herein provided or from prohibiting or regulating the
business or acts licensed.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008)
§ 110.03 LICENSE TAX LEVIED.
   (A)   There is levied and shall be collected annually, or oftener where
provided for, a privilege license tax on all businesses conducted or engaged in
within the city limits, as set out in this chapter.
   (B)   Privilege license fees are determined periodically by the city through
adoption of a privilege license fee schedule in accordance with the state
revenue laws and are stated in the privilege license fee schedule.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008)
§ 110.04 LICENSE PREREQUISITE TO CONDUCT BUSINESS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or the agent of any person to
engage in or carry on a business in the city, for which a license is required
by the provisions of this subchapter, without having paid the license tax and
obtained the license.
   (B)   If the failure, neglect or refusal to apply for and obtain the
privilege license be continued, the person shall pay an additional tax of 5% of
the amount of the privilege license tax which was due and payable at the
commencement of the business, trade, employment or profession or doing the act,
in addition to the privilege license tax imposed by this subchapter, for each
30 days that the privilege license tax remains unpaid from the date that same
was due and payable.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008) Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Engaging in business without license, see G.S. § 105-109
   License prerequisite to conduct of business, see G.S. § 105-103
§ 110.05 WHO IS REQUIRED TO PAY.
   (A)   Each person, except those otherwise exempt by this subchapter, who
conducts business within the city corporate limits is subject to privilege
license fees.
   (B)   (1)   A person “conducts business” when he or she engages in one act
of business taxed under this subchapter.
      (2)   One conducts the business “within the city” if he or she maintains
a business location within the city corporate limits or if, either personally
or through agents, he or she:
         (a)   Solicits business within the corporate city limits; or
         (b)   Picks up or delivers goods within the corporate city limits.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008)
§ 110.06 WHEN TAX DUE.
   (A)   (1)   The license taxes levied by this subchapter are levied as of
July 1 for the fiscal year and ending on June 30.
      (2)   In the case of any business which is begun after July 1, the tax
shall be due and payable before the business is begun.
   (B)   (1)   To avoid any late charge penalties, all privilege license fees
are due and payable to the city by July 1 of each year.
      (2)   In the event a business begins operation after July 1 of a year,
the privilege license fee for that year is due before the business is begun.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008)
§ 110.07 PRORATION OF FEE.
   When any business is begun after February 1 of any year, the license tax for
the business may be reduced by one-half of the tax otherwise due unless
otherwise provided by the provisions of this subchapter, other ordinance or
state law.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008)
§ 110.08 ABATEMENT; REFUND OF TAX.
   No license tax required by this subchapter shall be abated, nor shall any
refund of any part thereof be made, in any case where the licensee discontinued
the business before the end of the period for which the license was issued.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008)
§ 110.09 SEPARATE BUSINESS; SEPARATE PLACE.
   (A)   Every person engaged in more than one line of business is required to
secure a license for each separate line of business in which the person is so
engaged.
   (B)   Every person, having more than one place of business, shall secure a
license for each place of business, unless two or more places of business under
common ownership are contiguous to each other, communicate directly with and
open into each other and are operated as a unit.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008)
Statutory reference:
   Separate business to be separately licensed, see G.S. § 105-105
§ 110.10 EXEMPTION FROM PAYING TAX.
   (A)   Generally. Except as otherwise provided by this code, the schedule of
license taxes hereinafter set out or by state law, there shall be no exception
of any person for any reason from the payment of the license taxes by this
subchapter.
   (B)   Charitable organizations. The license tax imposed by this subchapter,
except as otherwise herein specifically provided, shall not apply to a person
who operates a business for an organized church, religious or fraternal
organization, educational, civic or patriotic purpose when all gross income of
the business is used for that purpose.
   (C)   Blind person(s). Blind person(s) are exempt from paying any privilege
license fee levied by this subchapter to the extent of G.S.§ 105-41(b).
   (D)   License must be obtained.
      (1)   A person exempt from paying a privilege license tax levied by this
subchapter shall nevertheless obtain a privilege license from the city. The
license shall show upon its face the fact that the license is exempt from the
payment of the license tax and shall cite the section of this code which is the
authority thereof. Exempt businesses engaging in non-exempt business activities
are required to pay the privilege license tax for those activities. Example:
the sale of computer hardware is exempt; however, software sales and service/
receipts are not exempt and the privilege license tax must be paid for these
activities.
      (2)   Businesses, occupations and items of personal property exempted by
state law from municipal privilege license taxation are as follows:
Business, Occupation or Item State Law Reference
Business, Occupation or Item                               State Law Reference
Accountants                                                G.S. § 105-41
Architects                                                 G.S. § 105-41
Attorneys                                                  G.S. § 105-41
Auctioneers                                                 
Banks                                                       
Bondsmen                                                    
Chiropodists                                               G.S. § 105-41
Chiropractors                                               
Dentists                                                   G.S. § 105-41
Embalmers                                                  G.S. § 105-41
Engineers                                                  G.S. § 105-41
Insurance companies, land surveyors, landscape architects, G.S. § 105-41
morticians, oculists
Opticians                                                  G.S. § 105-41
Optometrists                                               G.S. § 105-41
Osteopaths                                                 G.S. § 105-41
Physicians                                                 G.S. § 105-41
Real estate agents                                          
Real estate appraisers                                     G.S. § 105-41
Savings and loan associations                              G.S. § 105-88
Surgeons                                                   G.S. § 105-42
Veterinarians                                              G.S. § 105-41
 
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008)
Editor’s note:
   G.S. § 105-41 was repealed by S.L. 2023-134, s. 42.7(d) or taxable years
beginning on or after July 1, 2024.
   G.S. § 105-42 was repealed by Session Laws 1996, Second Extra Session, c.
14, s. 17.
§ 110.11 APPLICATION.
   (A)   A person shall apply to the city for each privilege license required
by this subchapter no less than 30 days before the date the fee is due.
   (B)   The application, which shall be submitted on forms provided by the
city, shall contain:
      (1)   The name of the applicant and whether the applicant is an
individual, a partnership, corporation or some other entity;
      (2)   The nature of the business;
      (3)   Physical location including the street number and address where the
business is conducted;
      (4)   An address where notices and statements may be mailed to as
required by this subchapter;
      (5)   Whether the business is regulated by a State Occupational Licensing
Board, subject to G.S. Ch. 93B, and, if so, the serial number of the state
license the applicant currently holds;
      (6)   Any other information the city determines to be necessary to
compute the amount of privilege license fee due;
      (7)   Emergency business contact information to be supplied to the city’s
Fire and Police Departments;
      (8)   Zoning compliance notation on the application; and
      (9)   A person’s name and telephone number of a business representative
who may be contacted regarding privilege license fee questions.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008)
§ 110.12 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Collector shall not issue any license when the application
therefore is refused by the governing body or any board, commission or
official, in cases where the approval of the governing body or of another
board, commission or official is required precedent to the issuance of the
license; nor shall the Tax Collector issue any license until the applicant
therefore has complied with every provision of this subchapter, including the
execution and delivery of any bond required.
   (B)   Every license issued shall show on the face thereof the name of the
licensee, the nature of the business and the location thereof (provided the
business has a fixed location) and the time for which issued, the amount of the
tax and penalty, if any, paid.
   (C)   Any license requiring the approval of the governing body or any board,
commission or official shall show approval on the face of same.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008)
§ 110.13 TAX COLLECTOR TO KEEP COPY.
   The Tax Collector shall keep a report of each license issued, including the
approval of the governing body or any board, commission or official endorsed on
the face of the same.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008)
§ 110.14 ASSIGNMENT OF LICENSE RESTRICTED.
   Every license issued under this subchapter shall be a personal privilege and
shall not be assignable; except that, when any business carried on at a fixed
place, designated in the license issued thereof, is sold as a unit to any
person and the purchaser thereof is to carry on the business at the same place,
the license for the business may be assigned to the purchaser, and upon the
payment of $10, shall be entitled to have a new and appropriate license issued;
provided that, any business requiring special approval shall not have the
license issued until the special approval has been duly obtained from the
proper authority.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008)
§ 110.15 DISPLAY.
   Every license shall be kept prominently displayed at the place of business
of the licensee named therein or, if the licensee has no fixed place for doing
business, the licensee shall keep the license wherever the business is being
operated and in a place where it can be seen at any time by an official
desiring to inspect same.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008)
§ 110.16 DUPLICATES.
   Upon satisfactory evidence that any licensee has lost any license issued to
the person, or that the license has been destroyed, the Tax Collector shall
issue to the licensee a duplicate license upon the payment of a fee of $10.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008)
§ 110.17 CHANGE IN BUSINESS CONDUCTED BY LICENSEE DURING THE LICENSE YEAR.
   (A)   When a license is issued to carry on a certain line of business, and
after the issuance of the license, the licensee shall so change or alter the
business as to bring it under a classification for which a higher license tax
is required, the licensee shall, before making the change, deliver the license
to the Tax Collector, together with a written and signed statement as to the
nature of the proposed change, and shall pay to the Tax Collector the proper
additional license tax. The Tax Collector shall thereupon cancel the old
license and shall issue to the licensee a new and appropriate license.
   (B)   When a license is issued to carry on a certain line of business, and
after the issuance of the license, the licensee shall so change or alter the
business and the change does not result in an imposition of a separate or
additional privilege license fee, the city shall reissue a license reflecting
the change upon payment of a fee of $10.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008)
§ 110.18 REVOCATION; SUSPENSION.
   Any license issued under this chapter shall be subject to revocation or
suspension for a definite or indefinite time by the governing body, without
refund of any part of the tax paid, if the licensee or manager or person in
charge of the business or employee shall violate any applicable provision of
this code, other ordinance or state law relative to the business, or be
convicted of crime, or if, in the judgment of the governing body, the licensee
does, by reason of the nature or the manner or place in which the business is
conducted constitute a nuisance or is a menace to good order or to the public
health, safety or morals. Upon the revocation or suspension of any license, it
shall be unlawful for the person to whom the license was granted to continue to
conduct the business.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.19 LICENSE TAX SCHEDULE.
   Except as otherwise provided by law, the city shall have power to levy
privilege license taxes on all trades, occupations, professions, businesses and
franchises carried on within the city. A city may levy privilege license taxes
on the businesses that were formerly taxed by the state under sections of G.S.
Ch. 105, Art. 2. Privilege license fees are determined periodically by the city
in accordance with the state revenue laws and are stated in the city’s
privilege license fee schedule.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008; Ord. 10-10, passed 4-27-2010)
SPECIFIC BUSINESSES
§ 110.30 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES.
   Alcoholic Beverage Control Board.
   (A)   An Alcoholic Beverage Control Board is hereby established, the
Chairperson and members to be appointed by the governing body, in accordance
with the policy for City Council appointments to authorities, boards,
commissions and committees (appointments policy) .
   (B)   Each regular member and the Chairperson shall be paid an annual salary
as shall be determined from time to time as necessary by the City Council. The
salaries shall be paid out of alcohol beverage control funds.
   (C)   The sale of malt beverages, unfortified wine, fortified wine, and
mixed beverages shall be allowed within the corporate limits of the City of
Kings Mountain beginning at 10:00 a.m. pursuant to the licensed premises'
permit under G.S. § 18B-1001.
(Prior Code, § 12-26) (Ord. 96-05, passed 5-28-1996; Ord. 16-29, passed 8-30-
2016; Ord. 19-21, passed 11-26-2019; Ord. 20-25, passed 10-27-2020; Ord. 20-25
(A), passed 11-5-2020) Penalty, see §
110.99
Cross-reference:
   Intoxicated persons at municipal lakes, see §
91.21
   Intoxicating beverages on city property, see §
130.10
   Privilege license fee for sale of beer and wine, see §
110.19
Statutory reference:
   Authority to so prohibit, see G.S. § 18B-1004
§ 110.31 AUCTIONS.
   (A)   Permit, inventory and bond required.
      (1)   Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person, whether principal or
agent, who has not engaged in a permanent business within the corporate limits
of the city for a continuous period of at least 12 months next preceding, to
sell, dispose of or offer for sale, or to cause or permit to be sold, disposed
of or offered for sale in the city, at public auction any jewelry, goods, wares
or merchandise without first having obtained a permit therefor; provided,
however, that, this section shall not apply to judicial sales or sales by
executors and administrators, receivers or assignees in insolvent and bankrupt
estates.
      (2)   Inventory. Every applicant for a permit to conduct a public auction
sale shall file with the city a complete inventory, verified under oath, of all
goods, wares and merchandise to be offered at the public auction.
      (3)   Bond. Every applicant for a permit to conduct a public auction sale
shall be required to file with the city a bond in the sum of $1,000, with good
and sufficient surety, for the purpose of guaranteeing compliance with the
terms of this section and applicable provisions of state law and the faithful
performance of any contract made with the customers and purchasers at the
auction sale; the bond to remain in full force and effect for the term of 60
days after the close of the auction sale.
(Prior Code, § 12-28)
   (B)   Adding stock to continue sale. It shall be unlawful for any person,
buying bankrupt stock or jewelry, to add to the stock for the purpose of
continuing an auction sale thereof.
(Prior Code, § 12-29)
   (C)   Duration of sale. Sales at public auction of the stock of any person
shall not be held on other than successive days, Sundays and legal holidays
excepted, and shall continue not more than 30 days in all, within the period of
one fiscal year.
(Prior Code, § 12-30)
   (D)   Closing hours. No person shall sell, dispose of or offer to sell or
dispose of at public auction any of the goods, wares or merchandise set forth
in division (A) above between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. the
following morning.
(Prior Code, § 12-31)
   (E)   Bidding regulated. No person at any public auction of goods, wares and
merchandise shall act as bidder, or what is commonly known as “capper”,
“booster” or “shiller”, or offer to make any false bid, or falsely pretend to
buy any article offered at the auction for the purpose of deceiving the persons
attending the sale, nor shall any person conducting the sale receive knowingly,
or permit to be made, any false or “boosting” bids by a “booster”, “by-bidder”,
“shiller” or other person bidding for the purpose of boosting the price of
articles sold, or offered for sale, at the auction sale.
(Prior Code, § 12-32)
Penalty, see §
110.99
Statutory reference:
   Auctions and auctioneers, see G.S. §§ 85B-1 et seq.
§ 110.32 BANKRUPTCY, SALVAGE STOCK.
   (A)   Any person who shall purchase a stock of merchandise sold as salvage
for the benefit of creditors, or by a trustee in bankruptcy shall, before
offering same at either retail or auction in the city, file with the City Clerk
or Chief of Police a complete inventory of the stock or merchandise which is
proposed to be sold in the city, which inventory shall be verified and under
oath.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the person, in the sale of the bankrupt or
distressed goods, wares or merchandise, to add to the stock from any source
whatsoever and advertise the same as the bankrupt or distressed stock of goods,
wares or merchandise.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall be construed to, in any way, restrict, prohibit
or interfere with the orderly sale of any bankrupt stock of goods, wares or
merchandise originating from any wholesale or retail merchant who has listed
the stock for taxation in the city.
(Prior Code, § 12-33) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.33 PAWNBROKERS.
   (A)   Reports and records. All pawnbrokers doing business in the city shall
furnish each day, to the Police Department, a full and complete list of every
article taken in pawn by them, or bought by them, giving a full description of
the same, including the maker, marks, number, brand, monogram and letters of
every kind on the article so pawned or bought, and shall keep a daily record
showing from whom all the articles are received and to whom sold.
(Prior Code, § 12-35)
   (B)   Arrangement of stock. Every pawnbroker in the city shall have the
person’s goods arranged in stock so as to enable any police officer to readily
inspect the same.
(Prior Code, § 12-36)
   (C)   Forfeiture of license. Every pawnbroker persistently neglecting,
failing or refusing to comply with divisions (A) and (B) above shall forfeit
the person’s license to do business in the city, in addition to any penalty
imposed upon conviction for any violation of the sections.
(Prior Code, § 12-37)
Penalty, see §
110.99
Cross-reference:
   License fee, see §
110.19
Statutory reference:
   Pawnbrokers Modernization Act of 1989, see G.S. Ch. 19A
§ 110.34 POOL ROOMS AND BILLIARD HALLS.
   No pool room or billiard hall shall be opened and operated for profit in the
city between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
(Prior Code, § 12-38) Penalty, see §
110.99
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   If any person shall continue a business, trade, employment or
profession, or to do the act, after the expiration of a license previously
issued therefore, without obtaining a new license, the person shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined and/or imprisoned in the
discretion of the court, as provided in §
10.99, but the fine shall not be less than 20% of the tax in addition to the
tax and the cost. The penalties for delayed payment provided for in this
section shall not impair the obligation to procure a license in advance or
modify any of the penalties for failure to do so.
   (B)   Any person who shall willfully make any false statement in any
application for a license under any section of this chapter or schedule shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined and/or
imprisoned in the discretion of the court as provided in §
10.99, which fine shall not be less than the amount of tax specified under the
section, and shall be in addition to the amount of the tax.
(Ord. 08-07, passed 4-29-2008)
CHAPTER 111: COMMUNITY MARKETS
Section
   
111.01   Restrictions on sales generally
   
111.02   Hours of operation
   
111.03   Failure to occupy space or be open for business
   
111.04   Subleasing
   
111.05   Responsibility of tenants concerning employees
   
111.06   Condition and cleanliness of tables
   
111.07   Combined rental
   
111.08   Cleaning of market area
   
111.09   Sanitary requirements
   
111.10   Scales and measures; inspection
   
111.11   Littering; garbage collection
   
111.12   Uniform display of produce
   
111.13   Identification signs
   
111.14   Use of printed matter for wrapping material prohibited
   
111.15   Wrapping and packaging cakes, cookies and the like
   
111.16   Sale of sandwiches and the like
   
111.17   Sale of uninspected meat prohibited
   
111.18   Livestock and dogs prohibited
   
111.19   Sale of poultry, hens and fryers
   
111.20   Use of short weights and measures; short changing and the like;
grounds for lease cancellation
   
111.21   Price fixing
   
111.22   Sale of farm produce within 600 feet prohibited
§ 111.01 RESTRICTIONS ON SALES GENERALLY.
   Selling space in the community market shall be limited to the residents of
the city and the immediate vicinity thereof and shall be for the purpose of
selling farm produce by those who raise it and handcrafts made by the seller.
Any lessee of a table may sell the products of the person’s own farm or
handcrafts through the person’s own employee. No seller on the market shall be
the employee of more than one producer or maker. No seller shall sell any
produce or handcrafts on the market on commission for any person or on shares
or as accommodation for any person not a lessee.
(Prior Code, § 12-34)
§ 111.02 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   The market shall be open for business daily, except on Sunday, during
daylight hours (sunrise to sunset) only, of each week during the year, except
holidays. It shall be within the discretion of the market manager to close the
market at any time during any day that conditions justify.
(Prior Code, § 12-34)
§ 111.03 FAILURE TO OCCUPY SPACE OR BE OPEN FOR BUSINESS.
   As to any tenant who does not occupy the space assigned for the days agreed
upon, whether one day or more than one day each week, and who fails to open the
tenant’s stand for business on any day by 8:30 a.m., the space shall be opened
by another tenant for that day at the discretion of the market manager.
(Prior Code, § 12-34)
§ 111.04 SUBLEASING.
   Tables may not be subleased by the renter.
(Prior Code, § 12-34)
§ 111.05 RESPONSIBILITY OF TENANTS CONCERNING EMPLOYEES.
   Each tenant will be held responsible for the action of the tenant’s
employees and helpers.
(Prior Code, § 12-34)
§ 111.06 CONDITION AND CLEANLINESS OF TABLES.
   Each lessee shall be held responsible for the condition of the lessee’s
table and no produce, containers or other equipment shall be left overnight.
The renter of each table shall be held responsible for the cleanliness of the
lessee’s assigned table under the supervision and inspection of the market
manager.
(Prior Code, § 12-34)
§ 111.07 COMBINED RENTAL.
   The above rate shall apply to the table and not to the individual renter;
that is, two or more persons may rent a table and agree among themselves as to
the days on which each of the renters shall use the same. Notice of the
agreement shall be filed with the market manager.
(Prior Code, § 12-34)
§ 111.08 CLEANING OF MARKET AREA.
   The market public area shall be cleaned at the end of each sales day by the
city and public works personnel.
(Prior Code, § 12-34)
§ 111.09 SANITARY REQUIREMENTS.
   All sanitary requirements of the market and products offered for sale shall
be under the supervision of the County Health Department.
(Prior Code, § 12-34)
§ 111.10 SCALES AND MEASURES; INSPECTION.
   All sellers of produce shall provide themselves with approved scales and
measures and the inspection of the same shall be made from time to time by the
market manager.
(Prior Code, § 12-34) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.11 LITTERING; GARBAGE COLLECTION.
   No throwing of rubbish on walkways or on tables will be permitted. The city
will provide a suitable number of containers conveniently placed and periodic
collection of garbage will be made by the city.
(Prior Code, § 12-34) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.12 UNIFORM DISPLAY OF PRODUCE.
   The market manager shall see that a uniform display of produce is maintained
with regard to the maximum length, width and height of the space to be
utilized.
(Prior Code, § 12-34) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.13 IDENTIFICATION SIGNS.
   No advertising signs shall be permitted in the market; however, a 12-inch by
24-inch identification sign will be permitted to be displayed on the table.
(Prior Code, § 12-34) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.14 USE OF PRINTED MATTER FOR WRAPPING MATERIAL PROHIBITED.
   No tenant shall use newspaper or other printed matter for wrapping purposes
with the exception of cut flowers or other products not for human consumption.
(Prior Code, § 12-34) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.15 WRAPPING AND PACKAGING OF CAKES, COOKIES AND THE LIKE.
   Cookies, cakes and other similar commodities shall be covered with wax or
similar non-absorbent sanitary paper before being further wrapped and shall be
packaged prior to bringing to the community market, in order to prevent human
contact with the product.
(Prior Code, § 12-34) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.16 SALE OF SANDWICHES AND THE LIKE.
   Sandwiches, ham biscuits and the like may not be sold in the market.
(Prior Code, § 12-34) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.17 SALE OF UNINSPECTED MEAT PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Under G.S. § 106-549.31, the State Compulsory Meat Inspection Law and
under the Federal Meat Inspection Act, no uninspected meat may be sold in the
city to anyone.
      (1)   Fresh pork slaughtered or butchered at home or on the farm may not
be sold to the public. This includes ribs, backbones, sausage, tenderloin,
fresh ham or shoulder or side meat.
      (2)   Hams, shoulders and side meat from hogs slaughtered or butchered at
home or on the farm, whether fresh, salted or country cured, may not be sold to
the public.
      (3)   Lard and cracklings cooked or rendered out at home or on the farm
may not be sold to the public.
      (4)   Beef, veal or lamb butchered at home or on the farm may not be sold
to the public.
   (B)   All persons selling meats at the community market shall show a receipt
of slaughter from an inspected slaughter house; all meats shall show a mark of
inspection or a label or carton bearing a mark of inspection.
   (C)   All uninspected meats found at the community market will be placed
under detention and disposed of in agreement to G.S. §§ 106-549.31 and 106-
549.33, the State Compulsory Meat Inspection Law.
(Prior Code, § 12-34) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.18 LIVESTOCK AND DOGS PROHIBITED.
   No livestock for sale, such as cattle, hogs, pigs, sheep and the like, shall
be permitted inside of the market. No dogs shall be permitted at any time in
the market.
(Prior Code, § 12-34) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.19 SALE OF POULTRY, HENS AND FRYERS.
   No poultry, hens and fryers will be sold in the market building.
(Prior Code, § 12-34) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.20 USE OF SHORT WEIGHTS AND MEASURES; SHORT CHANGING AND THE LIKE;
GROUNDS FOR LEASE CANCELLATION.
   Any seller detected in employing short weights or measures, short changing
or arranging any commodity for sale in a manner as to deceive the public as to
its real character shall be subject to dismissal or cancellation of the
person’s lease and forfeiture of rental paid.
(Prior Code, § 12-34) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.21 PRICE FIXING.
   Any collusion on the part of tenants to fix prices is prohibited and, upon
satisfactory proof of any violation of this rule, the guilty persons shall be
expelled from the market.
(Prior Code, § 12-34) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.22 SALE OF FARM PRODUCE WITHIN 600 FEET PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sell any farm produce from any city street, curb, sidewalk
or vacant lot within a distance of 600 feet of the community market unless
legally authorized to do so.
(Prior Code, § 12-34) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 112: ADVERTISING
Section
General Provisions
   
112.01   Creation of noise
   
112.02   Sound vehicles; permit required
   
112.03   Misrepresentation of goods
   
112.04   Misleading advertising or display of goods
   
112.05   Solicitation on streets
Handbills
   
112.20   Definition
   
112.21   License required
   
112.22   Scattering prohibited
   
112.23   Persons acting for others
   
112.24   Exceptions
Cross-reference:
   Peddlers and Solicitors, see
Ch. 115
   Sign regulations, see
Ch. 100
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful posting of advertisements, see G.S. § 14-145
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 CREATION OF NOISE.
   No person shall advertise any goods, wares or merchandise of any kind for
sale by crying out the same on the streets or sidewalks of the city. No person
shall advertise any goods, wares or merchandise, or any event of any kind, by
crying out the same, or by using any megaphone, bell, horn or other noise-
making device on any street or sidewalk; nor shall radios or loudspeakers be
operated in a manner as to project sound outside the confines of the building
in which they may be located.
(Prior Code, § 12-50) Penalty, see §
10.99
Cross-reference:
   Similar provision, see §
96.004(A)(2)
§ 112.02 SOUND VEHICLES; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to advertise any goods, wares or
merchandise of any kind by the use of any amplifying equipment used by or
mounted on any vehicle, boat or aircraft without first having obtained a permit
therefor from the city.
(Prior Code, § 12-51) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.03 MISREPRESENTATION OF GOODS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person conducting a public sale within the city
of any goods, wares or merchandise to falsely advertise or misrepresent the
same as being imported, or falsely represent the same as to brand, trademark,
quality, weight and texture.
(Prior Code, § 12-52) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.04 MISLEADING ADVERTISING OR DISPLAY OF GOODS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person conducting any mercantile business in
the city to display in the person’s windows or place of business any goods,
wares or merchandise which are not in fact priced in good faith and carried in
stock for sale in accordance with the display or advertisement so made, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to display any misleading advertisements or
displays as to the goods, wares or merchandise actually carried in stock for
sale.
(Prior Code, § 12-53) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.05 SOLICITATION ON STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any retail dealer in goods, wares or merchandise or
any employee of the dealer, to advertise the person’s business on the streets
by personally soliciting any person thereon to trade with the person at the
person’s store, or at the place of business of the person’s employer.
(Prior Code, § 12-54) Penalty, see §
10.99
HANDBILLS
§ 112.20 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISTRIBUTE. The scattering, throwing, handing out or any other means of
dispensing circulars, handbills or other printed matter.
(Prior Code, § 12-55)
Cross-reference:
   Location of billboards, see §
100.03
§ 112.21 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed
any circulars, handbills or other written or printed matter for advertising
purposes upon the streets or sidewalks of the city without having first
obtained a license therefor.
(Prior Code, § 12-56) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.22 SCATTERING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall promiscuously distribute handbills or advertisements of any
kind by placing or throwing the same on any street, lot or otherwise. The
handbills or advertisements shall be enclosed in an envelope, or clipped, and
placed under or in the door of each house where the advertising matter is left.
(Prior Code, § 12-57) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.23 PERSONS ACTING FOR OTHERS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute or cause to be distributed
any circulars, handbills or other written or printed matter for advertising
purposes on behalf of any other person unless the other person shall have first
obtained a license therefor. It shall be the duty of any person making the
distribution to ascertain as to whether or not the proper license has been
obtained by the other person.
(Prior Code, § 12-58) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 112.24 EXCEPTIONS.
   Sections
112.22 and
112.23 shall, in no way, affect the usual and customary sales and delivery of
newspapers and periodicals and shall not prevent the distribution of
advertising matter in business buildings or private residences.
(Prior Code, § 12-59)
CHAPTER 113: JUNK DEALERS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Permit required; application; issuance
   
113.03   Records required; maintenance
   
113.04   Enclosure required
   
113.05   Accessory buildings
   
113.06   Burning prohibited
   
113.07   Storage of flammable materials
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   JUNK. Any worn out, discarded or old iron, other metal, automobile parts,
chain, copper, parts of machinery, automobile tires, appliances, old wrecked or
unusable automobiles and trucks and other articles commonly known as JUNK.
   JUNKYARD. Any area larger than 100 feet by 100 feet in which junk is stored
or permitted to accumulate.
(Prior Code, § 12-70)
§ 113.02 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Any person who shall engage in the business of buying, selling,
handling, storing or hauling junk shall first obtain a permit therefor.
(Prior Code, § 12-71)
   (B)   Application for a permit to engage in the junk business shall be made
to the City Inspector and shall state the place where the business is to be
conducted and that the terms of this chapter shall be met.
(Prior Code, § 12-72)
   (C)   The City Inspector shall issue a permit to engage in the junk business
to the applicant therefor if it shall appear that the location of the junkyard
shall not constitute a fire hazard or other hazardous condition to any adjacent
property and is otherwise in compliance with this code and other ordinances.
(Prior Code, § 12-73)
Cross-reference:
   Junk on premises, see §§
96.003,
97.09
§ 113.03 RECORDS REQUIRED; MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Any person operating or maintaining a junkyard shall keep records on
each article of junk, which will show the following:
      (1)   Description of junk;
      (2)   Person from whom obtained; and
      (3)   Serial or motor number, if any.
(Prior Code, § 12-74)
   (B)   The records required to be kept by junk dealers shall not be destroyed
until three years of age and shall be available for inspection by the Building
Inspector or Chief of Police at reasonable times.
(Prior Code, § 12-75) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.04 ENCLOSURE REQUIRED.
   All junkyards shall be enclosed by a wire or metal fence of a minimum height
of six feet, protected by gates which may be locked and shall be locked when an
attendant is not present. The plans for construction of the fence and gates
shall be first submitted to the Building Inspector and approved by the
Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 12-76) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.05 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
   Nothing but motor vehicle dismantling shall be carried on in any motor
vehicle junkyard and, if repairs are made at or in any junkyard to motor
vehicles, the repairs shall be made in a building meeting all the applicable
provisions of this code, other ordinances and state law.
(Prior Code, § 12-77) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.06 BURNING PROHIBITED.
   No junk or any vehicle shall be burned in or on any premises occupied as a
junkyard.
(Prior Code, § 12-78) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 113.07 STORAGE OF FLAMMABLE MATERIALS.
   (A)   Gas and oil and all other flammable materials shall be stored in a
building of fireproof construction, which shall be constructed in full
compliance with all applicable provisions of this code, other ordinances and
state law.
   (B)   Upon being stored or placed in the junkyard, all gas and oil shall be
drained from vehicles and stored.
(Prior Code, § 12-79) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 114: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
114.01   Purpose
   
114.02   Qualifications of applicant
   
114.03   Application for license; contents
   
114.04   Applicability of other licensing provisions
   
114.05   Issuance of license
   
114.06   Information to be filed with city
   
114.07   Enforcement; procedure for license revocation
   
114.08   Hours of operation
   
114.09   Massages by unlicensed persons restricted
 
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the general health, safety,
welfare and morals. The licensing provisions of this chapter shall govern the
privilege of carrying on the business, trade or profession of masseur or
masseuse and the operation or carrying on of the businesses, trades or
professions commonly known as massage parlors, health salons, physical culture
studios, clubs or establishments or similar establishments by whatever name
designated, wherein physical culture, massage, hydrotherapy or other physical
treatment of the human body is carried on or practiced. The provisions of this
chapter shall not apply to a regularly established and licensed hospital,
sanitarium, nursing home or medical clinic, nor to the office or clinic
operated by a duly qualified and licensed medical practitioner, osteopath or
chiropractor, in connection with the person’s practice of medicine,
chiropractic or osteopathy; provided, however, that, the office or clinic is
regularly used by the medical practitioner, chiropractor or osteopath as the
person’s principal location for the person’s practice of medicine, chiropractic
or osteopathy.
(Prior Code, § 12-90)
§ 114.02 QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT.
   An applicant under this chapter, prior to making application for a license,
must have the following qualifications.
   (A)   The applicant shall be required to provide written recommendations
showing proof of good moral character; and, in case the applicant is a
corporation, the corporation must be created in or domesticated by the laws of
the state and the officers thereof shall provide written recommendations
showing proof of good moral character.
   (B)   Each applicant must furnish a health certificate from a medical doctor
which shall accompany the application as an exhibit. Should the applicant be a
corporation, it shall furnish the certificate to cover its officers, agents or
employees who will actually be engaged in and working under the license. Each
employee who begins work following the original issuance of a license shall
likewise obtain a health certificate. A copy of the application and all
certificates shall be furnished to the Police Department.
(Prior Code, § 12-91)
§ 114.03 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; CONTENTS.
   (A)   Any person desiring to engage in the business, trade or profession of
masseur or masseuse, or the operation or carrying on of any of the businesses,
trades, professions, occupations or callings mentioned in §
114.01 shall, before engaging in the business, trade, profession, occupation or
calling, file an application for a license addressed to the governing body.
   (B)   The application shall be in writing and shall set forth the following:
      (1)   Name and address of applicant; if the applicant is a corporation,
the addresses of the corporation and its officers; and
      (2)   Qualifications plainly stated, to be submitted together with
required exhibits annexed to the application proving the qualifications.
(Prior Code, § 12-92)
§ 114.04 APPLICABILITY OF OTHER LICENSING PROVISIONS.
   The general business licensing provisions as contained in
Chapter 110 of this code of ordinances, where applicable, shall also apply to
persons licensed under this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-93)
§ 114.05 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   If the license application is submitted in proper form and is approved by
the governing body or its designee, then a business license is authorized to be
issued to the applicant.
§ 114.06 INFORMATION TO BE FILED WITH CITY.
   It shall be the duty of all persons holding a license under this chapter to
file with the city, the names of all employees, their home addresses, home
telephone numbers and places of employment. Changes in the list of employees
with the names of new employees shall be filed with the city within seven days
from the date of any change.
(Prior Code, § 12-95)
§ 114.07 ENFORCEMENT; PROCEDURE FOR LICENSE REVOCATION.
   (A)   Whenever good cause is believed to exist as grounds for revocation of
a license acquired hereunder; the licensee shall be delivered a notice of the
revocation by registered or certified mail at that address had on record with
the city. The licensee shall have 14 days to request a hearing as to the
revocation notice. Such hearing shall be conduced by the Chief of Police, Codes
Enforcement Officer and that person authorized to issue business license.
   (B)   Cause for revocation of the license shall exist for the failure of the
licensee to perform any duty required by this chapter, for violation of any
provision of this chapter or for conviction of the licensee of any crime
involving moral turpitude. Grounds shall also exist if, by reason of the nature
or the manner or place in which the licensee conducts business, a nuisance and
menace to good order, public health, safety, morals or any other violation of
G.S. Chapters 14 and 18B.
   (C)   The governing body, whenever it has good cause to believe there exists
grounds for revocation of any license acquired hereunder, may, upon its own
motion, set a hearing as hereinabove provided, to show cause why the license
should not be revoked. Written notice stating the specific alleged grounds for
revocation shall be forwarded by registered or certified mail to the licensee
at least 14 days prior to the hearing.
   (D)   At the hearing, the licensee shall be given an opportunity to appear
and be heard, either personally or through an attorney, to rebut any evidence
against the licensee and to present evidence and witnesses in the licensee’s
defense. If the licensee fails to show cause why the license should not be
revoked, the revocation stands.
(Prior Code, § 12-96)
§ 114.08 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   No masseur or masseuse or any person or party engaging in any of the
businesses licensed by this chapter shall engage in the business, trade,
profession, occupation or calling, except within and between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 10:00 p.m.; nor shall any operator of a massage parlor or
establishment or business above-enumerated, and not specifically excepted
hereunder, operate the same except within and between the aforesaid hours.
(Prior Code, § 12-97) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.09 MASSAGES BY UNLICENSED PERSONS RESTRICTED.
   Massages, as permitted by this chapter, may be given by persons not holding
a license as a masseur or masseuse only if the massages are given under the
direct supervision of a person having a license as a masseur or masseuse.
(Prior Code, § 12-100) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
    Violations of this chapter shall be considered under this code as an
offense and persons found guilty of the violations shall be punished as a Class
3 misdemeanor for first offense and as a Class 2 misdemeanor for second or
subsequent offenses as set out in G.S. § 15-A-1340.23.
(Prior Code, § 12-97)
CHAPTER 115: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
General Provisions
   
115.01   “Itinerant merchant” defined; bond required
   
115.02   Definitions
   
115.03   Going on private residences without invitation prohibited
   
115.04   Selling on streets, sidewalks and places other than permanently
established lawful businesses prohibited
   
115.05   Crying out or using noise-making devices for advertising
   
115.06   Indirect solicitation prohibited
   
115.07   Peddling limited
Charitable and Religious Solicitations
   
115.20   Definitions
   
115.21   Investigations; publication of findings
   
115.22   Inspection of books and records
   
115.23   Report required at conclusion
   
115.24   Accounting system
   
115.25   Misrepresentations; deception or fraud
   
115.26   Permit; required, contents, term, renewal
   
115.27   Permit application
   
115.28   Permit investigation
   
115.29   Permit issuance or denial
   
115.30   Permit non-transferrable
   
115.31   Permit suspension and revocation
   
115.32   Certificate required; exceptions
   
115.33   Certificate application
   
115.34   Certificate issuance; contents
   
115.35   Certificate term and renewal
 
   
115.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Solicitation of contributions, see G.S. Ch. 131F
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 115.01 “ITINERANT MERCHANT” DEFINED; BOND REQUIRED.
   (A)   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ITINERANT MERCHANT. Any salesperson or merchant offering for sale goods,
wares or merchandise, other than farm products, shall be deemed an ITINERANT
MERCHANT if the person conducts business within the city for less than six
months, except in case of discontinuance for one of the reasons hereinafter
mentioned.
   (B)   When any person does not pay license tax herein levied on the ground
stated intention to become a regular merchant shall pay a cash deposit in the
sum of $100, which bond shall be forfeited for the payment of the tax herein
levied in case the person discontinues the business within six months for any
reason other than death, disability, insolvency or destruction of stock by fire
or other catastrophe. The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons
who sell books, periodicals, printed music, ice, wood for fuel, fish, beef,
mutton, pork, bread, cakes, pies, dairy products, poultry, eggs, livestock or
articles produced by the individual offering them for sale, but shall apply to
medicines, drugs or articles assembled.
(Ord. 02-04, passed 3-26-2002)
§ 115.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEEKEEPER. A person who keeps bees for the purpose of honey.
   FARMER. A person who grows or raises his or her own fruits and/or vegetables
and which may or may not prepare jellies, jams and/or other products from these
fruits and vegetables.
   NURSERYMAN. A person who grows plants, shrubs, trees and flowers.
   VENDOR. A person who hawks, peddles, sells or offers prepared food, flesh
flowers, fresh fruit, vegetables or other goods which they have purchased for
resale or crafted for sale.
(Ord. 02-04, passed 3-26-2002)
§ 115.03 GOING ON PRIVATE RESIDENCES WITHOUT INVITATION PROHIBITED.
   The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city by
solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of
merchandise, books, periodicals, magazines, pictures or prints or photographs
or makers of photograph negatives, not having been requested or invited so to
do by the owner or occupant of the private residence, for the purpose of
soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, books, periodicals, magazines,
pictures, prints or merchandise or disposing of or peddling or hawking the same
is declared to be a nuisance and punishable as a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 02-04, passed 3-26-2002) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.04 SELLING ON STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PLACES OTHER THAN PERMANENTLY
ESTABLISHED LAWFUL BUSINESSES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Permission for sidewalk merchandise. Merchants lawfully conducting and
operating a business from permanent physical business facilities which front on
and abut a city sidewalk may display and sell goods, wares and merchandise from
the sidewalk without need of application and approval from the City Council;
provided, however, that the merchandise, along with all racks, display cases
and other accessories thereto, shall be removed from all public sidewalks at
the end of every business day during which the same may have been displayed.
   (B)   Setback. On sidewalks more than 12 feet in width, excluding the curb,
the maximum distance that the goods, wares or merchandise may be placed from
the wall or front of the place of business shall be 36 inches. On sidewalks
seven feet in width, excluding the curb, the maximum distance shall be 24
inches. On sidewalks less than seven feet in width, no goods, wares or
merchandise shall be placed on the sidewalks or streets.
   (C)   Additional restrictions. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this
section, authority for merchants to sell from city sidewalks does not extend to
city streets and is limited to those sidewalk areas immediately abutting their
own property. Further, the setback requirements of division (B) above shall
apply to all obstructions of every description.
   (D)   Special events. The City Manager may waive the setback requirements
for special events recognized by the city, but in no event shall any merchant
be permitted to fully obstruct a city sidewalk.
   (E)   Sidewalk dining areas. Within the allowance specified by this section,
it is permissible for eating establishments to place tables and chairs on
sidewalks adjacent to the side of the business if located on a street corner.
No portion of any table or chair may protrude beyond the allotted space on the
sidewalk as specified in division (B) above. For safety purposes, tables and
chairs may not obstruct access to building entrances and exits. Merchants with
sidewalk dining are responsible for cleanliness and are subject to all
applicable Health Department regulations. Umbrellas over tables are
permissible, but must also provide a clearance of a minimum of 78 inches from
the lowest point of the canopy. Advertising messages may not be displayed from
tables, chairs or umbrellas. This division (E) does not apply to merchants with
outside dining that is part of their property and who comply with all
applicable Health Department and Building Code regulations.
   (F)   Placement of permanent and semi-permanent obstructions. It shall be
unlawful to place permanent and semi-permanent displays, features, inventory
racks, display cases, vending machines and other obstructions of a permanent or
semi-permanent nature on city-maintained sidewalks, streets or alleyways;
provided, however, this restriction will not prohibit placement of public
telephones and newspaper display racks with the setback limitations imposed by
division (B) above.
   (G)   Selling from streets, sidewalks, vehicles, parking lots and vacant
lots. It shall be unlawful for any vendor, as defined in §
115.02, or for any person whatsoever, to sell, barter, exchange or attempt to
sell, barter or exchange any goods, wares or merchandise from a city street,
sidewalk, vehicle, parking lot or vacant lot unless otherwise provided for in
this chapter, except as the prohibition may be waived by the City Manager for
special events recognized by the city; provided that, the applicant satisfies
all permit requirements of this subchapter and complies with other applicable
provisions of this code.
(Ord. 02-04, passed 3-26-2002) Penalty, see §
115.99
Statutory reference:
   Regulation of solicitation campaigns, flea markets and itinerant merchants,
see G.S. § 160A-178
§ 115.05 CRYING OUT OR USING NOISE-MAKING DEVICES FOR ADVERTISING.
   No person shall advertise any article of any kind or any event of any kind
by crying out the advertisement or by using therefor any megaphone, bell, horn
or other noise-making device on any street, sidewalk or other public way of the
city.
(Ord. 02-04, passed 3-26-2002) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.06 INDIRECT SOLICITATION PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sell or offer for sale any pencils, shoestrings, chewing gum
or similar objects in or on the streets or other public places of the city as
an indirect method of soliciting alms; nor shall any person offer a cup or
other receptacle for the deposit of money or take up any collection in
connection with the playing of any musical instrument in or on the streets or
other public places of the city, without having a permit therefore issued by
the City Manager of Chief of Police.
(Ord. 02-04, passed 3-26-2002) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.07 PEDDLING LIMITED.
   Peddlers shall be limited to only sell their products in the community
market and shall meet all the requirements of Chapter 111 of this code of
ordinances and other applicable sections of this code. This limitation may be
waived by the City Manager for special events recognized by the city.
(Ord. 02-04, passed 3-26-2002) Penalty, see §
115.99
CHARITABLE AND RELIGIOUS SOLICITATIONS
§ 115.20 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHARITABLE. Includes the words PHILANTHROPIC, SOCIAL SERVICES and WELFARE,
either actual or purported.
   CONTRIBUTIONS. Alms, food, clothing, money, property, subscription or
pledge, and also donations under the guise of loans of money or property.
   PROMOTER. Any person who promotes, manages, supervises or organizes, or
attempts to promote, manage, supervise or organize, a campaign of solicitation.
   RELIGIOUS, RELIGION. Not to include the word “charitable”, as herein
defined, but shall be given their commonly accepted definitions.
   SOLICIT, SOLICITATION.
      (1)   The request, directly or indirectly, of money, credit, property,
financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation that
the money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will
be used for a charitable or religious purpose, as those purposes are defined in
this section. These words shall also mean and include the following methods of
securing the money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of
value:
         (a)   Any oral or written request; and/or
         (b)   The making of any announcement to the press, over the radio, by
television, by telephone or telegraph concerning an appeal or campaign to which
the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable or religious
purpose connected therewith.
      (2)   SOLICITATION, as defined herein, shall be deemed to have taken
place when the request is made, whether or not the person making the same
receives any contribution referred to in this section.
(Prior Code, § 12-120)
§ 115.21 INVESTIGATIONS; PUBLICATION OF FINDINGS.
   (A)   The City Manager is hereby authorized to investigate the affairs of
any person soliciting for religious purposes under a certificate issued
pursuant to this subchapter and the affairs of any person exempted from the
requirement of a permit under §
115.26 or exempted from the requirement of a certificate under §
115.32 and make public the official’s written findings in order that the public
may be fully informed as to the affairs of any persons. The person shall make
available to the City Manager, or to any representative designated by the City
Manager, in writing for the specific purpose, all books, records or other
information reasonably necessary to enable the City Manager to fully and fairly
inform the public of all facts necessary to a full understanding by the public
of the work and methods of operation of the person.
   (B)   Five days before the public release of any findings under this
section, the City Manager shall serve a copy of the findings upon the person
investigated and, at the time of the release of the findings, the official must
release a copy of any written statement the person may file in explanation,
denial or confirmation of the findings.
(Prior Code, § 12-121)
§ 115.22 INSPECTION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   Upon request by the City Manager, the holder of a permit required by §
115.26 for a charitable solicitation shall make available for inspection by the
City Manager, or any person designated in writing by the City Manager, all of
the permit holder’s books, records and papers, at any reasonable time while the
permit is in effect or after it has expired.
(Prior Code, § 12-122)
§ 115.23 REPORT REQUIRED AT CONCLUSION.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of all persons issued permits for charitable
solicitations to furnish to the City Manager, when required by the official,
within 60 days after the solicitation has been completed, a detailed report and
financial statement showing the amount raised by the solicitation, the amount
expended in collecting the funds, including a detailed report of the wages,
fees, commissions and expenses paid to any person in connection with the
solicitation, and the disposition of the balance of the funds collected by the
solicitation.
   (B)   This report shall be available for public inspection at the City
Manager’s office.
(Prior Code, § 12-123)
§ 115.24 ACCOUNTING SYSTEM.
   No person shall solicit any contribution for any charitable purpose without
maintaining a system of accounting whereby all donations and all disbursements
are entered upon the books or records of the person’s treasurer or other
financial officer.
(Prior Code, § 12-124) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.25 MISREPRESENTATIONS; DECEPTION OR FRAUD.
   No person shall directly or indirectly solicit contributions for any purpose
by misrepresentation of the person’s name, occupation, financial condition,
social condition or residence, and no person shall make or perpetrate any other
misstatement, deception or fraud in connection with any solicitation of any
contribution for any purpose in the city, or in any application or report filed
under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-125) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.26 PERMIT; REQUIRED, CONTENTS, TERM, RENEWAL.
   (A)   Required; exceptions.
      (1)   No person shall solicit contributions for any charitable purpose
within the city without a permit from the City Manager authorizing the
solicitation; provided, however, that, the provisions of this section shall not
apply to any established organization organized and operated wholly or
partially for religious or charitable purposes and not operated for the
pecuniary profit of any person, if the solicitations are conducted only among
the members of the organization by other members or officers thereof,
voluntarily and without remuneration for making the solicitations, or if the
solicitations are in the form of collections or contributions at the regular
assemblies or services of the established organization.
      (2)   When a permit has been issued to other than an individual, the
individual agents and solicitors for the permit holder shall not be required to
obtain individual permits.
   (B)   Contents. Permits issued under this subchapter shall bear the name and
address of the person to whom the permit is issued, the number of the permit,
the date issued, the dates within which the permit holder may solicit and a
statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the city, or by
any of its departments, officers or employees, of the purpose or of the person
conducting the solicitation. All permits must be signed by the Tax Collector.
   (C)   Term. The City Manager may, by permit issued pursuant to this section,
grant the right to solicit on one or more single, non-consecutive days in any
calendar year and may grant the right to solicit for any number of consecutive
days not to exceed one year from the date of the permit.
   (D)   Renewal. Upon the expiration of any permit, and if requested in
writing so to do, the City Manager may renew the permit, if satisfied that the
requirements of this subchapter are still being met and that no violation has
been committed. The City Manager may, in the official’s discretion, require a
new application, and the official’s action upon the new application shall be
governed by the same standards as to granting or withholding the permit as in
the case of an original application. No new permit, or renewal of an original
permit, shall be issued for more than one year.
(Prior Code, § 12-127) Penalty, see §
115.99
§ 115.27 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a permit required by this subchapter shall be made to
the City Manager upon forms prescribed by the official. The application shall
be sworn to or affirmed and filed with the City Manager at least 15 days prior
to the time at which the permit applied for shall become effective; provided,
however, that, the City Manager may, for good cause shown, allow the filing of
an application less than 15 days prior to the effective date of the permit
applied for. The application shall contain the following information, or in
lieu thereof, a statement satisfactory to the City Manager of the reasons the
information or any item thereof is not furnished:
      (1)   A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any
funds collected for charitable purposes by the applicant, the statement giving
the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it, and final
distribution thereof;
      (2)   A full statement of the general character and extent of the
charitable work being done or to be done by the applicant, and showing how much
thereof is being done or to be done within the city;
      (3)   A statement that the actual cost of the solicitation will not
exceed 25% of the total amount to be raised, or, if the cost of solicitation is
expected to exceed 25%, a statement of what the maximum cost is expected to be,
together with a statement of any special facts tending to show that there are
peculiar reasons which make a cost higher than 25% reasonable in the particular
case;
      (4)   A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, it will not
be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or by any
department or officer thereof;
      (5)   A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, no person
under the age of 16 will be permitted to solicit money; and
      (6)   Other information as may be reasonably required by the governing
body in order for the official to determine the kind and character and method
of the proposed solicitation, when it will take place and for what period of
time, and whether the solicitation is in the interest of, and not inimical to,
the safety, convenience or welfare of the inhabitants of the city.
   (B)   If, while any application is pending, or during the term of any permit
granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy or method that would alter
the information given in the application, the applicant shall notify the City
Manager in writing thereof within 24 hours after the change.
(Prior Code, § 12-128)
§ 115.28 PERMIT INVESTIGATION.
   The City Manager shall examine all applications for permits under this
subchapter and shall make, or cause to be made, the further investigation of
the application and the applicant as the official deems necessary in order to
perform the duties under this subchapter. Upon request by the City Manager, the
applicant shall make available for inspection by the City Manager, or any
person designated in writing for that purpose, all of the applicant’s books,
records and papers at any reasonable time before the application is approved
and the permit issued.
(Prior Code, § 12-129)
§ 115.29 PERMIT ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   (A)   The City Manager shall issue the permit required by this subchapter,
whenever the official shall find the following facts to exist:
      (1)   All of the statements made in the application are true;
      (2)   The applicant, or if the applicant is not an individual person, the
applicant’s managing officers and managing agents, are of good character and
reputation for honesty and integrity, and that all solicitors have proper
credentials, showing they are authorized to solicit in the name of the
applicant;
      (3)   The control and supervision of the solicitation will be under
responsible and reliable persons;
      (4)   The applicant has not engaged in any fraudulent transaction or
enterprise;
      (5)   The solicitation will not be a fraud on the public;
      (6)   The solicitation is prompted solely by a desire to finance the
charitable cause described in the application and will not be conducted
primarily for private profit;
      (7)   The cost of raising the funds will be reasonable. Any cost in
excess of 25% of the amount collected shall be considered to be unreasonable
unless special facts are presented showing to the satisfaction of the City
Manager that peculiar reasons make a cost higher than 25% reasonable in the
particular case; and
      (8)   The kind, character and method of the proposed solicitation, the
time when it will take place and its duration are such that the solicitation
will be in the interest of and not inimical to the safety, convenience or
welfare of the inhabitants of the city.
   (B)   The City Manager shall file in the official’s office for public
inspection a written statement of the findings of fact and decisions upon each
application. If the application is denied, the City Manager shall notify the
applicant by registered or certified mail, at the address given in the
application, stating the reasons therefor.
(Prior Code, § 12-130)
§ 115.30 PERMIT NON-TRANSFERABLE.
   Any permit issued under this subchapter shall be non-transferable.
(Prior Code, § 12-131)
§ 115.31 PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION.
   (A)   Whenever it shall be shown or whenever the City Manager has reason to
believe that any person to whom a permit has been issued under this subchapter
has violated any of the provisions of this subchapter, or that any promoter,
agent or solicitor of a permit holder has misrepresented the purpose of the
solicitation, the City Manager shall immediately suspend the permit and give
the permit holder written notice in person or by registered or certified mail
of the suspension and of a hearing to be held within two days of the suspension
to determine whether or not the permit should be revoked. This notice must
contain a statement of the facts upon which the City Manager has acted in
suspending the permit. At the hearing, the permit holder, and any other
interested person, shall have the right to present evidence as to the facts
upon which the City Manager based the suspension of the permit, and any other
facts which may aid the City Manager in determining whether this subchapter has
been violated and whether the purpose of the solicitation has been
misrepresented. If, after the hearing, the City Manager finds that the
subchapter has been violated, or the purpose of the solicitation has been
misrepresented, the City Manager shall, within two days after the hearing file
in the official’s office for public inspection and send to the permit holder by
registered or certified mail, or serve upon the person in any manner provided
by general law for the service of notices, a written statement of the facts
upon which the City Manager bases such a finding and shall immediately revoke
the permit. If, after the hearing, the City Manager finds that this subchapter
has not been violated and the purpose of the solicitation has not been
misrepresented, the City Manager shall, within two days after the hearing, give
to the permit holder a written statement cancelling the suspension of the
permit and stating that no violation or misrepresentation was found to have
been committed.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall be notified forthwith of the suspension or
revocation of any permit issued under this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 12-132)
§ 115.32 CERTIFICATE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall solicit contributions for any religious purpose within
the city without a certificate from the City Manager authorizing the
solicitation. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any established
organization organized and operated exclusively for religious purposes and not
operated for the pecuniary benefit of any person if the solicitations by the
established organization are conducted only among the members thereof by other
members or officers thereof, voluntarily and without remuneration for making
the solicitations, or the solicitations are in the form of collections or
contributions at the regular assemblies or services of the established
organization.
   (B)   When a certificate has been issued to other than an individual, the
individual agents and solicitors for the certificate holder shall not be
required to obtain individual certificates.
(Prior Code, § 12-133)
§ 115.33 CERTIFICATE APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a certificate required by this subchapter shall be
made to the City Manager upon forms prescribed by the official. The application
shall be sworn to or affirmed, and shall contain the following information, or
in lieu thereof, a statement satisfactory to the City Manager of the reasons
the information or any item thereof is not furnished:
      (1)   A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any
funds collected for religious purposes by the applicant, the statement giving
the amount of money so raised, together with the cost of raising it, and final
distribution thereof;
      (2)   A full statement of the general character and extent of the
religious work being done or to be done by the applicant, and also the
character and extent of the work being done or to be done within the city;
      (3)   A statement to the effect that, if a certificate is granted, it
will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or by
any department or officer thereof;
      (4)   A statement to the effect that, if a certificate is granted, no
person under the age of 16 will be permitted to solicit money; and
      (5)   Other information as may be required in order for the City Manager
to determine the kind and character of the proposed solicitation.
   (B)   If, while any application is pending, or during the term of any
certificate granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy or method that
would alter the information given in the application, the applicant shall
notify the City Manager in writing thereof within 24 hours after the change.
(Prior Code, § 12-134)
§ 115.34 CERTIFICATE ISSUANCE; CONTENTS.
   Upon receipt of an application for a certificate under this subchapter, the
City Manager shall forthwith issue to the applicant a certificate of
registration. The certificate of registration shall bear the name and address
of the person by whom the solicitation is to be made, the number of the
certificate, the date issued and a statement that the certificate does not
constitute an endorsement by the city, or by any of its departments or
officers, of the purpose of the solicitation or of the person conducting the
solicitation.
(Prior Code, § 12-135)
§ 115.35 CERTIFICATE TERM AND RENEWAL.
   A certificate issued under the provisions of this subchapter shall remain in
force and effect for a period of one year after the issuance thereof, and shall
be renewed upon the expiration of the period upon the filing of a request in
writing, but the City Manager may require a new application.
(Prior Code, § 12-136)
§ 115.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
115.20 through
115.35 or filing or causing to be filed an application for a permit or
certificate under §§
115.20 through
115.35 containing false or fraudulent statements shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished as prescribed in §
10.99. If the violation charged is soliciting contributions for any charitable
purpose without a permit, or soliciting contributions for any religious purpose
without a certificate, each act of solicitation shall constitute a separate
offense.
(Prior Code, § 12-126)
CHAPTER 116: TAXICABS
Section
General Provisions
   
116.001   Definitions
   
116.002   Conduct of drivers
   
116.003   Taxicab stands
Operating Permits
   
116.020   Required
   
116.021   Issuance
   
116.022   Authorization to operate under permit
   
116.023   Application requirements for an operating permit
   
116.024   Hearing on application
   
116.025   Issuance; conditions
   
116.026   Expiration
   
116.027   Renewal
   
116.028   Transfer
   
116.029   Availability of permit
   
116.030   Retirement and replacement of taxicabs; new permits
   
116.031   Grounds for suspension or revocation of an operating permit
   
116.032   Surrender
   
116.033   Fees
Driver’s Permit
   
116.045   Required
   
116.046   Application requirements for a driver’s permit
   
116.047   Qualifications of driver’s permit applicant
   
116.048   Investigation of applicant
   
116.049   Refusal; grounds specified
   
116.050   Issuance
   
116.051   Fees
   
116.052   Authority to suspend; third suspension, revocation mandatory
   
116.053   Grounds for revocation; acts of drivers
   
116.054   Renewal
Operation Requirements
   
116.065   Registration and all proper permits necessary
   
116.066   Compliance with state law, ordinances and the like
   
116.067   Financial responsibility
   
116.068   Policies of insurance to be filed with City Manager
   
116.069   Operation standards
   
116.070   Terms between owner and driver regulated
   
116.071   Duty of operating permit holder to keep records and file reports
   
116.072   Driver’s daily manifest to be kept; right of inspection by police,
City Council, City Manager or designee
   
116.073   Drivers’ tags required; dress restrictions
   
116.074   Accidents to be reported
   
116.075   Occupants of taxicabs
Specifications and Equipment
   
116.090   Conformance
   
116.091   General construction requirements
   
116.092   Equipment required and general maintenance
   
116.093   Color schemes
Inspections and Maintenance of Equipment
   
116.105   Inspection; right of entry; withdrawal of vehicle when not in good
condition; right of reinspection
   
116.106   Taxicab found unsafe by operating permit holder to cease operation
until repairs are made
   
116.107   Duty of owner to clean taxicab
 
   
116.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 116.001 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DRIVER. Any person who drives a taxicab.
   DRIVER’S PERMIT. The license issued to any person to enable that person to
drive a taxicab vehicle.
   INDIVIDUAL OWNER-DRIVER. A person, self-employed, who engages in the
business of operating a single taxicab, as its owner and driver. The term
includes all operating permit holders who hold no more than one operating
permit.
   MEDALLION. A non-transferable numbered insignia to provide exterior
identification that a particular taxicab has a valid operating permit
associated with it.
   OPERATING PERMIT. The license, issued by the City Manager or his or her
designee, under which a person may operate a taxicab vehicle, and which shows
that the convenience and necessity of the public requires the operation of the
taxicab.
   OPERATING PERMIT HOLDER. The vehicle owner and supporting services provider
to whom an operating permit for the operation of a taxicab has been issued.
   STREET. Any street, alley, avenue, highway or any other public vehicular
area within the corporate limits of the city as the same may exist or may be
hereafter extended.
   SUPPORTING SERVICE PROVIDER. The person who provides, or guarantees to
provide, the requirements of §§
116.023(F) and
116.025(A)(3).
   TAXICAB. Any motor vehicle seating nine or fewer passengers and driver-
operated for hire upon any street, on call or demand.
   TAXICAB COMPANY. Any company which engages in the business or operating
taxicabs as the owner or franchiser.
(Prior Code, § 17-16) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.002 CONDUCT OF DRIVERS.
   (A)   No driver shall deceive or attempt to deceive any passenger who may
ride or desire to ride in his or her taxicab as to his or her destination or
the rate of fare to be charged, or convey or cause to be conveyed any passenger
to any place other than as directed by the passenger and, in no event, shall
any driver providing taxi service take a longer route to the requested
destination than is necessary, unless he or she is so requested by the
passenger or passengers.
   (B)   Drivers shall comply with all reasonable and lawful requests of the
passenger as to the speed of travel and the route to be taken.
   (C)   No driver shall allow the seating capacity of his or her taxicab to be
exceeded, with the exception that rear seat passengers may hold children in
their arms.
   (D)   If agreed to by the first passenger, a taxicab carrying passengers may
answer other calls, or pick up additional passengers, prior to taking the first
passenger to their destination; provided, the first passenger agreed to the
amount of additional time above the time normally required for the exclusive-
ride trip as estimated in advance by the driver. Taxi drivers shall specify any
fare discounts to passengers participating in a ride-sharing. If a child under
16 years of age and unaccompanied by a person 16 years of age or older is the
original passenger, no other passengers shall be permitted in the taxicab.
   (E)   No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person upon
request unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by provisions of this
chapter to do so.
(Prior Code, § 17-17) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.003 TAXICAB STANDS.
   (A)   The City Manager or his or her designee shall jointly establish and
designate taxicab stands.
   (B)   A list of all taxicab stands in the city shall be kept on file in the
office of the City Manager or his or her designee and shall be open to
inspection by the public.
(Prior Code, § 17-18) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
OPERATING PERMITS
§ 116.020 REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate any taxicab in the city without first having
obtained an operating permit authorizing the operation.
(Prior Code, § 17-20) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.021 ISSUANCE.
   (A)   The City Council or designee, by resolution, may, in its discretion,
limit by policy the total number of taxicab operating permits to be granted.
The City Council or designee will review on an annual basis the limit on the
total number of operating permits available and make changes, if any. An
operating permit, whether or not limited in number, shows that by its issuance
the convenience and necessity of the public requires the operation of the
taxicab.
   (B)   The City Council authorizes the City Manager or his or her designee to
issue operating permits to any applicant or applicants subject to conditions as
the City Council may deem advisable or necessary in the public interest and
upon payment of a regulatory fee provided by §
116.029. The operating permits shall be issued for a period of one year and be
renewable annually upon payment of a regulatory fee provided by §
116.029.
   (C)   No operating permit shall be issued to or renewed by any person who
shall not have fully complied with all of the prerequisite requirements of this
chapter before the commencement of the operation of the proposed service.
   (D)   When the operating permit has been authorized, and upon determination
by the City Manager or his or her designee that the color scheme is
sufficiently distinctive as not to cause confusion with other taxicab vehicles
already operating, and that the taxicab vehicle, after appropriate inspection,
meets the requirements of this chapter, the City Manager or his or her designee
will issue for each taxicab vehicle a numbered medallion to be affixed to the
outside left rear portion of the taxicab vehicle for which the operating permit
is issued, in plain view from the rear of the taxicab vehicle. Loss or
destruction or defacing of the medallion shall be reported to the City Manager
or his or her designee. No vehicle shall be operated while there is affixed
thereto a medallion issued pursuant to this division (D) unless, pursuant to
this chapter, the vehicle’s use as a taxicab has been authorized and the driver
of the vehicle has been authorized to drive a taxicab for the operating permit
holder to whom the medallion was issued.
   (E)   The privilege of engaging in the business of operating a taxicab
vehicle in the city granted in the operating permit is personal to operating
permit holders. The rights and the requirements and responsibilities which
attach to the operating permit remain with the holder at all times, the taxicab
vehicle is operated in the city under the authority of the operating permit.
These rights, requirements and responsibilities, which include, but are not
limited to, the requirements of this chapter, will remain unaffected by any
agreement or contractual arrangement between the operating permit holders,
irrespective of the form or characterization of the agreement under which the
operating permit holder and/or driver operates the taxicab vehicle.
   (F)   The operating permit holder shall, in the case of any change in
business address or telephone, notify the City Manager or his or her designee
in writing of the change within 48 hours of the effective date of the change.
(Prior Code, § 17-21) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.022 AUTHORIZATION TO OPERATE UNDER PERMIT.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit any person from owning or
operating a taxicab under an operating permit; provided that, the person shall
operate under the color scheme of the operating permit and use the depot or
terminal, dispatcher service, radio equipment and taximeter; and, provided
that, the person shall have a valid taxicab driver’s permit issued by the City
Council or designee, as provided for in §§
116.045 through
116.054; nor shall this chapter prohibit any association of individual owner-
drivers operating a taxicab under an operating permit issued to participants in
the association.
(Prior Code, § 17-22) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.023 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR AN OPERATING PERMIT.
   All applications for an operating permit are to be submitted by the vehicle
owner and the supporting service provider, hereafter called applicant, to the
City Manager or his or her designee in triplicate, on forms provided by the
city stating as follows:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicants and, in the event that an
applicant is a corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation,
or in the event that the person is an association, a certified copy of the
bylaws of the association; and, if a partnership, a copy of the partnership
agreement;
   (B)   The number of vehicles presently operated by the service provider on
the date of the application, if any;
   (C)   The color scheme for which the operating permit is desired;
   (D)   The make, type and passenger capacity of the taxicab for which
application for an operating permit is made;
   (E)   The court record of the applicant. If an applicant is a corporation or
association, the record of the officers, directors and supervising employees
thereof, including general manager, if any. The Chief of Police is charged with
the duty of investigating the criminal facts stated in the application and
report the findings to the City Council or designee;
   (F)   The applicant’s submittal of the following conditional information:
      (1)   Existence of a depot or terminal on private property;
      (2)   Ability to provide adequate supervision of taxicabs and drivers
operating under the operating permit(s);
      (3)   Evidence that the telephone number(s) of the taxicab company will
be listed in the city’s telephone directory to be issued; and
      (4)   Assurance that each vehicle operating under this permit shall be
kept clean and in good mechanical condition and in good physical condition at
all times.
   (G)   The applicant shall swear that the information submitted is neither
false nor misleading. Submitting, or causing to submit, false or misleading
information is unlawful and shall be grounds for denial of an operating permit.
(Prior Code, § 17-23) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.024 HEARING ON APPLICATION.
   The City Manager, or his or her designee, may require a hearing with the
operating permit applicant if the Manager is not convinced that the applicant
meets all eligibility criteria and has provided all necessary data to the City
Manager as outlined in §
116.023.
(Prior Code, § 17-24) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.025 ISSUANCE; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   On recommendation of the City Manager or his or her designee, the City
Council shall authorize issuance to every person who shall have filed
application therefor, as herein provided, an operating permit for the taxicab,
subject to the conditions this chapter may require; provided:
      (1)   The vehicle for which application for an operating permit or
permits is made shall have been found to be in strict compliance with this
chapter;
      (2)   The court record of the applicant is not such as would make it
against the public interest for the application to be granted;
      (3)   The applicants thereof shall have complied with all the provisions
of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the provision of:
         (a)   A depot or terminal on private property;
         (b)   Adequate supervision of drivers;
         (c)   Evidence that telephone numbers for the taxicab company will be
listed in the next city’s telephone directory issued;
         (d)   Assurance that each vehicle operating under this permit shall be
kept clean and in good mechanical condition and in good physical condition at
all times; and
         (e)   Rates for fares shall be posted in taxicabs.
      (4)   The issuance is not in conflict with the conditions as placed by
City Council on the issuance or operating permits.
   (B)   Upon authorization by the City Council, the City Manager or his or her
designee shall issue the operating permit and shall place it in the card frame
of the vehicle. At that time, the affixing of the medallion, as required by §
116.021(D).
(Prior Code, § 17-25) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.026 EXPIRATION.
   All operating permits shall expire on June 30 of the year after which the
operating permit is granted. The operating permit shall automatically expire if
the conditions under which the permit was issued, as provided in §
116.025, change without prior approval of the City Manager or his or her
designee.
(Prior Code, § 17-26) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.027 RENEWAL.
   Upon application, prior to the expiration of an operating permit, the City
Council or designee shall renew any operating permit or cause a new operating
permit to be issued for the ensuing year, in the absence of any contrary
evidence and finding of the City Council or designee regarding the operating
permit holder’s fulfillment of the eligibility criteria in §
116.025 and his or her ability to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17-27) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.028 TRANSFER.
   (A)   Each permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section is
separate and distinct and shall not be transferable from the operating permit
holder to another person or entity without prior approval of the City Council.
Neither the City Manager, nor his or her designee, will recommend any transfer
in conflict with any restrictions placed by the Council, as provided by §
116.021.
   (B)   Where the permit holder is a corporation, partnership or other legal
entity other than a natural person, transfer of the majority of the ownership
interest shall result in the automatic revocation of any operating permit
previously granted to the operating permit holder, unless the prospective
owners of the new entity obtain prior approval from the City Council or
designee for the transfer of operating permits to the new entity.
   (C)   Whenever an application for a transfer of permit is made, the City
Council or designee , shall require the information as required for the
original issuance of the operating permit, as set forth in §
116.023.
   (D)   Upon approval by the City Council or designee of a transfer of an
operating permit, the city, within 30 days of the approval, shall issue a new
operating permit; provided that, the applicant for the transfer has complied
with all provisions of this action.
(Prior Code, § 17-28) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.029 AVAILABILITY OF PERMIT.
   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall maintain a list of persons
desiring to obtain operating permits, including the number of permits desired
by that person. In the event that operating permits become available through
revocation, retirement or other means, as long as the total number of operating
permits issued does not exceed the limit, if any, placed by the City Council on
the total number of operating permits, then the City Manager shall inform the
City Council that operating permits are available. Provided that, an approved
application for an operating permit is on file, the City Manager or his or her
designee, upon approval by the City Council, shall offer one operating permit
to the first person on the list, and that person shall have seven days to
present the prospective taxicab for approval, in accordance with §
116.025(A)(1). If, at the end of the seven-day period, approval is not
received, then the City Manager, or his or her designee, shall offer the
available operating permit to the second person on the list, and this person
shall fulfill the same conditions of issuance. If not, the City Manager shall
continue down the list in the same manner. If more than one permit is
available, the City Manager shall continue to make offers moving down the list
until all permits are issued. In the event that the end of the list is reached
and additional operating permits are available, then offers shall be made
starting at the beginning of the list, and so forth until all available
operating permits are issued, or until no further persons desiring operating
permits and who have approved applications are available.
(Prior Code, § 17-29) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.030 RETIREMENT AND REPLACEMENT OF TAXICABS; NEW PERMITS.
   Whenever an operating permit holder permanently retires a taxicab for which
an operating permit has been granted, and within 30 days after the retirement
makes written application to the City Manager or his or her designee for
permanent replacement of the taxicab vehicle or vehicles, the City Manager, or
his or her designee, shall issue a new operating permit for no greater number
of taxicabs than those so retired; provided, the period of time between
permanent retirement of the taxicab and the replacement of the taxicab does not
exceed 30 days.
(Prior Code, § 17-30) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.031 GROUNDS FOR SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF AN OPERATING PERMIT.
   (A)   The City Council or designee may suspend or revoke an operating permit
upon the occurrence of any one of the following:
      (1)   The operating permit holder fails to operate his or her taxicab or
taxicabs in compliance with all the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   The City Council or designee finds that the operating permit holder
submitted, or caused to be submitted, false or misleading information on his or
her application for an operating permit;
      (3)   The operating permit holder ceases to operate any taxicab, during a
period of 30 consecutive days, without having obtained permission for the
cessation from the City Council;
      (4)   The operating permit holder commits any act with the intent to
defraud his or her creditors; and/or
      (5)   The City Council or designee determines that, in the interest of
public safety and welfare, an operating permit should be suspended or revoked.
   (B)   The City Council or designee may also revoke an operating permit due
to acts of drivers, pursuant to §§
116.052 and
116.053(A).
   (C)   Upon suspension or revocation of an operating permit, the holder shall
have a right to a hearing. The holder of the operator permit should be required
to make such a request within 72 hours of the date of suspension or revocation.
The hearing panel shall consist of the Chief of Police, Codes Director and
Billing Director. The panel may sustain, modify or dissolve the suspension or
revocation.
   (D)   An operating permit holder who has had an operating permit revoked may
not apply for an operating permit for a period of two years, next after
revocation.
(Prior Code, § 17-31) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.032 SURRENDER.
   (A)   When an operating permit is revoked, the operation as a taxicab of the
vehicle subject to the operating permit shall cease and the operating permit
and medallion for the vehicle shall be surrendered immediately to the City
Manager or his or her designee.
   (B)   When any operating permit holder permanently retires any vehicle or
vehicles from service and does not replace them within 30 days and/or does not
apply for operating permit transfer as specified in §
116.028, the operating permit for each retired vehicle or vehicles shall be
considered abandoned, and will be void; the operating permit holder shall
immediately surrender each related operating permit and medallion to the City
Manager or his or her designee.
   (C)   The abandoned operating permits may not be restored by any means other
than through application as for new operating permits in the manner provided in
this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 17-32) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.033 FEES.
   (A)   Fees for obtaining, renewing, duplicating, transferring and
reinstating operating permits shall be collected.
   (B)   Fees shall be approved by the City Council and on file with the City
Manager or his or her designee.
   (C)   Other fees as permitted by state law may be collected.
(Prior Code, § 17-33) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
DRIVER’S PERMIT
§ 116.045 REQUIRED.
   No person shall drive a taxicab within the city without first having
obtained a taxicab driver’s permit from the City Council or designee.
(Prior Code, § 17-34) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.046 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR A DRIVER’S PERMIT.
   (A)   (1)   Each applicant for a driver’s permit shall make application on
forms to be provided by the city. The application shall contain the following
information:
         (a)   The applicant’s full name and address;
         (b)   The applicant’s physical condition, with particular reference to
hearing; eyesight; and use of alcoholic beverages or narcotic or barbiturate
drugs; all shown by a recent medical examination, with alcohol and drug
screening tests;
         (c)   The applicant’s physical description, including age, race,
height, weight and color of eyes and hair;
         (d)   The length of time the applicant has resided at his or her
present address;
         (e)   The applicant’s place(s) of residence and employment for the two
years immediately preceding the date of application; and
         (f)   The applicant’s court records.
      (2)   The application shall be signed and sworn to by the applicant
before a person authorized to take oaths in the state.
   (B)   Each application shall have attached thereto three recent photographs
of the applicant conforming to the criteria for passport photographs.
   (C)   The applicant’s fingerprints shall be impressed on each application
form, in the space provided.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any applicant to willfully include, or
willfully cause to be included, a false statement in his or her application for
a driver’s permit.
(Prior Code, § 17-35) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.047 QUALIFICATIONS OF DRIVER’S PERMIT APPLICANT.
   Each applicant for a driver’s permit must meet the following requirements:
   (A)   Be at least 18 years of age as required by G.S. § 20-5;
   (B)   A driver’s permit applicant shall submit a medical examination and/or
provide the City Manager or his or her designee with a current medical report
verifying that the applicant does not suffer from any illness, sickness or
disease which would adversely affect the safe operation of a motor vehicle or
pose a threat to the health and safety of the public.
   (C)   All applicants and drivers must submit a blood or urine test at a
facility approved by the city for the purpose of detecting the presence of
controlled substances and shall provide the City Manager or his or her designee
with a copy of the report containing the results of such analysis. The test
shall take place and the results submitted with the application for a taxi
driver’s permit. All costs related to such analysis shall be the responsibility
of the applicant. The driver shall resubmit the test results for such test
annually to the taxi examiner every year before renewal of permits (reference
to Senate Bill 557 passed on May 20,2003, which authorizes a city to require an
applicant for a taxicab license to submit to and pass a drug test).
   (D)   Be able to read, write and speak the English language.
   (E)   Maintain a clean and neat personal appearance:
      (1)   The driver permit applicant must possess at least a valid state
Class C motor vehicle operator’s license which has not been suspended or
revoked, within three years preceding the date of application, for the
operational violations of a motor vehicle.
      (2)   The taxicab operator applicant shall not have had a revocation or
suspension of a state motor vehicle operator’s license for operational
violations of a motor vehicle or for failure to appear or failure to comply
with a court’s judgment in relation to a minor violation of a traffic law or
infraction within the three years preceding the date of application.
   (F)   Have not been convicted of a felony within ten years of date of
application.
   (G)   Have not been convicted of operation of a motor vehicle in a manner,
which resulted in an incapacitating Class A injury on the state traffic
accident report or the death of any person.
   (H)   Have not been convicted of a misdemeanor violation of any city,
county, state or federal law relating to the use, possession or sale of
alcoholic beverages or substances regulated by the State Controlled Substance
Act or the State Toxic Vapors Act; or relating to prostitution or gambling
within five years preceding date of application.
   (I)   Has not been a habitual violator of motor vehicle laws or a habitual
user of narcotic drugs, whether or not lawfully obtained, or a habitual abuser
of alcoholic beverages within five years preceding date of application. A
habitual violator of motor vehicle laws is one who has been convicted of at
least three moving violations within the preceding 12 months.
   (J)   Have permission from an operating permit holder to operate a taxicab
under the permit assigned to the operating permit holder.
(Prior Code, § 17-36) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.048 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   The Chief of Police is charged with the duty of investigating the criminal
facts stated in a driver’s permit application and shall report the findings and
recommendations to the City Council or designee.
(Prior Code, § 17-37) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.049 REFUSAL; GROUNDS SPECIFIED.
   The City Council or designee may refuse to grant or renew a driver’s permit
for any applicant including but not limited to the following reasons:
   (A)   Failure to meet or maintain qualifications in §
116.047 and failure to remain in compliance with and all the provisions set
forth in this chapter; or
   (B)   Upon determination that false information had been provided in the
application for a driver’s permit.
(Prior Code, § 17-38) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.050 ISSUANCE.
   The City Council or designee, upon finding that an applicant has
satisfactorily complied with the provisions of this subchapter, shall issue to
an applicant a driver’s permit, which shall show the applicant’s photograph,
name, height, weight, age, the expiration date and the operating permit holder
for whom the driver will be employed. The driver’s permit must be displayed at
all times in the card frame attached to the glove compartment or dash on the
right side in the driver’s taxicab. No driver shall operate a cab for any
operating permit holder other than the operating permit holder shown on his or
her driver’s permit and, upon the termination of a driver’s agreement to drive
for the operating permit holder, the driver shall surrender his or her permit
to the City Manager or his or her designee within 48 hours.
(Prior Code, § 17-39) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.051 FEES.
   Fees to cover the administrative cost of the driver’s permit shall be as
follows:
   (A)   Issuing new permit or reinstating permit: $15;
   (B)   Renewal of permit annually: $15; and
   (C)   Transferring or duplicating lost permit: $5.
(Prior Code, § 17-40) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.052 AUTHORITY TO SUSPEND; THIRD SUSPENSION, REVOCATION MANDATORY.
   (A)   The City Council or designee shall have the authority to suspend any
driver’s permit issued under this subchapter for any of the grounds specified
in §
116.053, for the permit holder’s violation of any section of this chapter, or
if the holder of the driver’s permit is found by the City Council to have
violated any federal, state or local law pertaining to the public welfare or
morals or to have been convicted of or pleaded guilty or no contest to any law.
   (B)   The suspension shall not exceed two years.
   (C)   A third suspension of a driver’s permit shall result in the mandatory
revocation of the driver’s permit.
(Prior Code, § 17-41) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.053 GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION; ACTS OF DRIVERS.
   (A)   The City Council or designee may revoke or refuse to renew a driver’s
permit if the person to whom the driver’s permit was issued is, at any time
after issuance:
      (1)   Found to have committed, been convicted of or pled guilty or no
contest to any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of any federal, state or local law relating to the
use, possession, manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages or any substance
regulated by the State Controlled Substances Act (G.S. §§ 90-86 through 90-
113.8) or the State Toxic Vapors Act (G.S. §§ 90-113.8A through 90-113.14);
         (b)   A violation of any federal, state or local law relating to
prostitution or gambling;
         (c)   A suspension or revocation of one’s driver’s licenses;
         (d)   Any felony;
         (e)   Any violation of a federal, state or local law designed for the
protection of life; and/or
         (f)   Any criminal assault involving the operation of a taxicab.
      (2)   Found to have made or caused to be made a false statement in his or
her application for issuance or renewal of a driver’s permit; and/or
      (3)   Does not continue to meet the qualifications for a driver’s permit
set forth in §
116.047.
(Prior Code, § 17-42)
   (B)   Upon a determination by the City Council or designee that a driver has
committed, been convicted of or pled guilty or no contest to:
      (1)   Any of the offenses specified in division (A) above;
      (2)   A violation of any provision of this chapter pertaining to the
operation of taxicabs; or
      (3)   A violation of any federal, state or local law pertaining to the
public health or morals;
and that the offense or violation occurred while the driver was engaged in the
operation of a taxicab or was engaged in some act related to the operation of a
taxicab, the City Council shall give notice of the determination to the driver
and to the operating permit holder under which the driver was operating.
(Prior Code, § 17-43)
(Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.054 RENEWAL.
   (A)   The City Council or designee may renew a driver’s permit from year to
year by appropriate endorsement thereon.
   (B)   A driver applying for a renewal of his or her driver’s permit shall
make application on a form furnished by the city.
(Prior Code, § 17-44) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
OPERATION REQUIREMENTS
§ 116.065 REGISTRATION AND ALL PROPER PERMITS NECESSARY.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle as a taxicab until the vehicle has
been registered in accordance with all requirements of the state and all proper
permits have been obtained therefor.
(Prior Code, § 17-45) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.066 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW, ORDINANCES AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   Every taxicab shall be operated in accordance with the laws of the
state and the ordinances of the city and with due regard for the safety,
comfort and convenience of passengers and for the safe and careful
transportation of property and for the safety of the general public.
   (B)   No taxicab shall be operated at a rate of speed inconsistent with
existing traffic regulations, road conditions and the hazard at intersections
and any other conditions then existing, nor in a manner or condition to
endanger or to be likely to endanger the safety of passengers, pedestrians,
vehicles or the person and property of others.
(Prior Code, § 17-46) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.067 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated any taxicab over the
streets of the city without first furnishing proof of financial responsibility
as required by G.S. § 20-280, or any superseding statute. If the taxicab is
owned by a person who operates under the operating permit of another owner, the
other owner shall be named as an additional insured in the policy covering the
taxicab. Insurance coverage must meet the minimum state requirement of $30,000/
$60,000/$25,000. Bodily injury per individual ($30,000) per occurrence
($60,000) and property damage per occurrence ($25,000).
   (B)   Any operating permit holder or person owning or causing any taxicab to
be operated shall, upon the receipt of any notice of cancellation of the
insurance, required by this section, immediately notify the City Manager or his
or her designee and the holder of the operating permit, if applicable, of the
cancellation. Failure to notify the City Manager or his or her designee of a
cancellation of insurance on a taxicab shall result in the immediate revocation
of the operating permit of taxicab for a period of 30 days.
   (C)   The insurance company issuing any policy required by this section
shall give the City Manager or his or her designee not less than 30 days
advance written notice of any cancellation, reduction in coverage or other
material change in the policy.
(Prior Code, § 17-47) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.068 POLICIES OF INSURANCE TO BE FILED WITH CITY MANAGER.
   The operating permit holder shall file with the City Manager or his or her
designee a copy of the vehicle insurance policy insuring the liability of the
vehicle, as a condition precedent to the operation of any taxicab on the
streets of the city. The policy filed shall, among other things, set forth a
description of each and every taxicab operating under the terms of the policy
or policies.
(Prior Code, § 17-48) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.069 OPERATION STANDARDS.
   Subsequent to the receipt of an operating permit to operate a taxicab or
taxicabs, an operating permit holder shall continue to meet the requirements of
§§
116.023 and
116.025 as a condition to retaining the license.
(Prior Code, § 17-49) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.070 TERMS BETWEEN OWNER AND DRIVER REGULATED.
   (A)   Any taxicab may be operated by the operating permit holder thereof, or
by a duly authorized agent and employee of the operating permit holder.
   (B)   An operating permit holder may enter into any contract, lease
agreement or understanding with any driver, as an independent contractor, by
the terms of which the driver pays to the operating permit holder a fixed or
determinable sum per day for the use of the taxicab and is entitled to all or a
portion of the proceeds of operation over and above the fixed or determinable
sum; provided, however, that, the operating permit holder provides and
maintains the insurance on any leased taxicab or cabs as required by the city
and state.
(Prior Code, § 17-50) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.071 DUTY OF OPERATING PERMIT HOLDER TO KEEP RECORDS AND FILE REPORTS.
   (A)   Every operating permit holder shall maintain on file with the City
Manager, or his or her designee, his or her name, business address, all
business telephone numbers listed in his or her name and the names of all
drivers, their license numbers and addresses, and shall, within 48 hours after
any change in connection therewith, report the change or changes to the City
Manager or his or her designee.
   (B)   In case more than one operating permit holder operates under the same
name, the operating permit holder of the name may keep the records and make the
reports required by this chapter in behalf of all operating permit holders
operating under his or her name; but his or her failure to do so shall not
relieve the other operating permit holder operating under the name of
responsibility for the records and reports with respect to the taxicab(s) owned
by them, it being the intent of this chapter to impose the responsibilities
upon each operating permit holder.
(Prior Code, § 17-51) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.072 DRIVER’S DAILY MANIFEST TO BE KEPT; RIGHT OF INSPECTION BY POLICE,
CITY COUNCIL, CITY MANAGER AND DESIGNEE.
   (A)   Every driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which shall be
recorded all trips made each day, the time, place of origin and destination of
each trip; the number of passengers and amount of fare for each trip; manifests
shall be in a form approved by the City Manager, or his or her designee, and
shall be furnished to the driver by the operating permit holder.
   (B)   Every operating permit holder shall retain and preserve, filed by
operating permit number, all driver’s manifests in a safe place for at least 90
days, and the same shall be made available upon demand for inspection by the
City Council, the city police or the City Manager or designee.
(Prior Code, § 17-52) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.073 DRIVERS’ TAGS REQUIRED; DRESS RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Each driver shall wear in plain view a tag containing his or her name
and the name of his or her company. The size, lettering and other features of
the name tag shall be approved by the City Council.
   (B)   Each driver shall wear clean clothing.
(Prior Code, § 17-53) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.074 ACCIDENTS TO BE REPORTED.
   All accidents involving the operation of taxicabs shall be reported to the
City Manager or his or her designee immediately. The operating permit holder
for the taxicab involved in an accident and the driver of the taxicab, so
involved, shall be jointly and individually responsible for making the required
report. A taxicab involved in an accident may be immediately ordered out of
service by the City Manager, or his or her designee, and shall be repaired,
before again being placed in service, if required by the City Manager or his or
her designee.
(Prior Code, § 17-54) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.075 OCCUPANTS OF TAXICABS.
   At any time a taxicab is occupied by a fare-paying passenger or passengers,
the taxicab shall not be occupied by any other person, except the driver and
any person who may be accompanying a fare-paying passenger.
(Prior Code, § 17-55) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
SPECIFICATIONS AND EQUIPMENT
§ 116.090 CONFORMANCE.
   No vehicle shall be granted an operating permit unless it conforms with all
the provisions of this subchapter.
(Prior Code, § 17-56) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
§ 116.091 GENERAL CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All taxicabs shall be vans or passenger vehicles. Passenger vehicles
shall have a minimum of four doors, two leading into the driver’s compartment
and the remaining two or more doors leading into the passenger’s compartment
and so constructed that they may be opened from the inside and the outside.
Each door shall be constructed with a double or safety lock.
   (B)   All upholstery covering or interior lining in any taxicab shall be of
non-absorbent and washable material and shall be free of cuts and tears.
   (C)   Floor mats of rubber or other non-absorbent material shall be provided
and shall at all times be removable. No taxicab shall have on the floor thereof
any footrest bracket or other fixture extending above the top of the floor mat.
   (D)   Seat belts shall be provided for each passenger to the extent required
as original equipment by the federal government.
(Prior Code, § 17-57) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.092 EQUIPMENT REQUIRED AND GENERAL MAINTENANCE.
   Every vehicle used as a taxicab shall meet the requirements of this section.
If the City Council finds that a vehicle does not meet these requirements, it
may order that the vehicle be removed from taxicab service.
   (A)   Conformance to the manufacturer’s specifications. The vehicle body
should conform to the general specifications of the manufacturer.
   (B)   Exterior paint work. All exterior work shall be maintained in good
condition, free of substantial rust, dents, scratches, chips and abrasions.
   (C)   Springs. The springs or other material used to support the seating
areas of the passengers shall be maintained to assure an elastic coefficient of
at least 90% of the manufacturer’s specifications.
   (D)   Suspension components. All suspension components affecting the ride
and safety of the vehicle shall be maintained so that they comply with the
manufacturer’s specifications.
   (E)   Windshields, windows. All windshield and window glass shall be
maintained free from cracks, scratches, pitting, abrasions or any other
condition that reduces clarity of vision below the level specified by the
manufacturer. Windows shall not rattle and shall not be difficult to open or
close.
   (F)   Safety. The vehicle must meet the state’s vehicle safety inspection
requirements at all times.
   (G)   Heater and air-conditioner. The taxicab vehicle must be equipped with
an operating heater and an operating air-conditioner.
   (H)   Headlights, taillights and parking lights. There shall be no broken or
cracked headlights, taillights or parking lights.
(Prior Code, § 17-58) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.093 COLOR SCHEMES.
   (A)   Every taxicab company shall adopt a color scheme distinct from that of
any other taxicab company, for the painting of its taxicabs. An operating
permit holder who operates from the terminal and under the name of another
operating permit holder shall use the same color scheme as another operating
permit holder.
   (B)   The name of the taxicab company, the taxicab number, which shall
correspond with the number of the operating permit, and the telephone number
shall be affixed with permanent paint or decals on both sides of each taxicab,
with letters at least four inches high on the sides. All taxicabs shall be
equipped with a roof light attached to the roof.
   (C)   Colors of paint used for lettering and numbering shall be of sharp
contrast with the color of the surface paint to which they are applied, so as
to be evenly visible at a reasonable distance, especially at night with street
lights.
   (D)   No person shall operate a vehicle that is identified as a taxicab
unless use of the vehicle as a taxicab has been authorized pursuant to this
chapter. No person shall operate a taxicab containing a taxicab company’s color
scheme or identification without authorization from the taxicab company.
(Prior Code, § 17-60) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992; Ord. passed 6-30-1992) Penalty,
see §
116.999
INSPECTIONS AND MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT
§ 116.105 INSPECTION; RIGHT OF ENTRY; WITHDRAWAL OF VEHICLE WHEN NOT IN GOOD
CONDITION; RIGHT OF REINSPECTION.
   (A)   Before an operating permit is issued or renewed for any operating
permit holder, the taxicab or taxicabs for which the operating permit is
requested shall be delivered to a place designated by the City Council or
designee, who shall ascertain whether the taxicab or taxicabs comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall have the right, at any
time, after displaying proper identification, to enter into or upon any
licensed taxicab for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any of the
provisions of this chapter are being violated. It shall be unlawful for any
person who owns or is in control of a taxicab to refuse, upon the request, to
present the taxicab for the purpose of inspection or the removal of the
medallion.
   (C)   Any taxicab which is found, after any inspection, to be unsafe for
taxicab service may be immediately ordered out of service by the City Council
or designee, and before again being placed in service shall be delivered to the
City Manager or his or her designee at a designated point for inspection.
(Prior Code, § 17-61) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.106 TAXICAB FOUND UNSAFE BY OPERATING PERMIT HOLDER TO CEASE OPERATION
UNTIL REPAIRS ARE MADE.
   Any taxicab found by the operating permit holder to be unsafe for taxicab
operation shall have the repairs and alterations made as may be required and
the operating permit holder shall not operate, or cause or permit to be
operated, any taxicab until all repairs and alterations have been completed.
(Prior Code, § 17-62) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.107 DUTY OF OWNER TO CLEAN TAXICAB.
   Every operating permit holder shall ensure that the interior and exterior of
each of his or her taxicabs is maintained at all times in a clean condition.
(Prior Code, § 17-63) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992) Penalty, see §
116.999
§ 116.999 PENALTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter. If the person violating any provision of this chapter is a
corporation, the officers, agents or employees thereof who shall violate or
procure, aid or abet any violation of any provisions of this chapter or permit
the operation of any taxicab contrary to the requirements hereof, shall be
subject to the same penalties as if they, themselves, were personally operating
the taxicab at the time the violations were committed. Upon a person’s
violation of any provision of this chapter, the City Council or designee may
suspend or revoke any operating permit held by the person.
(Prior Code, § 17-19) (Ord. passed 5-26-1992)
CHAPTER 117: ICE CREAM VENDORS
Section
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   License tax levied
   
117.03   License prerequisite to conduct business
   
117.04   Issuance of operator’s license
   
117.05   Regulations for motorized vendors
   
117.06   Noise restrictions
   
117.07   Denial or revocation of license; appeal
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The person(s) designated by the Manager to perform the duties
and responsibilities assigned by this chapter.
   APPLICANT’S LICENSE. The applicant’s license shall include the signature of
the Administrator, the name, address and driver’s license number of the
applicant and the registration number of the vehicle to be operated.
   SANITARY REQUIREMENTS. Certification by Cleveland County Health Department
must be obtained by the owner and/or manager. Certification that the vehicle
meets Health Department requirements must be presented to the Administrator
before an operator’s license will be issued.
   WRAPPING AND PACKAGING OF ICE CREAM PRODUCTS. Ice cream products must be
prepackaged.
(Ord. 10-11, passed 5-25-2010)
§ 117.02 LICENSE TAX LEVIED.
   There is levied and shall be collected annually, or oftener where provided
for, a privilege license tax on all businesses conducted or engaged in within
the city corporate limits as set out in this chapter.
(Ord. 10-11, passed 5-25-2010)
§ 117.03 LICENSE PREREQUISITE TO CONDUCT BUSINESS.
   (A)   Each operator of an ice cream vending vehicle must obtain an
applicant’s license. An application for the license must be completed and
return to the Administrator, verified under oath or affirmation and shall
contain the following information:
      (1)   Name and physical description of the applicant;
      (2)   Permanent home and/or business address of applicant;
      (3)   If employed, or acting as an agent, the name and address of the
employer or principal together with credentials establishing the exact
relationship;
      (4)   Two photographs of the applicant, showing the head and shoulders,
which have been taken within 60 days of filing the application;
      (5)   Two sets of fingerprints of the applicant and/or driver(s) taken by
the local Police Department;
      (6)   The driver’s license of the applicant and/or driver(s);
      (7)   The registration number of the vehicle to be operated; and
      (8)   Other information as may be reasonably required by the
Administrator.
   (B)   Any person operating or managing any vehicle must receive approval
from the Cleveland County Health Department which shall provide the operator or
manager with certification that the vehicle meets Health Department
requirements. This certification must be presented to the Administrator before
an applicant’s license will be issued.
   (C)   Each vehicle used on the streets of the city for the sale of the
products shall be insured by an insurance company licensed to write public
liability insurance in the state. The covered insurance amounts should be
$100,000 for a single injury or death, $300,000 for injury or death of two or
more people resulting from one accident and $25,000 for property damage.
(Ord. 10-11, passed 5-25-2010)
§ 117.04 ISSUANCE OF OPERATOR’S LICENSE.
   Upon submission of a completed application, insurance information and
verification of the information required to be submitted pursuant to this
chapter, the Administrator shall issue an applicant’s license upon the payment
of a fee in an amount to be determined from time to time as necessary by the
City Council to defray the cost of issuing the license. This fee is separate
and apart from the fee to be paid as a privilege license tax, if any, as set
forth in §
110.03.
(Ord. 10-11, passed 5-25-2010)
§ 117.05 REGULATIONS FOR MOTORIZED VENDORS.
   (A)   A clearly audible back-up warning device that will activate whenever
the vehicle is shifted into reverse must be used for the motorized vehicle of
ice cream products.
   (B)   The operator must present a state inspection of the vehicle. If a
proper inspection report is not available, the City Garage Department will
inspect the vehicle at a cost of $25. Proper inspection must be completed and
passed prior to the issuance of the license.
   (C)   Operators of ice cream vending vehicles shall not operate the vehicles
for the sale of ice cream before 10:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. or one-half hour
after sunset, whichever occurs first.
   (D)   The applicant’s license and Cleveland County health certificate must
be posted conspicuously in the ice cream vending vehicle at all times.
   (E)   The standards for the composition of ice cream and other frozen
products sold shall in all instances conform to the requirements of the State
Department of Agriculture.
   (F)   Selling of ice cream products within two blocks of a school during the
hours in which the school is in session is prohibited. No vehicle shall park
within 15 feet of an intersection for the purpose of selling the products, nor
shall any vehicle occupy the same parking area for more than 30 minutes at any
one time.
   (G)   The driver of the vehicles must abide by the city ordinances and
police regulations with respect to traffic and not have the right to obstruct
traffic with the vehicle.
   (H)   Every ice cream vending vehicle must have the name of the vendor
painted thereon plainly and legibly. All vehicles shall be marked in a way that
is clearly visible to other motorists to indicate that they are ice cream
vending vehicles.
   (I)   The operators of the vehicles shall, at all times, keep the sidewalks,
streets and other public spaces around the vehicle clean and free from paper
and refuse of any and all kinds. The vehicle shall at all times be maintained
in a clean and orderly condition.
(Ord. 10-11, passed 5-25-2010)
§ 117.06 NOISE RESTRICTIONS.
   No person shall use, play or employ any sound, outcry, amplifier,
loudspeaker or any other instrument or device for the production of sound from
an ice cream truck:
   (A)   Earlier than 10:00 a.m., nor later than 7:00 p.m. or one-half hour
after sunset, whichever occurs first; and/or
   (B)   In a manner that the sound is plainly audible at more than 330 feet
from the vehicle.
(Ord. 10-11, passed 5-25-2010)
§ 117.07 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE; APPEAL.
   (A)   An applicant’s license may be denied or revoked by the Administrator
for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   The application is incomplete or contains false statements;
      (2)   The applicant is under the age of 21;
      (3)   The applicant or licensee has been convicted of any crime involving
moral turpitude, narcotic or dangerous drugs, a felony conviction for an
offense against a person or property within five years of the application date;
      (4)   The applicant or driver(s) is required to register as a sex
offender;
      (5)   The applicant, driver(s) or licensee has been convicted of reckless
driving or driving a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or a
controlled substance within five years of the application date; and/or
      (6)   The applicant, driver(s) or licensee has failed to comply with any
of the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   The Administrator will mail written notification of his or her
decision to deny or revoke a license and the notification will state the
reasons of denial or revocation. The Administrator will inform the applicant or
licensee of the right of appeal as set forth below.
   (C)   The applicant or licensee may appeal by submitting a written request
to the Administrator for a hearing before the City Council within five days of
receipt of the notice of denial or revocation. The Council shall hear the
appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting in accordance with normal agenda
procedures and may affirm or reverse the decision of the Administrator.
(Ord. 10-11, passed 5-25-2010)
CHAPTER 118: ROOM OCCUPANCY
Section
   
118.01   Tax levied
   
118.02   Administration
   
118.03   Distribution and use of tax revenue
   
118.04   Collection of tax
   
118.05   Effective date
 
   
118.99   Penalty
§ 118.01 TAX LEVIED.
   (A)   There is hereby established a room occupancy tax, which shall be in an
amount of 3% of the gross receipts, which are derived from the rental of any
room, lodging or accommodation furnished by a hotel, motel, inn, tourist camp
or similar place, within the corporate limits of the city.
   (B)   This tax does not apply to accommodations furnished by non-profit,
charitable, educational or religious organizations, when furnished in
furtherance of their non-profit purpose.
(Ord. 02-01, passed 1-29-2002)
§ 118.02 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The tax levied under this section shall be levied, administered,
collected and repealed as provided in G.S. § 160A-215. The penalties provided
in G.S. § 160A-215 apply to the tax. The room occupancy taxes shall be due and
payable to the City’s Finance Officer in monthly installments on or before the
fifteenth day of the month following the month in which the tax accrues. Every
person, firm, corporation or association liable for the tax shall, on or before
the fifteenth day of each month, prepare and render a return on a form which
will be prescribed by the city. The return shall state the total gross receipts
derived in the preceding month from rentals upon which the tax is levied.
   (B)   The room occupancy tax return filed shall not be a public record.
(Ord. 02-01, passed 1-29-2002)
§ 118.03 DISTRIBUTION AND USE OF TAX REVENUE.
   (A)   On a quarterly basis, the taxes collected shall be remitted in the net
amount of the occupancy tax to the City Tourism Development Authority. The
Authority shall make use of at least two-thirds of the funds remitted to it to
promote travel and tourism in the city and shall use the remainder for tourism-
related expenditures.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      NET PROCEEDS. Gross proceeds less the cost to the city of administering
and collecting the tax, as determined by the Finance Officer, not to exceed 3%
of the first $500,000 of gross proceeds collected each year and 1% of the
remaining gross receipts collected each year.
      PROMOTE TRAVEL AND TOURISM. To advertise or market an area or activity,
publish and distribute pamphlets and other materials, conduct market research
or engage in similar promotional activities that attract tourists or business
travelers to the area. The term includes administrative expenses incurred in
engaging in the listed activities.
      TOURISM-RELATED EXPENDITURES. Expenditures that, in the judgment of the
Tourism Development Authority, are designed to increase the use of lodging
facilities, meeting facilities or convention facilities in a the city or to
attract tourists or business travelers to the city. The term includes TOURISM-
RELATED CAPITAL EXPENDITURES.
(Ord. 02-01, passed 1-29-2002)
§ 118.04 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   Every operator of a business subject to the room occupancy tax shall collect
the tax. This tax shall be collected as a part of the charge for furnishing a
taxable accommodation. The tax shall be stated and charged separately from the
sales records and shall be paid by the purchaser to the operator of the
business as trustee for and on account of the city. An operator of a business
who collects a room occupancy tax may deduct from the amount remitted to the
city a discount equal to the discount that the state allows the operator for
state sales and use tax.
(Ord. 02-01, passed 1-29-2002)
§ 118.05 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The beginning date of the levy and the date upon which the taxes must first
be paid and start to be collected is 4-1-2002.
(Ord. 02-01, passed 1-29-2002)
§ 118.99 PENALTY.
   A person, firm, corporation or association who fails or refuses to file a
room occupancy tax return or pay a room occupancy tax as required is subject to
the civil and criminal penalties as are set out in G.S. § 105-236 for failure
to pay or file a return for state sales and use taxes. The city, by its City
Council, may, if deemed appropriate, waive the penalties for a room occupancy
tax.
(Ord. 02-01, passed 1-29-2002)
CHAPTER 119: CABLE TELEVISION
Section
   
119.01   Basic service rates and charges
§ 119.01 BASIC SERVICE RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   The city will follow the FCC rate regulations in its regulation of the
cable service rates and charges of the company and any other cable television
system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent
provisions in the franchise.
   (B)   In connection with the regulation, the city will ensure a reasonable
opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties.
   (C)   The City Manager, or his or her designee, is authorized to execute on
behalf of the city and file with the FCC the certification forms or other
instruments as are now or may hereafter be required by the FCC rate regulations
in order to enable the city of regulate basic service rates and charges.
   (D)   This section shall be, and remain in full force and effect, from and
after the date of its adoption.
(Ord. 93-31, passed 12-14-1993)
CHAPTER 120: SHORT-TERM LEASE, RENTAL OF VEHICLES
Section
   
120.01   Definitions
   
120.02   Levy of tax
   
120.03   Collection of tax
   
120.04   Report and payment of tax
   
120.05   Taxpayer to keep records
   
120.06   Tax Collector to provide forms
   
120.07   Situs
   
120.08   Administration
   
120.09   Authority
   
120.10   Effective date
 
   
120.99   Penalty
§ 120.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CUSTOMER. Any person that leases or rents a vehicle on a short-term lease or
rental basis.
   GENERAL STATUTES. The North Carolina General Statutes and any reference to a
particular section thereof shall include the same as may be from time to time
amended, modified, supplemented, revised or superseded.
   GROSS RECEIPTS. The amount that is or would be reported as gross receipts on
a business’s state income tax return, or on the federal income tax return filed
with the state income tax return if the state return does not separately state
gross receipts for the most recently completed tax year. Taxes collected
hereunder are not subject to the tax herein imposed and are not included in
GROSS RECEIPTS.
   LEASE or RENTAL. A transfer of possession or control of tangible personal
property for a fixed or indeterminate term for consideration. The term does not
include any of the following:
      (1)   A transfer of possession or control of property under a security
agreement or deferred payment plan that requires the transfer of title upon
completion of the required payments.
      (2)   A transfer of possession or control of property under an agreement
that requires the transfer of title upon completion of required payments and
payment of an option price that does not exceed the greater of $100 or 1% of
the total required payments.
      (3)   The providing of tangible personal property along with an operator
for a fixed or indeterminate period of time if the operator is necessary for
the equipment to perform as designed. For the purpose of this subsection, an
operator must do more than maintain, inspect or set up the tangible personal
property.
(G.S. § 105-164.3(121))
   LONG-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL. A lease or rental made under a written agreement
to lease or rent one or more vehicles to the same person for a period of at
least 365 continuous days and that is not a vehicle subscription.
(G.S. § 105-187.1(a)(3))
   PERSON. Any individual, trustee, executor, other fiduciary, corporation,
unincorporated association, partnership, sole proprietorship, company, firm or
other legal entity.
   SHORT-TERM LEASE OR RENTAL. A lease or rental of a motor vehicle or
vehicles, including a vehicle sharing service, that is not a long-term lease or
rental.
(G.S. §§ 160A-215.1(e)(1) and 105-187.1(a)(8))
   TAX COLLECTOR. The individual appointed by the governing body, pursuant to
G.S. § 105-349 and/or the provisions of the code of ordinances for the city, to
collect taxes on behalf of the city and any other person authorized to carry
out the duties and functions of the individual.
   TAXPAYER. Any person liable for the taxes imposed by this chapter.
   VEHICLE. Any of the following:
      (1)   A motor vehicle of the private passenger type, including a
passenger van, minivan or sport utility vehicle;
      (2)   A motor vehicle of the cargo type, including a cargo van, pickup
truck or truck with a gross vehicle weight of 26,000 pounds or less used
predominantly in the transportation of property for other than commercial
freight and that does not require the operator to possess a commercial drivers
license; and
      (3)   A trailer or semi-trailer with a gross vehicle weight of 6,000
pounds or less.
(G.S. § 160A-215.1(e)(2))
(Ord. 00-27, passed 6-27-2000)
§ 120.02 LEVY OF TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed and levied in an amount equal to 1.5% of the gross
receipts derived from the short-term lease or rental of vehicles at retail to
the general public. This tax on gross receipts is in addition to the privilege
taxes authorized by G.S. § 160A-211.
(Ord. 00-27, passed 6-27-2000)
Editor’s note:
   G.S. § 160A-211 was repealed by Session Laws 2014-3, s. 12.3(a), effective
July 1, 2015.
§ 120.03 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   Every person engaged in the business of the short-term lease or rental of
vehicles at retail to the general public shall collect, at the time of the
lease or rental, the tax herein levied, place the tax so collected in a
segregated account and thereafter remit the tax to the Tax Collector in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The taxpayer shall include a
provision in each retail short-term lease or rental agreement stating that the
percentage amount enacted by this chapter of the total lease or rental price,
excluding sales tax, is being charged as a tax on gross receipts. The amount of
the tax shall be stated separately from the lease or rental and shown
separately on the taxpayer’s records. The tax shall be paid by the customer to
the taxpayer as trustee for and on account of the city. The taxpayer shall be
liable for the collection thereof and for its payment to the Tax Collector and
the taxpayer’s failure to charge or to collect the tax from the customer shall
not affect the liability.
(Ord. 00-27, passed 6-27-2000) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.04 REPORT AND PAYMENT OF TAX.
   Taxes levied under this chapter are due and payable when a return is
required to be filed. Every taxpayer shall, within the time specified, submit a
return to the Tax Collector on the form prescribed by the Tax Collector. A
return must be signed by the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s agent returns of
taxpayers are due to the Tax Collector each month on or before the fifteenth
day of the month following the month in which the tax accrues. As provided in
G.S. § 160A-208.1, a return shall not be considered a public record and
information contained in a return may be disclosed only in accordance
therewith.
(Ord. 00-27, passed 6-27-2000) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.05 TAXPAYER TO KEEP RECORDS.
   The taxpayer shall keep and preserve suitable records of the gross receipts
received by the taxpayer in the conduct of business and other books or accounts
as may be necessary to determine the amount of the tax for which the taxpayer
is liable under the provisions of this chapter. It shall be the duty of the
taxpayer to keep and preserve for a period of three years all records of gross
receipts and other books and accounts described. All records, books and
accounts herein described shall be open for examination at all reasonable hours
during the day by the Tax Collector or his or her duly authorized agent.
(Ord. 00-27, passed 6-27-2000) Penalty, see §
120.99
§ 120.06 TAX COLLECTOR TO PROVIDE FORMS.
   (A)   The Tax Collector shall design, prepare, print and make available to
all taxpayers operating within the municipal boundaries of the city forms and
instructions for filing returns to ensure a full collection of and an
accounting for taxes due.
   (B)   The failure to any taxpayer to obtain and receive forms shall not
relieve the taxpayer from the payment of the tax at the time and in the manner
provided.
(Ord. 00-27, passed 6-27-2000)
§ 120.07 SITUS.
   The transaction giving rise to the tax herein levied shall be deemed to have
occurred at the location of the entity from which the customer takes delivery
of the vehicle.
(G.S. § 160A-215.1(b)) (Ord. 00-27, passed 6-27-2000)
§ 120.08 ADMINISTRATION.
   In addition to the provisions herein, the levy and collection of the taxes
herein imposed shall be otherwise administered in the same manner as the sales
and use tax, as provided in G.S. Ch. 105, Subch. 1, Art. 5.
(G.S. § 160A-215.1(d)) (Ord. 00-27, passed 6-27-2000)
§ 120.09 AUTHORITY.
   This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 160A-215.1. Any
and all existing ordinances or portions thereof which are in conflict herewith
are hereby repealed.
(Ord. 00-27, passed 6-27-2000)
§ 120.10 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter and the taxes thereby levied and imposed shall become effective
7-1-2000.
(Ord. 00-27, passed 6-27-2000)
§ 120.99 PENALTY.
   The provisions with respect to remedies and penalties applicable to G.S. Ch.
105, Subch. VIII (Local Government Sales and Use Tax), as contained in G.S. Ch.
105, Art. 5 and Art. 9, Subchapter 1 thereof, shall be applicable in like
manner to the tax authorized to be levied and collected under this chapter, to
the extent that the same are not inconsistent with the provisions hereof. The
City Council may exercise any power the Secretary of Revenue may exercise in
collecting sales and use taxes.
(G.S. § 160A-215.1(f)) (Ord. 00-27, passed 6-27-2000)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   ILLEGAL DRUG USE; PARAPHERNALIA
      
132.   PARADES
      
133.   EXHIBITION SHOWS
      
134.   PICKETING
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Deaths resulting from accidental or violent means; reports; hospitals
receiving certain patients; liability
   
130.02   Interfering with police officer
   
130.03   Ball games in streets
   
130.04   Firearms; concealed weapons
   
130.05   Throwing objects
   
130.06   Projectiles; use restricted
   
130.07   Disturbing public meetings
   
130.08   Unlawful assembly
   
130.09   Disturbing the peace
   
130.10   Intoxicating beverages on city property
 
   
130.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Creating disturbances in parking lots, see §
73.14
Statutory reference:
   Elements of offense under ordinance not to be identical to those of offense
defined by state law, see G.S. § 160A-174
   Violation of city ordinance constitutes misdemeanor, see G.S. § 14-4
§ 130.01 DEATHS RESULTING FROM ACCIDENTAL OR VIOLENT MEANS; REPORTS; HOSPITALS
RECEIVING CERTAIN PATIENTS; LIABILITY.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Hospitals. It shall be the duty of the superintendent of every
hospital, or the person actively in charge thereof, to report to the Coroner
and the Police Department, within 15 minutes thereafter, the death of any
person within the hospital resulting from accidental or violent means.
      (2)   Physicians. It shall be the duty of every practicing physician
attending a case within the city, where death occurs as a result of accidental
or violent means, to report the fact of the death to the Coroner and the Police
Department within 15 minutes after information of the death is received by the
physician.
      (3)   Undertakers. It shall be the duty of every person operating an
undertaking establishment, by whatever name called, to report to the Coroner
and the Police Department, within 15 minutes after information of the death by
the undertaking establishment, where death was occasioned by accidental or
violent means.
(Prior Code, § 13-1)
   (B)   Hospitals to report to police upon receipt of certain patients. It
shall be the duty of every person operating or maintaining a hospital within
the city, or any person in charge of the same, to report to the Police
Department, within 30 minutes after receiving, at the hospital, any patient
suffering from injuries sustained in an accident or by assault, or from self-
inflicted wounds, giving in the report the name of the patient, the patient’s
approximate age, sex and residence, the extent of injuries, as near as
ascertainable, the person bringing the patient to the hospital, the name of the
attending physician and any information which may be obtained as to the facts
surrounding the injury to the patient.
(Prior Code, § 13-2)
   (C)   Accidents for which city may be liable. The Chief of Police,
immediately upon the happening of any accident which may result in injury to
person or damage to property within the city, for which the city may be held
liable, shall make, or cause to be made, a thorough investigation of the
circumstances surrounding the same and shall forthwith report, in writing, to
the City Manager and City Attorney the names of the parties injured and/or
location of the property damaged, the names of the witnesses to the injury and/
or damage and their places of residence, the substance of any statement that
the Chief is able to obtain from each one of them, the place of the accident,
the cause, in the Chief’s opinion, of the same, the date thereof and any other
information which may throw light thereon.
(Prior Code, § 13-3)
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.02 INTERFERING WITH POLICE OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hamper, molest,
resist or hinder a police officer in the lawful discharge of the officer’s
duty.
(Prior Code, § 13-4) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Resisting, obstructing and the like, officers, see G.S. § 14-223
§ 130.03 BALL GAMES IN STREETS.
   Except as otherwise authorized by the Chief of Police, no person shall play
baseball, football or other games on any public street.
(Prior Code, § 13-7) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.04 FIREARMS; CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot or to fire any pistol,
gun or other firearm within the city, except on firing ranges or in legally
established shooting galleries or ranges, or in the discharge of duty by law
enforcement officers, or a special events sponsored by the city, or as may be
authorized and approved by the Chief of Police for the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-10)
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided herein, all persons are prohibited from
possessing and/or carrying a concealed handgun while being upon property owned
by the city or under its control; accepting as may be set out in G.S. § 14-269
(B) and further as may be permitted under G.S. § 14-415.11.
      (2)   Weapons which are seized from persons found to be possessing
concealed handguns while on property owned by the city or under its control,
are hereby declared to be contraband. The Chief of Police for the city or his
or her designee or designees shall cause a confiscation of the weapons and that
it shall be held for disposal pursuant to court order or as otherwise by law
may be provided.
      (3)   A notice shall be conspicuously posted at the entrance to any
properties which are owned by the city or under its control, stating that
possession of weapons or concealed handguns is prohibited.
(Ord. 95-12, passed 9-26-1995; Ord. 08-28, passed 9-30-2008)
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.05 THROWING OBJECTS.
   No person shall throw from any window, porch or door of any building or from
the roof of a house any article which may endanger or annoy the pedestrians on
any street.
(Prior Code, § 13-11) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Shooting or throwing at trains or passengers, see G.S. § 14-280
§ 130.06 PROJECTILES; USE RESTRICTED.
   No person shall shoot or project any stone, rock, shot or other hard
substance by means of a slingshot, bean shooter, shot shooter, air rifle, pop
gun, bow or other similar contrivance; provided that, archery shooting may be
engaged in on the grounds as may be set aside and approved therefor by the
governing body.
(Prior Code, § 13-12) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Shooting or throwing at trains, see G.S. § 14-280
§ 130.07 DISTURBING PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   No person shall whistle, sing, shout or talk or make any noise at any
funeral, concert, play, school commencement or other entertainment, or near the
places where they are held, anywhere within the corporate limits, so as to
disturb, or annoy the persons, taking part in or attending the same.
(Prior Code, § 13-13) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Disturbing religious meetings, see G.S. § 14-288.4(a)(7)
§ 130.08 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any two or more persons within the city to
assemble together for any unlawful purpose or being assembled, to act in
concert to do any unlawful act with force and violence against the property of
the city, or to the person or property of another, or against the peace or to
the terror of citizens or other persons or who shall make any movement or
preparation therefor.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly suffer or permit any assemblage for the
purpose of committing any unlawful act or breach of the peace or any riotous,
offensive or disorderly conduct in or upon the premises owned by him or her or
under his or her control within the city.
(Prior Code, § 13-14) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.09 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   No person shall disturb the public peace by speaking angry and threatening
words to another, or by acting in a disorderly, riotous or turbulent manner.
(Prior Code, § 13-15) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   Riot, see G.S. § 14-288.2
§ 130.10 INTOXICATING BEVERAGES ON CITY PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume, sell, distribute or
display any fortified wine, spirituous liquor, mixed beverages or malt
beverages, upon any premises or property owned by or in the possession of the
city, unless specifically authorized by resolution of the governing body,
except for the following:
   (A)   Definitions. The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in
this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this division, except
where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Where words and
phrases used in this division are defined by state law, such definitions shall
apply to the use of such words and phrases in this division and are adopted by
reference. Those definitions so adopted that are further defined or are
reiterated in this division shall have the meanings set out in this division.
      ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE. Any beverage containing more than one-half of 1% of
alcohol by volume including alcoholic liquor, wine, and beer.
      PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any public street, alley, roadway, sidewalk,
walkway, right-of-way or public way designed for vehicular, bicycle, or
pedestrian travel that is dedicated public use and/or publically owned.
      PUBLIC SIDEWALK. The improved portion of the public right-of-way lying
between the traveled portion of the street and the private property or building
line, which is intended primarily for pedestrian use.
      RESTAURANT. A business that serves food to customers and which meets the
following criteria:
         (a)   Prepares meals on the premises and provides meal service which
is open to the public while the kitchen is open;
         (b)   Has a food service menu from which customers may order;
         (c)   Has an employee whose primary duty is the preparation of food
and an employee whose primary duty is to serve food to customers;
         (d)   Has a kitchen separate from the bar that contains such food
preparation equipment as a stove, exhaust fan, a griddle, a grill or broiler,
or a food refrigeration unit with a capacity in excess of 20 cubic feet;
         (e)   Is licensed by the Cleveland County Health Department to operate
as a restaurant service during at least 60% of the hours that the business is
open to the public; and
         (f)   Cafes, cafeterias, coffee shops, delicatessens, ice cream shops,
specialty food shops, lunchrooms, or tearooms are included.
      SIDEWALK CAFÉ. An outdoor area meeting the requirements of this section
that is temporarily situated on a public sidewalk and which is adjacent to and
contiguous with any side of a building in which a restaurant is located, and in
which food and beverages are served for consumption by persons sitting or
standing at tables within such area located within the Downtown Kings Mountain
Municipal Service District.
      SIDEWALK CAFÉ ELEMENTS. All tables, chairs, fencing planters and plants,
and any other privately owned property comprising the sidewalk café, which is
approved for use in a sidewalk by this division or in a sidewalk café permit.
      SIDEWALK CAFÉ PERMIT. A permit issued by the city for operation of a
sidewalk café which meets all of the requirements of this division and all
other applicable ordinances of the city and all state laws.
   (B)   Application. Before a restaurant may lawfully establish a sidewalk
café on the public sidewalk adjacent to its building, the proprietor of the
restaurant shall file an application with the Codes Department for a sidewalk
café permit on a form furnished by that Department. The application shall be
accompanied by each of the following items:
      (1)   Name, address, telephone, and fax number of the restaurant
operator;
      (2)   The proposed location of the sidewalk café; and
      (3)   A significantly detailed, accurate site plan showing the following:
         (a)   The dimensions of the proposed sidewalk café area;
         (b)   The position and number of tables, chairs, and other sidewalk
café elements;
         (c)   The distance between the boundaries of the sidewalk café area
and all adjacent street curbs, buildings, property lines, street intersections,
alleys, and fixtures in the public sidewalk including fire hydrants and FDCs
(Fire Department Connections);
         (d)   Any other items reasonably required by the Codes Officer or any
other city staff to ensure that the proposed sidewalk café area will comply
will all applicable requirements of this section and all other laws,
ordinances, and regulations applicable to sidewalk cafes and which shows that
the proposed sidewalk shall not unreasonably interfere with:
            1.   Adequate pedestrian flow;
            2.   Access to building entrances;
            3.   Exit access including areas inside the building, the exit
itself, and/or exit discharge outside;
            4.   Pedestrian and traffic safety; and
            5.   The aesthetic quality of the surrounding area;
      (4)   A statement of the seating capacity of the proposed sidewalk café
and of the existing retail food establishment actually operated by the
applicant in the adjacent building;
      (5)   Proof that the applicant holds a valid license or permits to
operate a restaurant, including copies of all permits and licenses showing all
required approvals by the County Health Department and any other applicable
regulatory agencies;
      (6)   Documentation of public liability insurance in the amount of
$1,000,000 insuring against personal injury, wrongful death and property
damage, including the city as a part insured and insuring the city against any
liability resulting from the uses permitted pursuant to this section;
      (7)   Consent to enter into a hold-harmless agreement with the city;
      (8)   Written consent to the establishment of a sidewalk café from the
owner of the building in which the restaurant is located, if the applicant is
not the owner of the building;
      (9)   Written approval of the Design Review Committee of the Kings
Mountain Main Street program for a sidewalk café to be located in the Kings
Mountain Municipal Service District;
      (10)   The currently required application fee to cover the cost of
processing and investigating the application and issuing the permit shall be
submitted with the application; and
      (11)   Other information deemed necessary by the City Manager.
   (C)   Insurance requirements. A sidewalk café shall not be established under
this section unless the applicant furnishes proof of insurance which meets the
following requirements: General Liability Insurance coverage in the amount of
$1,000,000. Prior to the execution of a permit, the permittee shall provide a
Certificate of Insurance, on which the city shall be named as an additional
insured. Such certificate shall require 30 days written notice by the insurer
or the permittee's agent in the event of cancellation, reduction, or other
modifications of coverage. In addition to the notice requirement above,
permittee shall provide the city with immediate written notice of cancellation,
reduction, or other modification of coverage of insurance. Upon failure of the
permittee to provide such notice, permittee assumes sole responsibility for all
losses incurred by the city for which insurance would have provided coverage.
The insurance certificate shall be for the permit period of one year.
   (D)   Term and transfer. A sidewalk café permit may be approved for a
maximum period of one year at a time. Permits are not transferable or
assignable in any manner without prior written consent of the City Manager.
   (E)   Revocation. The city specifically retains the right to revoke or
suspend a sidewalk café permit at any time it deems such revocation to be in
the best interest of the public health, safety or welfare, or where the
permittee has failed to comply with the applicable city requirements or is
found to have provided false or misleading information in the permit
application.
   (F)   Temporary suspension. The city shall have the right through the City
Manager, to suspend or prohibit the operation of a sidewalk café at any time
and for any necessary period of time because of anticipated or actual problems
or conflicts in the use of the sidewalk area. Such problems and conflicts may
arise from, but are not limited to, scheduled festivals and similar events,
parades or marchers, repairs to the street or sidewalk, or from demonstrations
or emergencies occurring in the area. To the extent possible, the permittee
shall be given prior written notice of any time period during which the
operation of the sidewalk café will be prohibited by the city; but any failure
to give prior written notice shall not affect the power of the city to prohibit
the cafe's operation at any particular time.
   (G)   Operation generally.
      (1)   A sidewalk café shall be conducted as an accessory or incidental
use to a legally-established restaurant or other eating and drinking
establishment that is located on a contiguous adjacent parcel and which is
under the same management and which shares the same name, food preparation
facilities, restroom facilities, and other customer conveniences. Sidewalk
dining may not constitute more than 50% of the total seating capacity of the
associated restaurant.
      (2)   The majority of the area in which the sidewalk café will be
operated shall be on the public sidewalk directly in front of the indoor
restaurant which operates the café and/or to the side of the business and
building if it is located on a corner lot. That area of the public sidewalk
which would be enclosed by a perpendicular projection of the indoor
restaurant's sidewalk frontage over the sidewalk shall be considered as being
directly in front of the indoor restaurant.
   (H)   Operational requirements. Operation of a sidewalk café shall conform
to the following requirements:
      (1)   There shall be a five-foot-wide unobstructed contiguous walkway
within the public sidewalk area for use by pedestrians, and handicapped
accessibility shall be provided as required by law. The outdoor activity shall
not impede pedestrian or vehicular traffic;
      (2)   The sidewalk café area shall maintain a minimum of a two-foot
clearance on each side of any doorway leading from the building onto the public
sidewalk or other publically-owned exterior dining area;
      (3)   All tables, chairs, and other items shall be placed so as to not
present a sight hazard to vehicular traffic or a hazard to pedestrians. Use of
public amenities such as benches or seats is prohibited. Further, tables and
chairs used for sidewalk café operation shall be constructed and utilized so as
to protect the public safety. Furniture material must be of a commercial grade,
and must not be out of character with the business district where the furniture
will be located;
      (4)   All outdoor dining furniture, including tables, chairs, umbrellas,
and planters, shall be movable. Umbrellas must be secured with a minimum base
weight of not less than 60 pounds;
      (5)   The City Manager may allow tables, chairs, and other permitted
items to remain in place as permitted on a year-round basis provided that the
sidewalk café premises is maintained free of litter, debris, leaves, and food
and drink stains and the sidewalk is kept in a clean manner by the permittee.
No materials whatsoever shall be stored on the public right-of-way;
      (6)   The sidewalk café area shall be served by waiters or restaurant
staff at all times during all hours of operation;
      (7)   Lighting of the sidewalk café area shall not unreasonably reflect
onto adjacent properties or cause disturbance to residential quarters located
above or adjacent to the sidewalk café area. No open flames shall be used in
the sidewalk dining area. This includes, but is not limited to, tiki torches,
candles and/or fire pits;
      (8)   Occupancy limits, including the occupancy load of the sidewalk café
area, shall comply will all applicable city or state building, fire, or other
applicable codes;
      (9)   Amplified sound equipment shall not be permitted within the area of
the sidewalk café; and
      (10)   At all times the permittee must comply with all other local,
state, or federal laws, ordinances, and regulations, including but not limited
to health, safety, and welfare rules, laws, and regulations.
   (I)   Days and hours of operation. The hours of operation of a sidewalk café
may be the particular restaurant's normal operating business hours Monday -
Saturday and after 12:00 noon on Sundays.
   (J)   Trash.
      (1)   The sidewalk café permittee shall maintain in a clean and sanitary
manner all areas where the furniture is located, including maintaining
appropriate trash receptacles, sweeping on a daily basis the full right-of-way
where the furniture is located, and immediately cleaning and washing any
liquid, food, debris, broken glass, and other trash from the right-of-way.
      (2)   Overnight storage of trash and refuse for the sidewalk café shall
not be permitted within the outdoor dining area or on adjacent sidewalk areas,
and the permittee shall remove all trash and litter as it accumulates.
   (K)   Alcoholic beverages. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this
code, alcoholic beverages may be served in approved sidewalk cafes providing
the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The sidewalk café shall be a part of a restaurant which shall
otherwise be authorized, permitted, or licensed under the state law and this
code to serve and sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption;
      (2)   The sidewalk café must be included as a part of the premises for
which an ABC permit is issued pursuant to state law, for the purpose of
applying and enforcing state laws regarding the sale of consumption of
alcoholic beverages;
      (3)   Signs shall be posted, visible at all exit points from the sidewalk
café, that it is unlawful to remove alcoholic beverages from the premises;
      (4)   The restaurant operator shall not have violated any law,
regulation, or ordinance relating to the possession, sale, transportation, or
consumption of intoxicating beverages or controlled substances for the three
years preceding the commencement of the sale of alcoholic beverages at the
sidewalk café;
      (5)   No outdoor bar is allowed within the sidewalk café, nor shall
outdoor preparation of alcoholic beverages be permitted that unfortified wine
may be decanted or beer poured at a table as part of a meal;
      (6)   Any alcoholic beverages served and consumed at an approved sidewalk
café must be served and consumed in glasses or cups which bear no markings
other than the logo or the name of the business operating the sidewalk café;
      (7)   Any alcoholic beverages served and consumed at an approved sidewalk
café can only be served to and consumed by a customer while that customer is
consuming a meal purchased from the business operating the approved sidewalk
café;
      (8)   No advertising of alcoholic beverages (including by way of
illustration, signs, napkins, and coasters) shall be allowed in the area of an
approved sidewalk café; and
      (9)   Only unfortified wine and beer may be served in the area of an
approved sidewalk café. No other alcoholic beverages are permitted.
   (L)   Alcoholic beverages at city events in Patriots Park. 
      (1)   The sale and distribution of wine and/or beer is permitted at the
“Beach Blast” and other city events at Patriots Park, if the sponsor or
sponsors of such events have been approved by the City Manager or designee
      (2)   Wine and/or beer may be consumed on the premises known as Patriots
Park if its sale occurred at an approved city event.
      (3)   Any aforementioned sale and consumption at approved city events in
Patriots Park shall be in compliance with all rules and regulations established
and in effect in G.S. Chapter 18B, as may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   Rules and regulations shall be established as are necessary for the
authorization granted herein and as may be necessary for it to take effect.
(Prior Code, § 13-16) (Ord. passed 4-12-1988; Ord. 17-06, passed 2-28-2017;
Ord. 18-22, passed 11-27-2018) Penalty, see §
130.99
Cross-reference:
   Intoxicated persons at municipal lakes, see §
91.21
Statutory reference:
   Local regulation of places of amusement, see G.S. § 160A-181
   Local regulation of Sunday business hours, see G.S. § 160A-191
   Noise regulation, see G.S. § 160A-184
   Public intoxication and disruption generally, see G.S. § 14-444
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Any person in violation of §
130.04(B) shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall
be fined $200 or imprisoned, as punishment may be imposed for a Class 3
misdemeanor or both.
(Ord. 95-12, passed 9-26-1995)
CHAPTER 131: ILLEGAL DRUG USE; PARAPHERNALIA
Section
   
131.01   Definitions
   
131.02   Determination
   
131.03   Sale of drug stem
   
131.04   Defense
 
   
131.99   Penalty
§ 131.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any substance controlled by the State Controlled
Substances Act as set forth in G.S. §§ 90-86 et seq.
   DRUG STEM. Objects that facilitate the ingestion and/or inhalation of crack
cocaine, crank methamphetamine or any other controlled substance, as defined by
the State Controlled Substances Act. A DRUG STEM is further defined as a two-
to six-inch long tube, one-eighth inch to three-quarter inch in diameter and
that is made of glass, metal or ceramic or any other material. DRUG STEMS
include, but are not limited to, glass vials or tubes which may contain novelty
items of insignificant value or may contain items that are not, in the normal
course of business, packaged in a manner.
   SELL and SALE. The commercial transfer of ownership, possession or use of a
drug stem in the regular course of wholesale or retail business for
consideration of any type.
(Ord. 06-35, passed 11-28-2006)
§ 131.02 DETERMINATION.
   In determining whether an object is a drug stem, the following facts, in
addition to all other relevant evidence, may be considered:
   (A)   Statements by any person, owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
   (B)   Prior convictions, if any, of any person, owner or of anyone in
control of the object, for violation of the Federal or State Controlled
Substances Acts;
   (C)   The proximity of the drug stem, in time and space, to a controlled
substance;
   (D)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the drug
stem;
   (E)   The proximity of the drug stem to other drug paraphernalia as deemed
by the State Drug Paraphernalia Act as set forth in G.S. §§ 90-113.20 et seq.;
   (F)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the drug stem concerning
its use;
   (G)   Descriptive materials accompanying the drug stem explaining or
depicting its use;
   (H)   Advertising concerning its use;
   (I)   The manner in which the drug stem is displayed for sale;
   (J)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the drug stem in the
community;
   (K)   Expert testimony concerning whether the drug stem is primarily used
for introducing a controlled substance into the human body;
   (L)   The intent of the owner or other person in control of the drug stem to
deliver it to persons whom he or she knows or reasonably should know intended
to use the object to facilitate a violation of the State Controlled Substances
Act; and
   (M)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object
to the total sales of the business enterprise.
(Ord. 06-35, passed 11-28-2006)
§ 131.03 SALE OF DRUG STEM.
   It is a violation of this section for any person or retail establishment to
sell, or to possess with intent to sell, a drug stem knowing that it will be
used to ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled
substance.
(Ord. 06-35, passed 11-28-2006) Penalty, see §
131.99
§ 131.04 DEFENSE.
   It is a defense to a violation of this section that the drug stem is
primarily designed and used for a legitimate purpose unrelated to the ingestion
of a controlled substance into the human body.
(Ord. 06-35, passed 11-28-2006)
§ 131.99 PENALTY.
   The penalty and additional remedies for violation of this section shall be
as follows.
   (A)   Civil penalty, injunctive relief. Any person who violates any section
of this chapter shall be subject to a civil penalty for each violation or
injunctive relief to restrain the person from continuing the violation or
threat of violation, or both injunctive relief and a civil penalty. Upon a
citation having been issued, then the violator may have within ten days of the
citation being received, the ability to pay a civil penalty of $25 and to also
cease the violating conduct or activity. If the civil penalty is not paid
within that ten days and/or the conduct has not ceased, then the penalty shall
be in an amount of $50 for each violation, for each day as long as the
violation continues. Upon application for injunctive relief, it shall be
necessary and a finding that a person is violating or threatening to violate
any section of this chapter, the Superior Court shall grant injunctive relief
to restrain the violation. The city may establish procedure for the collection
of the civil penalties and may enforce the penalties by a civil action in the
nature of a debt.
   (B)   Continuing violations. Each day a violation of any section of this
chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
   (C)   Criminal violation. A violation of this chapter shall also be a
violation of G.S. § 14-4 and that, upon a finding of guilty, the violating
party shall be guilty of Class III misdemeanor and subject to a fine of up to
$500.
   (D)   Forfeiture of drug stem. Any item sold or possession with intent to
sell by any person after a court has adjudicated such an item to constitute
drug paraphernalia, as defined by this chapter, shall be subject to forfeiture
of the drug stem to the city, upon order of the court entered in any injunction
proceedings instituted under the authority of this section or in a separate
forfeiture action instituted by the city.
(Ord. 06-35, passed 11-28-2006)
CHAPTER 132: PARADES
Section
   
132.01   Definitions
   
132.02   Permit required
   
132.03   Application and fee
   
132.04   Requirements for issuance
   
132.05   Applicable standards
   
132.06   Notice of rejection
   
132.07   Responsibility of participants and persons in charge
   
132.08   Violation
§ 132.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony or procession of any kind, in or upon
any street, sidewalk or other public place owned or under the control of the
city.
   PARADE PERMIT. A written authorization as required by this section.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
(Prior Code, § 13-17) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
§ 132.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any
parade unless a permit shall have been obtained from the Chief of Police;
provided that, no person may conduct or otherwise participate in any parade
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m., except
on Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   Funeral processions supervised by a licensed mortuary;
      (2)   Any governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions;
and
      (3)   Picketing on the sidewalks.
(Prior Code, § 13-17) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.03 APPLICATION AND FEE.
   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with
the Chief of Police on forms provided by the city.
   (A)   Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with
the Chief of Police not less than two weeks before the time when it is proposed
to conduct the parade; provided, however, that, a permit may be issued if filed
less than two weeks before the time for commencement of the parade when the
Chief of Police finds that: there is no conflict in schedule with some other
event and that the time for filing is insufficient to prepare for the parade
pursuant to the standards set forth under §
132.04(C). A fee of $50 shall be paid by the person applying for the permit at
the time of application to cover expenses incidental to processing the
application.
   (B)   Contents. The application for a permit shall set forth the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the parade;
      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by
an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of the
organization;
      (3)   The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;
      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted and the hours when the
parade will start and terminate;
      (5)   The proposed route to be traveled, the starting point and the
termination point;
      (6)   The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles
which, will constitute the parade; the type of animals and description of the
vehicles;
      (7)   The location by streets and designation by time of an assembly area
of the parade;
      (8)   If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of, or for
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file
with the Chief of Police a communication in writing from the person proposing
to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit in his or
her behalf;
      (9)   The person or persons to be in charge of the activity and who will
accompany it and carry the permit at all times; and
      (10)   Any additional information which the Chief of Police shall find
reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be
issued.
(Prior Code, § 13-17) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
§ 132.04 REQUIREMENTS FOR ISSUANCE.
   (A)   Persons who otherwise meet the requirements for a parade permit and
who receive a parade permit are entitled to exercise their First Amendment
rights in the city; however, in order to better protect the participants and
the citizens of the city and the property of the citizens, and to facilitate
the flow of the parade and of traffic in general, certain streets and
thoroughfares in the city will be designated by the Chief of Police as routes
which the participants may use for the parade. The applicant who secures a
parade permit shall request the route through which he or she wished to conduct
the parade in accordance with those streets set forth above. The Chief of
Police shall approve the specified streets and thoroughfares that are to be
used for the parade and the route of the parade.
   (B)   The applicant may request a route deviation from those streets
designated by the Chief of Police. The applicant shall set forth the basis or
reasons for the necessity of the deviation in the written request. The Chief of
Police shall approve a deviation in the route if he or she finds that the
conditions set forth hereunder are met:
      (1)   There will be reasonable and safe access along the deviated route;
      (2)   There will be no impeding pedestrian or traffic congestion in the
area because of the numbers of participants and numbers of residents living
within the area;
      (3)   The deviated route does not present a clear danger to children in
congested residential areas based upon lack of sidewalks, the narrow width of
streets and the numbers of participants and/or motor vehicles involved; and
      (4)   After considering the distance to be traveled, duration of the
parade, number of intersections which will be crossed during the parade,
accessibility of emergency vehicles, availability of sidewalk areas to
accommodate pedestrian traffic, and the number of participants, spectators and
residential citizens living adjacent to the route, that adequate provisions can
be made for the safe and orderly movement of the parade and of other traffic
pedestrian and vehicular, contiguous to the deviated route.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall issue a permit as provided hereunder when,
from a consideration of the application and from other information as may
otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that:
      (1)   Adequate provisions can be made for the safe and orderly movement
of the parade and of other traffic, pedestrian and vehicular, contiguous to its
route;
      (2)   Adequate provisions can be made for police protection which will
not require diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to
police properly the lines of movements and the areas contiguous thereto as to
prevent normal police protection to the city; and
      (3)   The applicant for the parade permit has agreed to abide by the
standards hereinafter set forth below which are necessary measures to promote
the safety and welfare of the community.
(Prior Code, § 13-17) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
§ 132.05 APPLICABLE STANDARDS.
   (A)   (1)   No firearms or dangerous weapons of any kind, as defined below,
may be possessed either exposed or concealed by any participant in the parade
or any person affiliated with and present at the parade or any person upon any
street, sidewalk or other public place within 500 feet of the parade.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, the term DANGEROUS WEAPON shall be
defined as any device designed or capable of being used to inflict serious
injury upon person or property, including, but not limited to, firearms, knives
of any kind or any type having a blade in excess of three inches in length,
razors and razor blades, metallic knuckles, clubs, blackjacks and night sticks,
dynamite cartridges, bombs, grenades, mines, other powerful explosives and
loaded canes.
      (3)   This restriction shall not apply to the following persons while
acting lawfully and within the scope of their duties and authority:
         (a)   Law enforcement officers;
         (b)   Officers and soldiers of the armed forces, militia and National
Guard;
         (c)   Students of military science in an accredited program; and
         (d)   Park rangers and animal control officers.
   (B)   No hand-carried signs or posters transported in the parade shall be of
greater density than one-quarter inch thickness cardboard. No support for the
sign or poster shall be of a metallic substance nor thicker than one by three-
fourths inches.
   (C)   No vicious animal, whether leashed or unleashed, shall participate in
or proceed along the route of any parade.
   (D)   The person designated by the applicant as the person responsible for
the physical conduct of the parade shall be physically present and accept
responsibility for compliance with any and all terms of the parade permit as
set forth in §
132.07.
   (E)   The applicant shall file with the Chief of Police a waiver signed by
the applicant releasing and saving the city and its employees harmless for any
claims, actions and lawsuits, arising out of the conduct of the parade,
excepting injuries or damages proximately caused by the city.
   (F)   Every parade shall follow the route designated and approved by the
Chief of Police.
   (G)   No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede or interfere
with any parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or
used in a parade.
(Prior Code, § 13-17) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.06 NOTICE OF REJECTION.
   The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for a parade permit
within seven days after the filing thereof. If the Chief of Police disapproves
the application, he or she shall notify the applicant, stating the reason for
denial of the permit.
(Prior Code, § 13-17) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
§ 132.07 RESPONSIBILITY OF PARTICIPANTS AND PERSONS IN CHARGE.
   (A)   Participants in a parade are required to abide by this section and the
terms of the parade permit issued hereunder. Willful violation thereof will
constitute a violation of this section of the municipal code and is punishable
as provided by law.
   (B)   The person designated in the application as responsible for the
physical conduct of the parade shall be responsible for monitoring the conduct
of the participants in the parade. Upon actual notice of any violation, given
to the responsible person by a law enforcement officer on the scene of the
parade, the person shall make immediate bona fide attempts to correct the
violation. It shall be unlawful for the responsible person to refuse to make
the bona fide attempts to correct the violation.
(Prior Code, § 13-17) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 132.08 VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this section
or any of the conditions of the parade permit. Any person violating any
provision thereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided by
law.
(Prior Code, § 13-17) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 133: EXHIBITION SHOWS
Section
   
133.01   Definition
   
133.02   Permit required
   
133.03   Sponsor of show to be non-profit organization
   
133.04   Application
   
133.05   Standards for issuance
   
133.06   Notification of rejection or withdrawal of permit
   
133.07   Duration
   
133.08   Operation and parking of motor vehicles
   
133.09   Violation
§ 133.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EXHIBITION SHOW. An exhibition or show where merchandise, wares or other
tangible items are displayed for show and/or sale either out-of-doors or in a
building occupied in whole or part for a period not to exceed two days. It
shall not include a sidewalk sale conducted by a merchant having a valid
privilege license on the sidewalk immediately adjoining the merchant’s store.
However, all sidewalk sales must be conducted so that reasonable use of the
sidewalk is maintained for the normal pedestrian traffic.
(Prior Code, § 13-18) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
§ 133.02 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or commence any
exhibition show, as defined above, in or upon any street, sidewalk or other
public place in the city unless a permit shall have been obtained from the
Chief of Police; provided, no person may conduct or otherwise participate in
any exhibition show, except between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. only.
(Prior Code, § 13-18) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.03 SPONSOR OF SHOW TO BE NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATION.
   No permit shall be issued unless the exhibition show is totally sponsored by
a non-profit organization conducting the exhibition show for charitable,
cultural, religious or civic purposes. No sale of arts, crafts or other
tangible items shall be permitted within the street or sidewalk areas except
under the auspices and control of the organization receiving the permit. The
organization shall be fully responsible for compliance with rules, regulations
and ordinances for the city with respect to the exhibition show being conducted
pursuant to a permit issued thereunder.
(Prior Code, § 13-18) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
§ 133.04 APPLICATION.
   (A)   A person seeking issuance of a permit for an exhibition show shall
file an application with the Chief of Police on forms provided by the city.
   (B)   An application for an exhibition show permit shall be filed with the
Chief of Police not less than two weeks before the time when it is proposed to
conduct the exhibition show. The application for an exhibition show shall set
forth the following information:
      (1)   The name, address and telephone number of the organization applying
for a permit;
      (2)   The name and addresses of its principal officers and management;
      (3)   The purpose for which any receipts derived from the exhibition show
are to be used;
      (4)   The name and address of the person or persons who will be in direct
charge of the exhibition show;
      (5)   An outline of the type of exhibition show and the hours of
operation;
      (6)   The amount of any special wages, fees, commissions or expenses to
be expended or paid to anyone in connection with the exhibition show;
      (7)   A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable,
religious, educational or civic work being done by the applicant organization
within the city;
      (8)   The name and portions of the street or streets to be closed for the
purpose of displays and conducting the exhibition show or the specific name and
area of any city park or other public place in which the exhibition show is to
be conducted; and
      (9)   Any additional information which the Chief of Police shall find
reasonable and necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should
be issued.
(Prior Code, § 13-18) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
§ 133.05 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE.
   The Chief of Police shall issue a permit for an exhibition show, upon a
finding that the application meets the qualifications herein, that the
exhibition will not unduly inconvenience or interfere with the orderly movement
of traffic in the area involved, that property owners in the area are not
unduly deprived of access to their property, that the exhibition will not
unduly interfere with normal business activity within the area of the street
occupied by the exhibition, that emergency vehicles will not be denied access
to any person or property and that adequate cleanup arrangements have been
made. In addition, if the exhibition show is to be located in a park or other
public place, the Chief of Police shall be satisfied that adequate provisions
and accommodations can be made for conducting the exhibition show.
(Prior Code, § 13-18) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
§ 133.06 NOTIFICATION OF REJECTION OR WITHDRAWAL OF PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police shall act upon the application for an exhibition show
permit within seven days after the filing thereof. If the Chief of Police
disapproves the application, he or she shall notify the applicant stating the
reasons for his or her denial of the permit. A permit issued hereunder may be
withdrawn in the event of any violation of conditions, misstatement of fact in
the application or in instances where the health or safety of the citizens will
be adversely affected.
(Prior Code, § 13-18) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
§ 133.07 DURATION.
   Where the exhibition show is to be conducted pursuant to a permit issued
hereunder, the exhibition show may not extend for more than two successive days
without an intervening period of at least one week.
(Prior Code, § 13-18) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.08 OPERATION AND PARKING OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate or leave parked any motorized vehicle
of any type, including motorcycles and minicycles, upon any street or public
vehicular area wherein an exhibition show is conducted pursuant to permit
issued under this section without the express permission of the person in
direct charge of the exhibition show.
   (B)   Any vehicle parked in violation hereunder is subject to impoundment.
(Prior Code, § 13-18) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 133.09 VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter
or any of the conditions of the exhibition permit. Any person violating any
provision thereof shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided by
law.
(Prior Code, § 13-18) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 134: PICKETING
Section
   
134.01   Definitions
   
134.02   Notice of intent and receipt required
   
134.03   Standards of conduct
   
134.04   Interference prohibited; police authority to disperse crowds; failure
to leave
   
134.05   Prohibition of firearms and dangerous weapons
§ 134.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PICKET, PICKETS and PICKETING. Deemed to include DEMONSTRATORS. Persons
participating in a vigil and any action primarily promoting or objecting to a
policy upon those portions of the public ways not used primarily for vehicular
parking and moving traffic and not constituting a parade.
(Prior Code, § 13-19) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
§ 134.02 NOTICE OF INTENT AND RECEIPT REQUIRED.
   Peaceful picketing shall be permitted in the city; provided, the same is
done under the following conditions.
   (A)   No picketing shall be conducted on the public ways of the city and no
person shall participate in the same unless notice of intent to picket has been
given to the Chief of Police, and unless a receipt of the notice has been
issued.
   (B)   Notice of intent to picket shall be given in writing and shall contain
the following information:
      (1)   The name, if any, of the organization or group sponsoring or
proposing to picket;
      (2)   The location or locations in the city where the pickets propose to
assemble and demonstrate;
      (3)   The date on which the picketing is to occur;
      (4)   The name of the person and organization giving notice of intent to
picket;
      (5)   Whether or not persons below the age of 18 years are expected to
participate; and
      (6)   The person or persons to be in charge of the activity and who will
accompany it and carry any receipt of notice at all times.
   (C)   Upon the giving of notice of intent to picket, properly completed as
hereinabove set out, the Chief of Police shall review the requirements of this
section with the applicant and immediately issue a receipt of notice. Notice
shall be given by the holder of a receipt of notice to the Chief of Police or
his or her designated representative immediately upon the cessation of the
picketing for a period of 24 hours or more. Before resumption of picketing
interrupted for any period, a new notice shall be given and a new receipt
issued.
(Prior Code, § 13-19) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.03 STANDARDS OF CONDUCT.
   (A)   Picketing shall be conducted only on portions of the public ways not
used primarily for vehicular parking or moving traffic.
   (B)   Pickets may carry written or printed placards or signs not exceeding
24 inches in length and width promoting the objective for which picketing is
done; provided, the words used would not tend to incite violence.
   (C)   Pickets must, if marching, march in single file, not abreast, and may
not march closer together than 15 feet, except in passing one another. Pickets
not marching shall remain at least 15 feet apart.
   (D)   If pickets promoting different objectives, causes, actions or policies
desire to use a sidewalk that is already used for picketing, the Chief of
Police or his or her designated agents shall allot a number of pickets
promoting each objective, to use the sidewalk, on an equitable basis,
proportionate to the number of objectives being promoted.
   (E)   Pickets shall be restricted to the use of the outermost half of the
sidewalk or other public way nearest the street and shall not at any time nor
in any way obstruct, interfere with or block: persons entering or exiting from
vehicles; persons crossing streets or otherwise using the public way; the
entrance or exit to any building or access to property abutting the street or
sidewalk; or pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   (F)   No person observing, engaging in or assisting in picketing shall bring
to or allow to remain in the immediate area of picketing any vicious animal.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for anyone to picket without filing a notice as
required herein or without being issued a receipt of the notice.
   (H)   The provisions of this chapter are mandatory and not merely directory,
and failure to comply with the provisions of this section is hereby declared to
be unlawful and punishable as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 13-19) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.04 INTERFERENCE PROHIBITED; POLICE AUTHORITY TO DISPERSE CROWDS; FAILURE
TO LEAVE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to physically interfere with
pickets in the use of the sidewalk or to address profane, indecent, abusive or
threatening language to or at those pickets which would tend to provoke the
pickets or others to a breach of the peace.
   (B)   The police officers of the city may, in the event of the assemblage of
persons in numbers as to tend to intimidate pickets pursuing their lawful
objective through numbers alone or through use of inflammatory words, direct
the dispersal of persons so assembled and may arrest any person who fails to
absent himself or herself from the place of the assemblage when so directed by
the police.
   (C)   Whenever the free passage of any street or sidewalk in the city shall
be obstructed by a crowd, whether or not the crowd assembles as a result of or
in connection with picketing, the persons composing the crowd shall disperse or
move on when directed to do so by a police officer. It shall be unlawful for
any person to refuse to so disperse or move on when so directed by a police
officer, as herein provided.
(Prior Code, § 13-19) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 134.05 PROHIBITION OF FIREARMS AND DANGEROUS WEAPONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to possess on or about his or her
person or vehicle any firearm or dangerous weapon of any kind, as defined
below, whether exposed or concealed, while participating in any picketing.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person present at any picketing or any
person upon any street, sidewalk, alley or other public property within 500
feet of any picketing, to possess on or about his or her person or vehicle any
firearm or dangerous weapon of any kind, whether exposed or concealed.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, the term DANGEROUS WEAPON shall be
defined as in G.S.§ 14-288.1.
   (D)   This restriction shall not apply to the following persons while acting
lawfully and within the scope of their duties and authority:
      (1)   Law enforcement officers;
      (2)   Officers and soldiers of the armed forces, militia and National
Guard;
      (3)   Students of military science in an accredited program; and
      (4)   Park Rangers and Animal Control Officers.
(Prior Code, § 13-19) (Ord. passed 11-26-1991)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
      
151.   SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
      
152.   HOUSING CODE; NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDING MAINTENANCE CODE
      
153.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
      
154.   COMMUNITY APPEARANCE STANDARDS CODE
      
155.   HISTORIC LANDMARKS
      
156.   UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS; CONSTRUCTION
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   State Building Code adopted
Building Inspector
   
150.15   Office created
   
150.16   Appointment; term
   
150.17   Conflict of interest
   
150.18   Powers and duties generally
   
150.19   Effect of failure to perform duties
Permits
   
150.35   Permits required generally
   
150.36   Demolition permit
   
150.37   Application for permit
   
150.38   Plans and specifications to accompany application
   
150.39   Fees
 
   
150.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 STATE BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   The North Carolina State Administrative and Policy Code, The North Carolina
State Building Code, The North Carolina State Residential Code, The North
Carolina State Plumbing Code, The North Carolina State Mechanical Code, The
North Carolina State Fuel Gas Code, The North Carolina State Energy
Conservation Code, The North Carolina State Accessibility Code (ANSI 117.1),
The North Carolina Existing Building Code, The North Carolina State Electrical
Code ( NEC 70), The North Carolina Modular Construction Regulations and The
North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes, as enacted and published by
the North Carolina Building Code Council, and as modified by the cumulative
supplements thereto covering amendments passed and ratified, is hereby adopted
by reference as fully as though set forth herein as the Building Code of the
city, to the extent such code is applicable for safe and stable design, methods
of construction, minimum standards, and use of materials in buildings or
structures hereafter erected, enlarged, altered, repaired or otherwise
constructed or reconstructed.
(Prior Code, § 4-1) (Ord. 96-20, passed 8-27-1996; Ord. 01-51, passed 12-11-
2001; Ord. 19-23, passed 12-17-2019)
BUILDING INSPECTOR
§ 150.15 OFFICE CREATED.
   There is hereby created in and for the city the Office of Building
Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 4-3)
§ 150.16 APPOINTMENT; TERM.
   The Building Inspector shall be appointed by the City Manager and shall
serve as the Inspector until a successor is appointed and qualified.
(Prior Code, § 4-4)
§ 150.17 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   While holding office, the Building Inspector shall not engage in, nor be
interested in, business as an architect, engineer or builder, nor shall the
Inspector be financially interested in the sale of building material or accept
fees or other compensation for engineering advice or plans and specifications
submitted.
(Prior Code, § 4-5)
§ 150.18 POWERS AND DUTIES GENERALLY.
   The Building Inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce all the
provisions of this chapter; to take what action may be necessary to remove any
conditions which under the terms of this chapter shall have been declared to be
a nuisance; to make or have made, all necessary inspections; to have the right
to enter any premises, at reasonable hours, for the purpose of inspection or
enforcing this chapter; to keep records as may be necessary for the efficient
maintenance and conduct of the office.
(Prior Code, § 4-6)
§ 150.19 EFFECT OF FAILURE TO PERFORM DUTIES.
   No oversight, dereliction or failure to perform official duties on the part
of the Building Inspector or authorized assistants shall legalize the violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-7)
PERMITS
§ 150.35 PERMITS REQUIRED GENERALLY.
   (A)   No person shall commence or proceed with the following without first
securing all permits required by the State Building Code and any other state or
local laws and ordinances applicable to the work:
      (1)   The construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, removal or
demolition of any building or structure;
      (2)   The installation, extension or general repair of any plumbing
system;
      (3)   The installation, extension, alteration or general repair of any
heating or cooling equipment system;
      (4)   The installation, extension, alteration or general repair of any
electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment; or
      (5)   The moving of any building or structure from the owner’s premises;
if the cost of the same shall exceed $5,000
   (B)   (1)   A permit shall be in writing and shall contain a provision that
the work done shall comply with the State Building Code and all other
applicable state and local laws.
      (2)   No permits shall be issued unless the plans and specifications are
identified by the name and address of the author thereof, and if the general
statutes of the state require that plans for certain types of work be prepared
only by a registered architect or registered engineer, no permit shall be
issued unless the plans and specifications bear the state seal of a registered
architect or of a registered engineer.
      (3)   When any provision of the general statutes of the state or of any
ordinance requires that work be done by a licensed specialty contractor of any
kind, no permit for the work shall be issued unless the work is to be performed
by the duly licensed contractor.
(Prior Code, § 4-20)
Statutory reference:
   Building within fire limits, see G.S. § 160A-436
   Issuance to contractors regulated, see G.S. § 87-14
   Similar provisions, see G.S. § 160A-417
§ 150.36 DEMOLITION PERMIT.
   Before the demolition of any structure is begun, a verified application
containing a statement of the facts in relation thereto and to the ownership
and location thereof shall be submitted by the owner, or the owner’s authorized
representative, to the Building Inspector and a written permit for the
operation shall be obtained from the Building Inspector. The permit shall
expire, by limitation, two months from the date of its issuance if the work
authorized has not commenced. The Building Inspector shall be given not less
than 24 hours’ notice before the demolition of the structure may be begun.
(Prior Code, § 4-22)
§ 150.37 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   Application for a building permit shall be made to the Building Inspector by
the owner of the premises on which the proposed work is to be done or the
owner’s authorized representative. The application shall give the full name,
residence and business address of the owner of the building and of the owner of
the premises; the name and address of the owner’s authorized representative to
whom notice may be sent in case of violations of this chapter; the maximum
number of persons to be accommodated on each floor at any time and the purpose
for which the structure is intended to be, or will be, used.
(Prior Code, § 4-23)
§ 150.38 PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS TO ACCOMPANY APPLICATION.
   The necessary plans and specifications for the proposed work to be done
shall be submitted with the application for a building permit, together with
data as may be required by the Building Inspector to determine whether there
will be compliance with the intent and purposes of this chapter.
(Prior Code, § 4-24) (Ord. 02-19, passed 8-27-2002)
§ 150.39 FEES.
   (A)   As prescribed.
      (1)   A fee shall be charged for each permit issued under this chapter as
prescribed from time to time by the governing body.
      (2)   For the purpose of computing the fee, a statement of the cost of
the repairs, remodeling, construction or building from the builder or
contractor may be required.
(Prior Code, § 4-25)
   (B)   Additional. Additional inspections, or inspection trips, by the
Building Inspector, made necessary through the failure of any building
contractor, carpenter in charge of work, electrical contractor, electrician in
charge of work, plumbing contractor, plumber in charge of work, heating
contractor, heating worker in charge of work, or any person doing building or
construction-type work, to specify location of work, or failure to install
materials, or apparatus, in proper manner, or to otherwise create conditions
making additional inspections or trips necessary, are hereby designated “extra
building inspections”, the fees for which shall be as prescribed from time to
time by the governing body.
(Prior Code, § 4-26)
Statutory reference:
   Power of Council to establish fees, see G.S. § 160A-414
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   There shall be a penalty of double the actual cost of the permit for
failure to obtain the required permit before any actual work is begun. The
failure shall also be a misdemeanor pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175 and G.S. §
160A-417, and violators shall be subject to injunction and abatement orders
pursuant to G.S. § 160A-175.
(Prior Code, § 4-35)
CHAPTER 151: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Title
   
151.02   Purpose
   
151.03   Jurisdiction
   
151.04   Definitions
   
151.05   Scope and exclusions
Standards and Requirements
   
151.15   General requirements and objectives
   
151.16   Basic control objectives
   
151.17   Mandatory standards for land-disturbing activity
   
151.18   Design and performance standards
   
151.19   Stormwater outlet protection
   
151.20   Borrow and waste areas
   
151.21   Access and haul roads
   
151.22   Operations in lakes or natural watercourses
   
151.23   Responsibility for maintenance
   
151.24   Additional measures
   
151.25   Existing uncovered areas
   
151.26   Certificate of approved plan
   
151.27   Erosion and sedimentation control plans
Administration and Enforcement
   
151.40   [Reserved]
   
151.41   Appeals
   
151.42   Inspections and investigations
   
151.43   Injunctive relief
   
151.44   Restoration of areas affected by failure to comply
   
151.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Sedimentation pollution control, see G.S. §§ 113A-50 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the Kings Mountain Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Ordinance.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.02 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted for the purposes of:
   (A)   Regulating certain land-disturbing activity to control accelerated
erosion and sedimentation in order to prevent the pollution of water and other
damage to lakes, watercourses, and other public and private property by
sedimentation; and
   (B)   Establishing procedures through which these purposes can be fulfilled.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.03 JURISDICTION.
   The City Council hereby adopts this chapter. The chapter applies to all
portions of Kings Mountain. However, this chapter may later be adopted to also
apply within other regions upon proper resolution duly adopted. Wherever
conflicts exist between federal, state, or local laws, ordinances, or rules,
the more restrictive provision shall apply.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCELERATED EROSION. Any increase over the rate of natural erosion as a
result of land-disturbing activity.
   ACT. The North Carolina Sedimentation Pollution Control Act of 1973 and all
rules and orders adopted pursuant to it.
   ADEQUATE EROSION CONTROL MEASURE, STRUCTURE, OR DEVICE. One which controls
the soil material within the land area under responsible control of the person
conducting the land-disturbing activity.
   AFFILIATE. A person that directly, or indirectly through one or more
intermediaries, controls, is controlled by, or is under common control of
another person.
   BEING CONDUCTED. A land-disturbing activity has been initiated and permanent
stabilization of the site has not been completed.
   BORROW. Fill material, which is required for on-site construction and is
obtained from other locations.
   BUFFER ZONE. The strip of land adjacent to a lake or natural watercourse.
   COMMISSION. The North Carolina Sedimentation Control Commission.
   COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION OR DEVELOPMENT. No further land disturbing
activity is required on a phase of a project except that which is necessary for
establishing a permanent ground cover.
   DEPARTMENT. The North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural
Resources.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Division of Land Resources of the North
Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources.
   DISCHARGE POINT. That point at which run-off leaves a tract of land.
   DISTRICT. The Kings Mountain Stormwater District created pursuant to G.S.
Chapter 139.
   ENERGY DISSIPATER. A structure or a shaped channel section with mechanical
armoring placed at the outlet of pipes or conduits to receive and break down
the energy from high velocity flow.
   EROSION. The wearing away of land surface by the action of wind, water,
gravity, or any combination thereof.
   FINAL CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. The document required by the North Carolina
State Building Code certifying that a new building shall not be occupied or a
change made in occupancy, nature or use of a building until after all required
building and services systems have been inspected for compliance with the
technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the
Kings Mountain Code Enforcement Department.
   GROUND COVER. Any natural vegetative growth or other material that renders
the soil surface stable against accelerated erosion.
   HIGH QUALITY WATERS. Those waters classified as such in 15A NCAC 2B.0101(e)
(5), General Procedures, which is incorporated herein, by reference, to include
further amendments.
   HIGH QUALITY WATER (HQW) ZONES. Areas in the coastal counties that are
within 575 feet of high quality waters and for the remainder of the state areas
that are within one mile and drain to HQW's.
   KINGS MOUNTAIN ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW BOARD. The Kings Mountain, North
Carolina Soil Erosion & Sedimentation Control Ordinance Environmental Review
Board.
   LAKE OR NATURAL WATERCOURSE. Any stream, river, brook, swamp, sound, bay,
creek, run, branch, canal, waterway, estuary, and any reservoir, lake or pond,
natural or impounded, in which sediment may be moved or carried in suspension,
and which could be damaged by accumulation of sediment.
   LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any use of the land by any person in residential,
industrial, educational, institutional, or commercial development, highway and
road construction and maintenance that results in a change in the natural cover
or topography and that may cause or contribute to sedimentation.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT. The City of Kings Mountain.
   MAY. Contingent upon the discretion of the Stormwater Division Director.
   NATURAL EROSION. The wearing away of the earth's surface by water, wind, or
other natural agents under natural environmental conditions undisturbed by man.
   PARENT. An affiliate that directly, or indirectly through one or more
intermediaries, controls another person.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture,
public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or
private institution, utility, cooperative, interstate body, or other legal
entity.
   PERSON CONDUCTING LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any person who may be held
responsible for a violation unless expressly provided otherwise by this
chapter, the Act, or any other order adopted pursuant to this chapter or the
Act.
   PERSON RESPONSIBLE FOR THE VIOLATION. As used in this chapter, and G.S. §
113A-64, means:
      (1)   The developer or other person who has or holds himself out as
having financial or operational control over the land-disturbing activity; or
Kings Mountain, North Carolina Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Ordinance.
      (2)   The landowner or person in possession or control of the land when
he or she has directly or indirectly allowed the land-disturbing activity or
has benefited from it or he has failed to comply with any provision of this
chapter, the Act, or any order adopted pursuant to this chapter or the Act as
imposes a duty upon him.
   PHASE OF GRADING. One or two types of grading, rough or fine.
   PLAN. An Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan.
   RECURRING VIOLATION. A violation that has not been corrected within the time
specified by the Stormwater Division, or, a reoccurrence of a violation from
which a previous notice has been issued, notwithstanding natural occurrences
exceeding design requirements.
   SEDIMENT. Solid particulate matter, both mineral and organic, that has been
or is being transported by water, air, gravity, or ice from its site of origin.
   SEDIMENTATION. The process by which sediment, resulting from accelerated
erosion, has been or is being transported off the site of the land-disturbing
activity or into a lake or natural watercourse.
   SHALL. A requirement.
   STORM DRAINAGE FACILITIES. The system of inlets, conduits, channels,
ditches, and appurtenances which serve to collect and convey stormwater through
and from a given drainage area.
   STORMWATER RUN-OFF. The surface flow of water resulting from precipitation
in any form and occurring immediately after rainfall or melting.
   SUBSIDIARY. An affiliate that is directly, or indirectly, through one or
more intermediaries, controlled by another person.
   TEN-YEAR STORM. The surface run-off resulting from a rainfall of an
intensity expected to be equaled or exceeded, on the average, once in ten
years, and of a duration which will produce the maximum peak rate of run-off,
from the watershed of interest under average antecedent wetness conditions.
   TRACT. All contiguous land and bodies of water being disturbed or to be
disturbed as a unit, regardless of ownership.
   TWENTY-FIVE YEAR STORM. The surface run-off resulting from a rainfall of an
intensity expected to be equaled or exceeded, on the average, once in 25 years,
and of a duration which will produce the maximum peak rate of runoff, from the
watershed of interest under average antecedent wetness conditions.
   UNCOVERED. The removal of ground cover from, on, or above the soil surface.
   UNDERTAKEN. The initiating of any activity, or phase of activity, which
results or will result in a change in the ground cover or topography of a tract
of land.
   VELOCITY. The average speed of flow through the cross-section of the main
channel at the peak flow of the storm of interest. The cross-section of the
main channel shall be that area defined by the geometry of the channel plus the
area of the flow below the flood height defined by vertical lines at the main
channel banks. Overload flows are not to be included for the purpose of
computing velocity of flow.
   WASTE. Surplus materials resulting from on-site land-disturbing activities
and being disposed of at other locations.
   WORKING DAYS. Days, exclusive of Saturday and Sunday, during which weather
conditions or soil conditions permit land-disturbing activity to be undertaken.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.05 SCOPE AND EXCLUSIONS.
   This chapter shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities:
   (A)   Activities, including the breeding and grazing of livestock,
undertaken on agricultural land for the production of plants and animals useful
to man, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Forages and sod crops, grains and feed crops, tobacco, cotton, and
peanuts.
      (2)   Dairy animals and dairy products.
      (3)   Poultry and poultry products.
      (4)   Livestock, including beef cattle, llamas, sheep, swine, horses,
ponies, mules, and goats.
      (5)   Bees and apiary products.
      (6)   Fur producing animals.
   (B)   Activities undertaken on forestland for the production and harvesting
of timber and timber products and conducted in accordance with best management
practices set out in "Forest Practice Guidelines Related to Water Quality" as
adopted by the Department. If land-disturbing activity undertaken on forestland
for the production and harvesting of timber and timber products is not
conducted in accordance with "Forest Practice Guidelines Related to Water
Quality," the provisions of this chapter shall apply to such activity and any
related land-disturbing activity on the tract; and
   (C)   Activities for which a permit is required under the Mining Act of
1971, G.S. Ch. 74, Art. 7.
   (D)   (1)   Land-disturbing activity over which the state has exclusive
regulatory jurisdiction as provided in G.S. § 113A-56.
      (2)   The Commission shall have jurisdiction, to the exclusion of local
governments, to adopt rules concerning land-disturbing activities within the
city limits that are:
         (a)   Conducted by the state;
         (b)   Conducted by the United States;
         (c)   Conducted by persons having the power of eminent domain;
         (d)   Conducted by local governments; or
         (e)   Funded in whole or in part by the state or the United States.
   (E)   For the duration of an emergency; activities essential to protect
human life and/or property.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS
§ 151.15 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   Plan required. No person shall initiate any land-disturbing activity
without having an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved by the Kings
Mountain Stormwater Division except as otherwise noted within this chapter.
   (B)   Compliance. Person who submits a plan to the Kings Mountain Stormwater
Division shall comply with the provisions of §
151.27 of this chapter.
   (C)   Protection of property. Persons conducting land-disturbing activity
shall take all reasonable measures to protect all public and private property
from sedimentation siltation caused by such activity.
   (D)   More restrictive rules shall apply. Whenever conflicts exist between
federal, state, or local laws, ordinances, or rules, the more restrictive
provision shall apply.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.16 BASIC CONTROL OBJECTIVES.
   A plan may be disapproved pursuant to §
151.27 of this chapter if the plan fails to address the following control
objectives:
   (A)   Identify critical areas. On-site areas, which are subject to severe
erosion, and off-site areas, which are especially vulnerable to severe erosion
and/or sedimentation are to be identified.
   (B)   Limit time of exposure. All land-disturbing activity is to be planned
and conducted to limit exposure to the shortest feasible time.
   (C)   Limit exposed areas. All land-disturbing activity is to be planned and
conducted to minimize the size of the area to be exposed at any time.
   (D)   Control surface water. Surface water run-off originating from upgrade
of exposed areas shall be controlled to reduce erosion and sediment loss during
the period of exposure.
   (E)   Control sedimentation. All land-disturbing activity is to be planned
and conducted so as to prevent off-site sedimentation damage to the extent
required by the Act.
   (F)   Manage stormwater run-off. When the increase in the velocity of
stormwater run-off resulting from a land-disturbing activity is sufficient to
cause accelerated erosion of the receiving watercourse, plans are to include
measures to control the velocity at the point of discharge so as to minimize
accelerated erosion of the site and to decrease sedimentation to any lake or
natural watercourse.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.17 MANDATORY STANDARDS FOR LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY.
   No land-disturbing activity subject to the control of this chapter shall be
undertaken except in accordance with the following mandatory standards:
   (A)   Buffer zone.
      (1)   No land-disturbing activity during periods of construction or
improvement to land shall be permitted in proximity to a lake or natural
watercourse unless a buffer zone is provided along the margin of the
watercourse of sufficient width to confine visible siltation within the 25% of
the buffer zone nearest the land disturbing activity. The minimum width of the
buffer zone shall not be less than ten feet. Visible siltation must not
discharge through the buffer zone. This subdivision shall not apply to a land
disturbing activity in connection with the construction of facilities to be
located on, over, or under a lake or natural watercourse.
      (2)   Unless otherwise provided, the width of a buffer zone begins and is
measured at least ten feet from the edge of the top of the bank of the
watercourse to the nearest edge of the disturbed area with the 25% of the strip
nearer the land-disturbing activity containing natural and or artificial means
of confining visible siltation. Natural or artificial means of confining
visible siltation must be placed, constructed or installed outside the
undisturbed buffer zone.
   (B)   Graded slopes and fills. The angle for graded slopes and fills shall
be no greater than the angle that can be retained by vegetative cover or other
adequate erosion control devices or structures. In any event, slopes left
exposed will, within 21 calendar days of completion of any phase of grading, be
planted or otherwise provided with temporary or permanent ground cover,
devices, or structures sufficient to restrain erosion.
   (C)   Fill material. Unless a permit from the Department's Division of Waste
Management to operate a landfill is on file for the official site, acceptable
fill material shall be free of organic or other degradable materials, masonry,
concrete and brick in sizes exceeding 12 inches, and any materials which would
cause the site to be regulated as a landfill by the state.
   (D)   Ground cover. Whenever land-disturbing activity that will disturb one
or more acres is undertaken on a tract the person conducting the land-
disturbing activity shall install such sedimentation and erosion control
devices and practices as are sufficient to retain the sediment generated by the
land-disturbing activity within the boundaries of the tract during construction
upon and development of the tract, and shall plant or otherwise provide a
permanent ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion after completion of
construction or development. Provisions for a ground cover sufficient to
restrain erosion must be accomplished within 15 working days or 60 calendar
days, following completion of construction or development.
   (E)   Prior plan approval. No person shall initiate any land-disturbing
activity that will disturb one or more acres on a tract unless, 30 or more days
prior to initiating the activity, a plan for the activity is filed with the
Kings Mountain Stormwater Division. Should the plan be filed, approved and a
certificate of approved plan issued in less than 30 days from the filing of the
plan, the land-disturbing activity may commence.
   (F)   Plan compliance. The land-disturbing activity shall be conducted in
accordance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan.
   (G)   Self-inspections. The person(s) conducting land-disturbing activity
shall perform an inspection of the area covered by the plan after each phase of
the plan has been completed and after establishment of temporary ground cover.
Such inspection reports shall be maintained and made available on-site. Any
deviation from the plan shall be documented. Records shall be maintained until
permanent groundcover has been established.
   (H)   The person(s) (developer or other person who has or holds himself out
as having financial or operational control over the land-disturbing activity)
conducting land disturbing activity or an agent of that party shall contact the
Stormwater Division at least 48 hours before commencement of the land-
disturbing activity.
   (I)   The Stormwater Division may require an onsite meeting with the person
(s) conducting land-disturbing activity, or an agent of that party, to review
and discuss the approved plan before commencement of the land-disturbing
activity.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.18 DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, erosion and
sedimentation control measures, structures, and devices shall be so planned,
designed, and constructed as to provide protection from the calculated maximum
peak rate of runoff from the ten-year storm. Run-off rates can be calculated
using the rational method, the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
peak discharge method, or other acceptable methods.
   (B)   In high quality water zones (HQW) the following design standards shall
apply:
      (1)   Uncovered areas in HQW zones shall be limited at any time to a
maximum total area within the boundaries of the tract of 20 acres. Only this
section shall govern the portion of the land-disturbing activity within a HQW
zone. Larger areas may be uncovered with the written approval of the Director.
      (2)   Erosion and sedimentation control measures, structures, and devices
within HQW zones shall be so planned, designed and constructed to provide
protection from the run-off of the 25 year storm which produces the maximum
peak rate of run-off as calculated according to procedures in the USDA, Natural
Resource Conservation Service's "National Engineering Field Manual for
Conservation Practices," or according to procedures adopted by any other agency
of this state or the United States or any generally recognized organization or
association.
      (3)   Sediment basins within HQW zones shall be designed and constructed
such that the basin will have a settling efficiency of at least 70% for the 40
micron (0.04 mm) size soil particle transported into the basin by the run-off
of that two-year storm which produces the maximum peak rate of run-off as
calculated according to the procedures in the USDA, Natural Resources
Conservation Service's "National Engineering Field Manual for Conservation
Practices" or according to procedures adopted by any other agency of this state
or the United States or any generally recognized organization or association.
      (4)   Newly constructed open channels in HQW zones shall be designed and
constructed with side slopes no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical if
a vegetative cover is used for stabilization unless soil conditions permit a
steeper slope or where the slopes are stabilized by using mechanical devices or
other acceptable ditch liners. In any event, the angle for side slopes shall be
sufficient to restrain accelerated erosion.
      (5)   Ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion must be provided for
any portion of a land-disturbing activity in a HQW zone within 15 working days
or 30 calendar days following completion of any phase of construction or
development, whichever period is shorter.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.19 STORMWATER OUTLET PROTECTION.
   (A)   Persons shall prepare a plan that designs the post construction
velocity of the 10-year storm run-off in the receiving watercourse to the
discharge point that does not exceed the greater of:
      (1)   The velocity established by the table in division (D) of this
section; or
      (2)   The velocity of the 10-year storm run-off in the receiving
watercourse prior to development. If conditions (1) or (2) of this section
cannot be met, then the receiving watercourse to and including the discharge
point shall be designed and constructed to withstand the expected velocity
anywhere the velocity exceeds the prior to development velocity by 10%.
   (B)   Acceptable management measures. Measures applied alone or in
combination to satisfy the intent of this section are acceptable if there are
no objectionable secondary consequences. The Commission recognizes that the
management of Stormwater run-off to minimize or control downstream channel and
bank accelerated erosion is a developing technology. Innovative techniques and
ideas will be considered and may be used when shown to have the potential to
produce successful results. Some alternatives are to:
      (1)   Avoid increases in surface run-off volume and velocity by including
measures to promote infiltration to compensate for increased run-off from areas
rendered impervious.
      (2)   Avoid increases in stormwater discharge velocities by using
vegetated or roughened swales and waterways in lieu of closed drains and high
velocity paved sections.
      (3)   Provide energy dissipaters at outlets of storm drainage facilities
to reduce flow velocities to the point of discharge. These may range from
simple rip-rapped sections to complex structures.
      (4)   Protect watercourses subject to accelerated erosion by improving
cross sections and/or providing erosion-resistant lining.
      (5)   Upgrade or replace the receiving device, structure or watercourse
such that it will receive and conduct the flow to a point where it is no longer
subject to degradation from the increased volume, or increased velocity of the
flow.
   (C)   Exceptions. This rule shall not apply where it can be demonstrated
that stormwater discharge velocities will not create an erosion problem in the
receiving watercourse.
   (D)   The following is a table for maximum permissible velocity for
stormwater discharges: units are in feet per second (FPS) and meters per second
(MPS).
         Maximum Permissible Velocity
Material F.P.S. M.P.S.
                                         Maximum Permissible Velocity
Material                                 F.P.S. M.P.S.
Fine sand (non-colloidal)                2.5    0.08
Sandy loam (non-colloidal)               2.5    0.08
Silt loan (non-colloidal)                3.0    0.9
Ordinary firm loam                       3.5    1.1
Fine gravel                              5.0    1.5
Stiff clay (very colloidal)              5.0    1.5
Graded, loam to cobbles (non- colloidal) 5.0    1.5
Graded, silt to cobbles (colloidal)      5.5    1.7
Alluvial silts (non-colloidal)           3.5    1.1
Alluvial silts (colloidal)               5.0    1.5
Coarse Gravel (non-colloidal)            6.0    1.8
Cobbles and shingles                     5.5    1.7
Shale and hard pans                      6.0    1.8
 
   Source - Adapted from recommendations by Special Committee on Irrigation
Research, American Society of Civil Engineers, 1926, for channels with straight
alignment For sinuous channels, multiply allowable velocity by 0.95 for
slightly sinuous, by 0.9 for moderately sinuous channels, and by 0.8 for highly
sinuous channels.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.20 BORROW AND WASTE AREAS.
   When the person conducting the land-disturbing activity is also the person
conducting the borrow or waste disposal activity, areas from which borrow is
obtained and which are not regulated by the provisions of the Mining Act of
1971, and waste areas for surplus materials other than landfills regulated by
the Department's Division of Waste Management, shall be considered as part of
the land-disturbing activity where the borrow material is being used or from
which the waste material originated. When the person conducting the land-
disturbing activity is not the person conducting the borrow and/or disposing of
the waste, these areas shall be considered a separate land-disturbing activity.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.21 ACCESS AND HAUL ROADS.
   Temporary access and haul roads, other than public or private roads,
constructed or used in connection with any land-disturbing activity shall be
considered a part of such activity.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.22 OPERATIONS IN LAKES OR NATURAL WATERCOURSES.
   Land disturbing activity in connection with construction in, on, over, or
under a lake or natural watercourse shall minimize the extent and duration of
disruption of the stream channel. Where relocation of a stream forms an
essential part of the proposed activity, the relocation shall minimize
unnecessary changes in the stream flow characteristics.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.23 RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
   During the development of the site, the person conducting the land-
disturbing activity shall install and maintain all temporary and permanent
erosion and sedimentation control measures as required by the approved plan or
any provision of this chapter, the Act, or any order adopted pursuant to this
chapter or the Act. After site development, the landowner or person in
possession or control of the land shall install and/or maintain all necessary
permanent erosion and sedimentation control measures, except those measures
installed within a road or street right-of-way or easement accepted for
maintenance by a governmental agency.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.24 ADDITIONAL MEASURES.
   Whenever the Kings Mountain Stormwater Division determines that significant
sedimentation is occurring as a result of land disturbing activity, despite
application and maintenance of protective practices, the person conducting the
land-disturbing activity will be required to and shall take additional
protective action.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.25 EXISTING UNCOVERED AREAS.
   (A)   All uncovered areas existing on the effective date of this chapter
which resulted from land-disturbing activity that are subject to continued
accelerated erosion, and are causing off-site damage from sedimentation, shall
be provided with a ground cover or other protective measures, structures, or
devices sufficient to restrain accelerated erosion and control off-site
sedimentation.
   (B)   The Stormwater Division reserves the right to require preparation and
approval of an erosion and sedimentation control plan in any instance where
extensive control measures are required.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.26 CERTIFICATE OF APPROVED PLAN.
   No person shall undertake any land-disturbing activity subject to this
chapter without first obtaining a certificate of approved plan from Kings
Mountain, through its Kings Mountain Stormwater Division, except that no
certificate of approved plan shall be required for any land-disturbing
activity:
   (A)   For the duration of an emergency, for activities essential to protect
human life and/or property; or
   (B)   For construction of a single-family residence on a single lot that
does not exceed one acre. Despite not being required to obtain a certificate of
approved plan, parties engaged in land-disturbing activities of less than one-
acre are subject to all portions of this chapter. If the erosion and sediment
control measures for the development site are designed for all lot disturbances
and being Kings Mountain, North Carolina, Soil Erosion and Sedimentation
Control Ordinance maintained, individual lots within the development site may
be excluded.
   (C)   If a party has been determined to have been in recurring violation of
this chapter within the past two years on the same property or if a land
disturbing activity requiring a plan is begun without a certificate of approved
plan, the certificate of approved plan fee may be doubled for that party.
   (D)   No certificate of approved plan will be issued to any party having an
outstanding recurring violation on the same property subject to this chapter.
   (E)   This decision may be appealed to the Environmental Review Board.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.27 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   A pre-submittal conference with Stormwater staff can be requested by
the person(s) conducting land-disturbing activity or an agent of that party to
take place at least ten days prior to submittal of the plan for land-disturbing
activities.
   (B)   At the pre-submittal conference, Stormwater staff shall inform the
applicant of the processes involved with plan review and approval, issuance of
a plan certificate and letter of approval, and the relationship of said plan
and letter of approval with zoning, building code, and other land-use
regulations in effect in Kings Mountain. At the time of application submission,
Stormwater staff also shall notify the applicant of the appeal process as
provided in the chapter.
   (C)   Persons conducting land-disturbing activity on a tract which covers
one or more acres shall file two copies of the erosion and sedimentation
control plan with the Stormwater Division at least 30 days prior to beginning
such activity and shall keep another copy of the plan on file at the job site.
After approving the plan, if the Stormwater Division either upon review of such
plan or on inspection of the job site, determines that a significant risk of
accelerated erosion or off-site sedimentation exists, the Stormwater Division
will require a revised plan. Pending the preparation of the revised plan, work
shall cease or shall continue under conditions outlined by the appropriate
authority.
   (D)   Erosion and sedimentation control plans may be disapproved unless
accompanied by an authorized statement of financial responsibility and
ownership. The person financially responsible for the land-disturbing activity
or his or her attorney shall sign this statement in fact. The statement shall
include the mailing and street addresses of the principal place of business of
the person financially responsible and of the owner of the land or their
registered agents. If the person financially responsible is not a resident of
North Carolina, a North Carolina agent must be designated in the statement for
the purpose of receiving notice of compliance or non-compliance with the plan,
the Act, this chapter, or rules or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this
chapter. If the applicant is not the owner of the land to be disturbed, the
draft erosion and sedimentation control plan must include the owner's consent
for the applicant to submit a draft erosion and sedimentation control plan and
conduct the anticipated land disturbing activity.
   (E)   The Stormwater Division shall review the plan and submit any comments
and recommendations to Codes Department staff within 20 days after the
Stormwater Division received the erosion and sedimentation control plan,
recommendations within 20 days or within any agreed upon shorter period of time
shall not delay final action on the plan.
   (F)   The Stormwater staff will review each complete plan submitted to them
and within 30 days of receipt thereof will notify the person submitting the
plan that it has been approved, approved with modifications, approved with
performance reservations, or disapproved. Failure to approve, approve with
modifications, or disapprove a complete erosion and sedimentation control plan
within 30 days of receipt shall be deemed approval. Disapproval of a plan must
specifically state in writing the reasons for disapproval. The Stormwater
Division must approve with modifications, or disapprove a revised plan within
15 days of receipt, or it is deemed to be approved. The Stormwater Division
shall only approve a plan upon determining that it complies with all applicable
state and local regulations for erosion and sedimentation control. If,
following commencement of a land disturbing activity pursuant to an approved
plan, the Stormwater staff determines that the plan is inadequate to meet the
requirements of this chapter, the Stormwater staff may require any revision of
the plan that is necessary to comply with this chapter. Failure to approve,
approve with modifications, or disapprove a revised erosion and sedimentation
control plan within 15 days of receipt shall be deemed approval. The approved
erosion and sedimentation control plan shall expire one year following the date
of approval, if no land disturbing activity has been undertaken.
   (G)   Any plan submitted for a land-disturbing activity for which an
environmental document is required by the North Carolina Environment Policy Act
(G.S. § 113A-1, et seq.) shall be deemed incomplete until a complete
environmental document is available for review. The Stormwater Division shall
promptly notify the person submitting the plan that the 30-day time limit for
review of the plan pursuant to §
151.27(F) of this chapter shall not begin until a complete environmental
document is available to review. The person submitting a plan to the Stormwater
Division, prior to submission of the plan, is solely and exclusively
responsible for determining whether the proposed land disturbing activities
require any form of state or federal environmental certification or
documentation. The Stormwater Division shall condition approval of an erosion
and sedimentation control plan upon the applicant's compliance with federal and
state water quality laws, regulations and rules; and shall disapprove an
erosion and sedimentation control plan if implementation of the Kings Mountain,
North Carolina Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance plan would
result in a violation of rules adopted by the Environmental Management
Commission to protect riparian buffers along surface waters.
   (H)   Any plan required by this section shall contain architectural and
engineering drawings, maps, assumptions, calculations, and narrative statements
as needed to adequately describe the proposed development of the tract and the
measures planned to comply with the requirements of this chapter. Plan content
may vary to meet the needs of specific site requirements. Detailed guidelines
for Plan preparation may be obtained from the Stormwater Division on request.
   (I)   The Stormwater Division may disapprove an erosion and sedimentation
control plan upon a finding that an applicant, or a parent, subsidiary, or
other affiliate of the applicant:
      (1)   Is conducting land-disturbing activity without an approved plan, or
has received notice of violation of a plan previously approved by the
Commission or a local government pursuant to the Act and has not complied with
the notice within the time specified in the notice;
      (2)   Has failed to pay a civil penalty assessed pursuant to the Act or a
local ordinance adopted pursuant to the Act by the time the payment is due and
is not currently being appealed;
      (3)   Has been convicted of a misdemeanor pursuant to G.S. § 113A-64(b)
or any criminal provision of a local ordinance adopted pursuant to the Act;
      (4)   Has failed to substantially comply with state rules or local
ordinances and regulations adopted pursuant to the Act. For purposes of this
section (an applicant's record may be considered for only the two years prior
to the application date); or
      (5)   Is in violation of federal, state, or local laws, rules,
regulations or ordinances pertaining to a different phase of the same tract
and/or development
   (J)   Applications for amendment of an erosion and sedimentation control
plan in written and/or graphic form may be made at any time under the same
conditions as the original application. Until such time as the amendment is
approved by the Stormwater Division, the land-disturbing activity shall not
proceed except in accordance with the erosion and sedimentation control plan as
originally approved.
   (K)   Any person engaged in land-disturbing activity who fails to file a
plan in accordance with this chapter, or who conducts a land-disturbing
activity except in accordance with provisions of an approved plan, shall be
deemed in violation of this chapter.
   (L)   Any person engaged in land-disturbing activity that is required by
this chapter to file an erosion and sedimentation control plan shall pay a plan
review fee to the Stormwater Division in an amount to be determined by the City
Council.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.40 [RESERVED].
§ 151.41 APPEALS.
   (A)   Except as provided in §
151.27(B) of this chapter the appeal of a disapproval or approval with
modifications of a plan shall be governed by the following provisions:
      (1)   The disapproval or modification of any proposed erosion and
sedimentation control plan by the Stormwater Division shall entitle the person
submitting the plan to a public hearing if such person submits written demand
for a hearing within 15 days after receipt of written notice of disapproval or
modifications.
      (2)   Hearings held pursuant to this section shall be conducted by the
Board of Adjustment, within 30 days after the date of the appeal or request for
a hearing.
      (3)   The Board of Adjustment will render its final decision on any
erosion and sedimentation control plan following completion of the hearings.
      (4)   If the Board of Adjustment upholds the disapproval or modification
of a proposed soil erosion and sedimentation control plan following the
hearing, the person submitting the plan shall then be entitled to appeal the
local government’s decision to the North Carolina Sedimentation Control
Commission as provided in G.S. § 113A-61(c) and Title 15A NCAC 4B.0018(d).
   (B)   In the event that an erosion and sedimentation control plan is
disapproved pursuant to §
151.27(I) of this chapter, the Stormwater Division shall notify the applicant
in writing, within ten days, as to the specific reasons the plan was
disapproved. The applicant may appeal the Department’s disapproval of the plan
pursuant to §
151.27(I) directly to the North Carolina Sediment Control Commission.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013; Ord. 23-22, passed 8-29-2023)
§ 151.42 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   Agents, officials, or other qualified persons authorized by the city
will periodically inspect land-disturbing activities to ensure compliance with
the Act, this chapter, or rules or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this
chapter, and to determine whether the measures required in the plan are
effective in controlling erosion and sediment resulting from land-disturbing
activity. Notice of the right to inspect shall be included in the certificate
of approval of each erosion and sedimentation control plan. A list of
authorized agents and officials shall be provided or listed at the Stormwater
Division.
   (B)   No person shall willfully resist, delay, or obstruct an authorized
representative, employee, or agent of the city while that person is inspecting
or attempting to inspect a land-disturbing activity under this section.
   (C)   If, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activity
has failed to comply with the Act, this chapter, or rules, or orders adopted or
issued pursuant to this chapter, a notice of violation shall immediately be
served upon that person.
      (1)   The notice may be served by any means under G.S. § 1A-1, Rule 4 or
its successors.
      (2)   The notice shall specify a date, by which the person must comply
with the Act, this chapter, or rules, or orders adopted pursuant to this
chapter, and inform the person of the actions that need to be taken to comply
with the Act, this chapter, or rules or orders adopted pursuant to this
chapter. Any person who fails to comply in the time specified is subject to
additional civil and criminal actions. Penalties for a continuing violation are
provided in this chapter.
   (D)   The Stormwater Department shall have the power to conduct such
investigation as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as
prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times
upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigating and
inspecting the sites of any land-disturbing activity.
   (E)   The Stormwater Department shall also have the power to require written
statements, or the filing of reports under oath, with respect to pertinent
questions relating to land-disturbing activity.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.43 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   (A)   Whenever the Environmental Review Board has reasonable cause to
believe that any person is violating or threatening to violate this chapter or
any rule or order adopted or issued pursuant to this chapter, or any term,
condition, or provision of an approved erosion and sedimentation control plan,
it may, either before or after the institution of any other action or
proceeding authorized by this chapter, institute a civil action in the name of
the county, for injunctive relief to restrain the threatened violation. The
action will be brought in the Superior Court of Cleveland County, North
Carolina.
   (B)   Upon determination by a court that an alleged violation is occurring
or is threatened, the court shall enter any order or judgment that is necessary
to abate the violation, to ensure that restoration is performed, or to prevent
the threatened violation. The institution of an action for injunctive relief
under this section shall not relieve any party to the proceedings from any
civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations of this chapter.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.44 RESTORATION OF AREAS AFFECTED BY FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   The Environmental Review Board may require a person who engaged in a land-
disturbing activity and failed to retain sediment generated by the activity, as
required by G.S. § 113A-57(3), to restore the waters and the land affected by
the failure so as to minimize the detrimental effects of the resulting
pollution by sedimentation. This authority is in addition to any other civil or
criminal penalty or injunctive relief authorized under this chapter.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of the Act, this
chapter, or rules or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this chapter, or who
initiates or continues a land-disturbing activity for which an erosion and
sedimentation control plan is required, except in accordance with the terms,
conditions, and provisions of an approved plan, is subject to a civil penalty.
The maximum civil penalty for a violation is $5,000. The maximum civil penalty
for a violation of a stop work order is $5,000. A civil penalty may be assessed
from the date of the violation. Each day of continuing violation shall
constitute a separate violation.
      (2)   The Kings Mountain Stormwater Department shall determine the amount
of the civil penalty to be assessed under this division as set forth in the
Guidelines for Assessing Civil Penalties for Violations of Kings Mountain's
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance. The Stormwater Division shall
notify the person who is assessed the civil penalty of the amount of the
penalty and the reason for assessing the penalty. In determining the amount of
the penalty the Stormwater Division shall consider the degree and extent of
harm caused by the damage, the cost of rectifying the damage, the amount of
money the violator saved by noncompliance, whether the violation was committed
willfully, and the prior record of the violator in complying or failing to
comply with this chapter. The notice of assessment shall be served by any means
authorized under G.S. § 1 A-l, Rule 4, and shall direct the violator to either
pay the assessment or contest the assessment, within 30 days after receipt of
the notice of assessment, by written demand for a hearing. A hearing on a civil
penalty shall be conducted by the Environmental Review Board within 30 days
after the date of the written demand for the hearing. The Environmental Review
Board shall render its final decision on the civil penalty at the conclusion of
the hearing. Appeal from the final decision of the Environmental Review Board
shall be to the Superior Court of Cleveland County, North Carolina.
      (3)   If payment is not received within 30 days after demand for payment
is made, the Environmental Review Board may institute a civil action to recover
the amount of the assessment. The civil action may be brought in Superior Court
of the county where the violation occurred, or the violator's residence or
principal place of business is located. Such civil actions must be filed within
three years of the date the assessment was due. An assessment that is not
contested is due when the violator is served with a notice of assessment. An
assessment that is contested is due at the conclusion of the administrative and
judicial review of the assessment.
      (4)   Civil penalties collected pursuant to this chapter shall be
credited to the Civil Penalty and Forfeiture Fund.
   (B)   Final certificate of occupancy with regard to the development of any
tract that is subject to this chapter, the Code Enforcement Department shall
not issue a certificate of occupancy where any of the following conditions
exist:
      (1)   There is a violation of this chapter with respect to the tract.
      (2)   If there remains due and payable to Kings Mountain civil penalties
that have been levied against the person conducting the land-disturbing
activity for violation(s) of this chapter. If a penalty is under appeal, they
may require the amount of the fine, and any other amount that the person would
be required to pay under this chapter if the person loses the appeal, be placed
in a refundable account for surety prior to issuing the certificate of
occupancy.
      (3)   The requirements of the plan have not been completed and the
building for which a certificate of occupancy is requested is the only building
then under construction on the tract.
      (4)   On the tract which includes multiple buildings on a single parcel,
the requirements of the plan have not been completed and the building for which
a certificate of occupancy is requested is the last building then under
construction on the tract.
      (5)   On a tract which includes multiple parcels created pursuant to the
applicable subdivision regulations, the requirements of the plan have not been
completed with respect to the parcel for which the certificate of occupancy is
requested.
      (6)   Any person conducting land-disturbing activities that has been
denied a certificate of occupancy under the provisions in this chapter may make
a written appeal of the decision to the Environmental Review Board.
   (C)   Criminal penalties. Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any
provision of this chapter, or rule or order adopted or issued pursuant to this
chapter, or who willfully initiates or continues a land-disturbing activity for
which an erosion and sedimentation control plan is required except in
accordance with the terms, conditions, and provisions of an approved plan,
shall be guilty of a Class 2 Misdemeanor which may include a fine not to exceed
$5,000.
   (D)   Stop work orders. Whenever a building, sign, or structure, or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered or repaired in violation
of this chapter, the Enforcement Officer may order the work to be immediately
stopped. The stop order shall be in writing and directed to the owner,
occupant, or person doing the work. The stop order shall state the specific
work to be stopped, the specific reasons for the stoppage, and the conditions
under which the work may be resumed. Such action shall be in accordance with
G.S.§ 160A-421, or the North Carolina Building Code.
(Ord. 13-34, passed 11-26-2013)
CHAPTER 152: HOUSING CODE; NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDING MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
Housing Code
   
152.01   Code adopted
   
152.02   Definitions
   
152.03   Findings of fact
   
152.04   Inspector; duties, powers and the like
   
152.05   Notice to repair and the like; hearing
   
152.06   Order to repair and the like; contents; failure to comply
   
152.07   Cost of abatement declared tax lien
   
152.08   Sale of materials
   
152.09   Failure to serve notice; effect
   
152.10   Appeal
   
152.11   Declaration of nuisance
   
152.12   Service of process, complaints
   
152.13   Standards for determining unfitness
   
152.14   Regulations for vacated and closed dwellings
   
152.15   Civil penalty
Non-residential Building Maintenance Code
   
152.20   Code adopted
   
152.21   Definitions
   
152.22   Findings of fact
   
152.23   Intent
   
152.24   Inspector; duties, powers and the like
   
152.25   Notice to repair and the like; hearing
   
152.26   Order to repair and the like; contents; failure to comply
   
152.27   Cost of abatement declared tax lien
   
152.28   Sale of materials
   
152.29   Failure to serve notice; effect
   
152.30   Appeal
   
152.31   Declaration of nuisance
   
152.32   Service of process, complaints
   
152.33   Standards and responsibilities
   
152.34   Regulations for vacated and closed buildings
   
152.35   Civil penalty
HOUSING CODE
§ 152.01 CODE ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to the provisions of G.S. §§ 160D-1201 through 160D-1212, and as
provided generally in §
150.01, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk, is hereby
adopted as the housing code of the city; provided that, if any provision,
standard or requirement of this chapter is found to be in conflict with any
other section of this chapter or any provision of any other city ordinance, the
provision which establishes the higher standard or more stringent requirement
for the promotion and protection of the health and safety of the residents of
the city shall prevail.
(Prior Code, § 4-150) (Ord. 98-06, passed 4-28-1998; Ord. 01-31, passed 5-29-
2001; Ord. 19-22, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 21-45, passed 12-14-2021; Ord. 24-50,
passed 12-10-2024)
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Any structure or part thereof not a dwelling.
   DWELLING. Any structure or part thereof, which is used or intended to be
used for human habitation, except that it does not include any recreational
vehicle or camper.
   HABITABLE ROOM. A room or space used for living, sleeping, eating or cooking
but does not include bathrooms, laundry rooms, halls, closets and storage
spaces.
   INSPECTOR. The Code Enforcement Officer or Building Inspector of the city.
   OCCUPANT. Any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or having actual
possession of a dwelling.
   OWNER. The holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgage, judgement
and lien holder of record.
   PARTIES OF INTEREST. All persons who have interests of record in a dwelling.
   UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. Means that conditions exist in a dwelling which
violate or do not comply with one or more of the minimum standards established
by this chapter.
   VACATED AND CLOSED. A dwelling which lacks the habitual presence of persons
who have a legal right to be on the premises or at which substantially all
occupancy has ceased and one or more windows or exterior doors have been
boarded up to prevent ingress of the structure.
(Prior Code, § 4-151) (Ord. 19-22, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-
2024)
Statutory reference:
   Similar definitions, see G.S. § 160A-442
§ 152.03 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   It is found as a fact that there exists within the planning and development
regulation jurisdiction of the city dwellings which are unfit for human
habitation due to dilapidation, defects increasing hazards of fire, accident or
other calamities, lack of ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, and due to
other conditions rendering the dwelling unsafe, unsanitary, dangerous or
detrimental to the health, safety or morals, or otherwise detrimental to the
welfare of the residents of the planning and development regulation
jurisdiction of the city.
(Prior Code, § 4-152) (Ord. 19-22, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-
2024)
§ 152.04 INSPECTOR; DUTIES, POWERS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   The Inspector shall have the powers as may be necessary, lawful or
convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this
chapter, including the following powers and duties in addition to others herein
granted:
      (1)   To investigate and examine dwellings and building conditions in
order to determine which dwellings therein are unfit for human habitation,
which dwellings and buildings are dangerous, and for the purpose of carrying
out the objectives of this chapter with respect to the repair, closing or
demolition of such dwellings and buildings;
      (2)   To enter upon and within premises, dwellings and buildings for the
purpose of making examinations and inspections; provided that, the entry shall
be lawful and made in a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to
the persons in possession;
      (3)   To obtain, serve, and execute administrative inspection warrants;
      (4)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
      (5)   To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this
chapter and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the standards as
set forth in §
152.13; and
      (6)   To appoint and fix the duties of the officers, agents and employees
as deemed necessary to assist in carrying out the provisions of this chapter,
and to delegate functions and powers to such officers, agents and employees.
(Prior Code, § 4-153)
   (B)   For the purpose of making inspections, the Inspector is hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings,
buildings and the premises associated therewith. The owner or occupant of every
dwelling and building or the person in charge thereof shall give the Inspector
free access to such dwelling and building and its premises at all reasonable
times for the purposes of such inspection, examination and survey.
(Ord. 19-22, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Exercise of police power authorized, see G.S. § 160A-441
§ 152.05 NOTICE TO REPAIR AND THE LIKE; HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever a petition is filed with the Inspector by a public authority
or by at least five residents of the jurisdiction charging that any dwelling is
unfit for human habitation; or whenever it appears to the Inspector, on the
Inspector's own motion, that any dwelling is unfit for human habitation; the
Inspector shall, if the Inspectors preliminary investigation discloses a basis
for the charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties in
interest in the dwelling a complaint stating the charges and containing a
notice that a hearing will be held before the Inspector at a place within the
planning and development regulation jurisdiction in which the property is
located therein fixed not less than ten days, nor more than 30 days, after the
service of the complaint.
   (B)   The owner or parties in interest shall be given the right to file an
answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. The rules of evidence
prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings
before the Inspector.
(Prior Code, § 4-156) (Ord. 19-22, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-
2024)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see G.S. § 160A-443(2)
§ 152.06 ORDER TO REPAIR AND THE LIKE; CONTENTS; FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   If after the notice and hearing, the Inspector determines that the
dwelling under consideration is unfit for human habitation, the Inspector shall
state in writing the Inspector's findings of fact in support of the
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an
order:
      (1)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be
made at a cost of not more than 50% of the current value of the dwelling, the
order shall require the owner, within the time specified therein, to repair,
alter or improve the dwelling so as to render it fit for human habitation; or
      (2)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling cannot be
made at a cost equal to or less than 50% of the current value of the dwelling,
the order shall require the owner, within the time specified, to repair, alter
or improve the dwelling so as to render it fit for human habitation or demolish
and remove the dwelling.
      (3)   In emergency cases where it reasonably appears there is immediate
danger to life or safety of any person or to the safety of other property,
unless a dwelling or building as herein described is immediately repaired or
demolished, the Inspector shall cause immediate repair or demolition of such
dwelling or building and the cost of such repair or demolition shall be
recovered and collected as is provided in section §
152.07.
      (4)   If the Inspector determines that the continued occupancy of the
dwelling during the time allowed for repairs, alterations, or improvements will
present a significant threat to life or safety of any person or to the safety
of other property, considering the current state of the property; the Inspector
may order the dwelling to be vacated and cause to be posted on the main
entrance thereof a placard with the following words: "THIS DWELLING IS UNFIT
FOR HUMAN HABITATION; THE USE OR OCCUPATION OF THIS DWELLING FOR HUMAN
HABITATION IS PROHIBITED AND UNLAWFUL." Occupation of a dwelling so posted
shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor.
   (B)   (1)   If the owner of any dwelling declared to be unfit for human
habitation shall fail to comply with the order described in division (A)(l)
above, the Inspector may cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved
or to be vacated and closed. In the event, the Inspector may cause to be posted
on the main entrance thereof a placard with the following words, "THIS DWELLING
IS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION; THE USE OR OCCUPATION OF THIS DWELLING FOR HUMAN
HABITATION IS PROHIBITED AND UNLAWFUL." Occupation of a dwelling so posted
shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor.
      (2)   If the owner fails to comply with the order described in division
(A)(2) above, the Inspector may cause the dwelling to be demolished and
removed. The duties of the Inspector set forth in this division, shall not be
exercised until the governing body shall have by ordinance ordered the
Inspector to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this chapter with respect to
the particular property or properties which the Inspector shall have found to
be unfit for human habitation and which property or properties shall be
described in the ordinance. No ordinance shall be adopted to require demolition
of a dwelling until the owner has first been given a reasonable opportunity to
bring it into conformity with this chapter. The ordinance shall be recorded in
the office of the County Register of Deeds in the county in which the land is
situated and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in the grantor
index.
   (C)   If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a dwelling or
building, the Inspector may file a civil action in the name of the city to
remove such occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling or building shall be in
the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint
naming as defendant any person occupying such dwelling or building.
(Prior Code, § 4-158) (Ord. 19-22, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-
2024)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see G.S. § 160A-443(5)
§ 152.07 COST OF ABATEMENT DECLARED TAX LIEN.
   The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or of
vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the Inspector shall be a lien
against the real property upon which the cost was incurred; and the lien shall
be recorded in the office of Clerk of the Superior Court of the county. The
cost shall also be placed upon the city's tax books against the property and
may be collected and the lien may be foreclosed in the same manner as taxes and
tax liens are collected and foreclosed or by suit as the city may determine.
(Prior Code, § 4-159) (Ord. 19-22, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-
2024)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see G.S. § 160A-443(3) through (5)
§ 152.08 SALE OF MATERIALS.
   If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the Inspector, the Inspector
shall sell the materials of the dwelling and any personal property, fixture or
appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling, and shall credit the
proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or demolition. Any balance
remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court of the county by the
Inspector, shall be secured in a manner as may be directed by the court, and
shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit, in any way, the
power of the municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
removal or abatement by summary proceedings, or otherwise.
(Prior Code, § 4-160) (Ord. 19-22, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-
2024)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see G.S. § 160A-443(6)
§ 152.09 FAILURE TO SERVE NOTICE; EFFECT.
   Willful failure on the part of any owner or party in interest to receive or
have served upon the person any complaint, notice or order herein provided for
shall not affect or invalidate the proceedings with respect to any owner or
party in interest or any other person.
(Prior Code, § 4-161) (Ord. 19-22, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-
2024)
§ 152.10 APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Inspector or a decision
rendered by the governing body may petition the Superior Court for an
injunction restraining the Inspector from carrying out the order or decision
and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining
the Inspector pending a final disposition of the cause. The petition shall be
filed within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision.
Hearing shall be had by the court on a petition within 20 days, and shall be
given preference over other matters on the court's calendar. The court shall
hear and determine the issue raised and shall enter the final order or decree
as law and justice may require. It shall not be necessary to file bond in any
amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this section.
(Prior Code, § 4-162) (Ord. 19-22, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-
2024)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see G.S. § 160A-446(f)
§ 152.11 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   If any order issued and served in accordance with this chapter is not
complied within the time specified therein, the dwelling with respect to which
the order has been issued is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and it
shall be unlawful for any person who has knowledge of the issuance of the order
to occupy as a human habitation, or use the dwelling, or any part thereof, or
to suffer or permit same, or any part thereof, to be occupied as a human
habitation or used therefor. Any person lawfully convicted of violating this
chapter or failing to comply therewith shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
each day that any violation or failure to comply continues or is allowed to
continue shall constitute and be a separate and distinct offense.
(Prior Code, § 4-163) (Ord. 19-22, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-
2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 152.12 SERVICE OF PROCESS, COMPLAINTS.
   Complaints, notices or orders issued by the Inspector pursuant hereto shall
be served upon persons either personally or certified mail. If the identities
of any owners or the whereabouts of any persons are unknown and cannot be
ascertained by the Inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the
Inspector shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of the
complaint, notice or order upon the person may be made by publishing at least
once in a newspaper having general circulation in the jurisdiction, service
being deemed complete seven days after the date of last publication. A copy of
any notice, complaint or order served by publication shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the notice, complaint or order on
or before the date of the last publication. A copy of the complaint or order
may also be filed by the Inspector in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court
of the county, as in cases of lis pendens notice, as provided by law.
(Prior Code, § 4-164) (Ord. 19-22, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-
2024)
Statutory reference:
   Similar state law, see G.S. § 160A-445
§ 152.13 STANDARDS FOR DETERMINING UNFITNESS.
   The Inspector shall determine that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation
if the Inspector finds that conditions exist in a dwelling which violate or do
not comply with one or more of the following:
   (A)   Walls, sill plates, joist, rafters or other structural members shall
not list, lean or buckle, and shall not be rotted, deteriorated, or damaged and
shall not have holes or cracks which might admit rodents;
   (B)   Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and strength to
be reasonably safe for the purpose used;
   (C)   Foundation walls, piers or other foundation supports shall be
maintained in such condition that they will not fail or collapse;
   (D)   Steps, landings, railings, guardrails, porches or other parts or
appurtenances shall be maintained in such condition that they will not fail or
collapse;
   (E)   The roof, flashings, exterior walls, foundation walls, floors, and all
doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and maintained so
as to be weathertight, watertight and rodent proof;
   (F)   All exterior elements including siding, fascia, eaves, soffits, vent
screenings, gutters and downspouts shall be complete, free from rot and decay,
and properly installed;
   (G)   There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are defective,
deteriorated or in danger of falling;
   (H)   Interior walls, floors and ceilings of all rooms, closets and hallways
shall be finished with suitable materials, which will, by use of reasonable
household methods promote sanitation and cleanliness;
   (I)   Each dwelling shall be properly connected to a potable water supply
and to a public sewer or other approved sewage disposal system;
   (J)   Each dwelling shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory,
tub or shower, water closet and water heater;
   (K)   Hot and cold water shall be provided to the kitchen sink, tubs,
showers and lavatories;
   (L)   All plumbing fixtures and faucets shall be maintained in a state of
good repair and in good working condition;
   (M)   All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling.
The bathroom shall be located in a room that affords privacy to the user;
   (N)   Plumbing drains, vents and sewage piping shall be maintained in proper
sanitary working condition;
   (O)   Water supply piping shall be adequately protected from freezing;
   (P)   Extension cords shall not be a substitute for permanent wiring.
Extension cords shall not be affixed to structures, extended through walls,
ceilings or floors, or under doors or floor coverings, nor shall such cords be
subject to environmental damage or physical impact. Extension cords shall be
used only with portable appliances;
   (Q)   Laundry rooms and each bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle
outlet;
   (R)   Each bedroom, bathroom and kitchen shall contain a ceiling or wall
mounted light fixture controlled by a wall switch;
   (S)   Hallways, laundry rooms and similar rooms shall contain a ceiling or
wall mounted light fixture controlled by either a wall switch or a pull chain;
   (T)   Every electrical outlet and fixture, and all electrical wiring and
equipment shall be installed, maintained and connected to an approved source of
electric power in accordance with the National Electrical Code;
   (U)   Every dwelling shall a safe and properly installed means of providing
heat to maintain a minimum temperature of 68 degrees Fahrenheit in all
habitable rooms and bathrooms during ordinary winter days;
   (V)   All heating equipment, flue piping, duct, chimney liners, vents and
fuel piping shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe and good
working condition;
   (W)   Unvented gas appliances are prohibited in bedrooms;
   (X)   Every habitable room shall have a window facing directly to the
outdoors with a total openable area of window(s) to equal 8% or more of the
floor area of the room served, unless mechanical means of ventilation are
provided;
   (Y)   Each bathroom shall have an operable window or be provided with an
approved mechanical exhaust system;
   (Z)   Clothes dryer exhaust duct shall terminate independently to the
exterior;
   (AA)   Attics and crawl spaces shall be properly ventilated;
   (BB)   Minimum ceiling height in habitable rooms and hallways shall be seven
feet. All other rooms and spaces shall have a minimum ceiling height of six
feet, eight inches. Rooms with sloped ceilings shall have a minimum ceiling
height of seven feet for at least 50% of the required floor area of that room;
   (CC)   All required egress doors and windows shall be unobstructed and
readily openable from the inside;
   (DD)   Each bedroom shall contain an egress door with direct access to the
exterior or an emergency escape egress window in accordance with the applicable
building code;
   (EE)   Smoke detectors and carbon monoxide detectors shall be in proper
working condition and located in accordance with the applicable building code;
   (FF)   Exterior surfaces shall be resistant to deterioration or treated with
a protective coating of paint, stain or other approved covering material and
maintained in good repair to prevent deterioration;
   (GG)   Skirting material shall be maintained free from broken or missing
sections and securely attached to the structure and properly sized from the
ground to the lower outside perimeter of the structure;
   (HH)   All windows opening to the outside shall be adequately screened
unless the room is served by an approved ventilating system. Screens shall not
be torn and shall fit the window opening snugly. Screens shall not be
permanently attached to the window frame or sash;
   (II)   All windows and doors shall be maintained in proper working condition
and free of broken or missing panes of glass. Exterior doors and window
openings shall not be boarded up unless otherwise approved by the Inspector.
Broken or missing panes shall be replaced with glass;
   (JJ)   Crawl spaces shall be kept free from trash and debris;
   (KK)   Yards shall be graded so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant
water and to allow positive drainage away from the foundation of the dwelling;
   (LL)   Extermination of insects, rodents and other pests within the dwelling
is the responsibility of the owner and shall be conducted as needed; and/or
   (MM)   Detached garages, storage buildings and all other accessory
structures to the dwelling shall be maintained and kept in good repair and
sound structural condition.
(Prior Code, § 4-165) (Ord. 19-22, passed 12-17-2019; Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-
2024)
Statutory reference:
   Determination of standards, see G.S. § 160A-444
§ 152.14 REGULATIONS FOR VACATED AND CLOSED DWELLINGS.
   (A)   If a dwelling has been vacated and closed for a period of one year
after an Inspector has caused the dwelling to be vacated and closed as
described in § 152.06(B)(l), the Inspector may find that the owner has
abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter, or improve the dwelling in
order to render it fit for human habitation and that the continuation of the
dwelling in its vacated and closed status would be detrimental to the health,
safety, and welfare of the community, threat to children and vagrants, would
attract persons intent on criminal activities, would cause or contribute to
blight and the deterioration of property values in the area, or would render
unavailable property and a dwelling that might otherwise have been made
available to ease the persistent shortage of decent and affordable housing in
the area, then in such circumstances, the governing body may, after the
expiration of such one year period, enact an ordinance and serve such ordinance
on the owner, setting forth the following:
      (1)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it
fit for human habitation can be made at a cost of not more than 50% of the
current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the owner
either repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days.
      (2)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it
fit for human habitation cannot be made at a cost equal to or less than 50% of
the current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the owner to
demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days.
   (B)   If a property owner causes a dwelling to be vacated and closed at
their own discretion, the following provisions shall apply:
      (1)   Vacated and closed dwellings shall be added to a vacated and closed
inventory, maintained by the Inspections and Codes Department.
         (a)   The owner shall give notice to the Inspections and Codes
Department within 15 days after causing a dwelling to be vacated and closed.
         (b)   If a dwelling has been vacated and closed for a period exceeding
15 days and an owner has failed to notify the Inspections and Codes Department,
the Inspector shall cause the dwelling to be added to the vacated and closed
building inventory. The Inspector shall serve a written notice to the owner
stating that the dwelling has been added to the vacated and closed building
inventory and that the provisions of division (B)(2) and divisions (B)(3) below
will be enforced.
         (c)   Any owner who has vacated and closed a dwelling prior to the
effective date of this chapter shall comply with the regulations contained
herein within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter. If after 30
days, an owner has failed to notify the Inspections and Codes Department and
have their property added to the vacated and closed building inventory, the
Inspector shall cause the dwelling to be added to the vacated and closed
building inventory. The Inspector shall serve a written notice to the owner
stating that the dwelling has been added to the vacated and closed building
inventory and that the provisions of divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) below will be
enforced.
      (2)   The materials and methods used for vacating and closing the
dwelling shall be:
         (a)   Plywood or (OSB) oriented strand board cut to tightly fit over
the window and door openings, flush with the outside of the trim molding;
         (b)   Securely attach plywood or (OSB) oriented strand board to the
frame of the opening with screws placed 12 inches on center around the
perimeter of the plywood or oriented strand board; and
         (c)   Plywood or (OSB) oriented strand boards shall be painted black
using an exterior grade paint.
      (3)   Any time after six months from the date that the dwelling has been
added to the vacated and closed building inventory the Inspector determines
that the owner or agent thereof is not actively working, with visible progress
being made to repair, alter, improve or demolish the dwelling, or a dwelling
has been closed and vacated for a period greater than one year, the Inspector
may find that the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter,
improve or demolish the dwelling. In the event, the Inspector shall issue and
cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order requiring the owner, within
the time specified therein, to remove any material which has been placed over
window and exterior door openings.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 152.15 CIVIL PENALTY.
   Inspectors are empowered to issue citations to the owner of any property in
violation of this subchapter. A civil penalty of $50 will be charged for each
day a violation continues to exist after the time specified by the Inspector on
an order that has expired and will continue to accumulate until compliance has
occurred up to a maximum penalty of $500. The civil penalty shall be paid
within 30 days after the issue date of a statement of charges. The city may
take one of the following courses of action to collect an unpaid civil penalty:
   (A)   The city may institute a civil action in the nature of a debt in the
appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for the collection of the
civil penalty, attorney fees, and other such relief as provided in G.S. 160A-
175.
   (B)   A lien may be levied against the property owner for the cost of the
citation fee as provided by the authority of the city.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
NON-RESIDENTIAL BUILDING MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 152.20 CODE ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to the provisions of G.S. §§ 1600-1118 through 1600-1125, and as
provided generally in §
150.01, one copy of which is on file in the office of the City Clerk, is hereby
adopted as the Non-residential Building Maintenance Code of the city; provided
that, if any provision, standard or requirement of this subchapter is found to
be in conflict with any other section of this chapter or any provision of any
other city ordinance, the provision which establishes the higher standard or
more stringent requirement for the promotion and protection of public health,
safety or general welfare shall prevail.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 152.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply to
this subchapter unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
   INSPECTOR. The Code Enforcement Officer or Building Inspector of the city.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who is a tenant or has actual possession of a building
or structure.
   OWNER. The holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgage, judgement
and lien holder of record.
   PARTIES IN INTEREST. All individuals, associations, and corporations who
have interest of record in a non-residential building or structure and any who
are in possession thereof.
   STRUCTURE. Anything which is constructed or placed upon a property which is
supported by the ground or which is supported by any other structure.
   VACANT INDUSTRIAL WAREHOUSE. Any building or structure that was previously
used for the storage of goods or equipment in connection with manufacturing
processes, that has not been used for that purpose for at least one year, and
that has not been converted to another use.
   VACANT MANUFACTURING FACILITY. Any building previously used for the lawful
production or manufacturing of goods, which has not been used for that purpose
for at least one year, and has not been converted to another use.
   VACATED AND CLOSED. A building which lacks the habitual presence of persons
who have a legal right to be on the premises or at which substantially all
occupancy has ceased and one or more windows or exterior doors have been
boarded up to prevent ingress of the building.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 152.22 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   It is found as a fact that there are or may exist non-residential buildings
and structures that are detrimental to the public health, safety, morals, and
welfare as a result of their failure to meet the standards of maintenance,
sanitation, or safety as set forth herein.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 152.23 INTENT.
   The intent of this chapter is to establish minimum standards of maintenance,
sanitation, and safety for non-residential buildings and structures, in order
to address conditions that are or may be detrimental to the public health,
safety, morals, and welfare. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all
buildings and structures or parts thereof, which are used or intended to be
used for non-residential purposes within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 152.24 INSPECTOR; DUTIES, POWERS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   The Inspector shall have the powers as may be necessary, lawful or
convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this
chapter, including the following powers and duties in addition to others herein
granted:
      (1)   To investigate and examine non-residential buildings and structures
in order to determine whether they have been properly maintained in compliance
with the minimum standards as set forth in §
152.33 and for the purpose of carrying out the objectives of this subchapter
with respect to the repair, closing or demolition of such buildings and
structures;
      (2)   To enter upon and within premises, buildings, and structures for
the purpose of making examinations and inspections; provided that, the entry
shall be lawful and made in a manner as to cause the least possible
inconvenience to the persons in possession;
      (3)   To obtain, serve, and execute administrative inspection warrants;
      (4)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
      (5)   To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this
subchapter and an inventory of those buildings and structures that do not meet
the standards as set forth in §
152.33; and
      (6)   To appoint and fix the duties of the officers, agents and employees
as deemed necessary to assist in carrying out the provisions of this chapter,
and to delegate functions and powers to such officers, agents and employees.
   (B)   For the purpose of making inspections, the Inspector is hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all buildings,
structures and the premises associated therewith. The owner or occupant of
every building or structure or the person in charge thereof shall give the
Inspector free access to such building or structure and its premises at all
reasonable times for the purposes of such inspection, examination and survey.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 152.25 NOTICE TO REPAIR AND THE LIKE; HEARING.
   (A)   Whenever a petition is filed with the Inspector by a public authority
or by at least five residents of the city or whenever it appears to the
Inspector, on the Inspector's own motion, that any non-residential building or
structure has not been properly maintained and that the safety or health of its
occupants or general public is jeopardized due to failure of the property to
meet the minimum standards as set forth in §
152.33, the Inspector shall, if the Inspectors preliminary investigation
discloses a basis for the charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner
of and parties in interest in the non-residential building or structure a
complaint stating the charges and containing a notice that a hearing will be
held before the Inspector at a place within the city in which the property is
located therein fixed not less than ten days, nor more than 30 days, after the
service of the complaint.
   (B)   The owner or parties in interest shall be given the right to file an
answer to the complaint and to appear in person or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. The rules of evidence
prevailing in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings
before the Inspector.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 152.26 ORDER TO REPAIR AND THE LIKE; CONTENTS; FAILURE TO COMPLY.
   (A)   If after the notice and hearing, the Inspector determines that the
building or structure under consideration does not meet one or more of the
minimum standards as set forth in §
152.33, the Inspector shall state in writing the Inspector's findings of fact
in support of the determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the
owner thereof an order:
      (1)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the building or
structure can be made at a cost of not more than 50% of the current value of
the building or structure, the order shall require the owner, within the time
specified therein, to repair, alter or improve the building or structure to
bring it into compliance with the minimum standards of this chapter; or
      (2)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the building or
structure cannot be made at a cost equal to or less than 50% of the current
value of the building or structure, the order shall require the owner, within
the time specified, to repair, alter or improve the building or structure to
bring it into compliance with the minimum standards of this chapter or demolish
and remove the building or structure.
      (3)   An order may not require repairs, alterations, or improvements to
be made to vacant manufacturing facilities or vacant industrial warehouse
facilities to preserve the original use. The order may require such building or
structure to be vacated and closed, but repairs may be required only when
necessary to maintain structural integrity or to abate a health or safety
hazard that cannot be remedied by ordering the building or structure closed for
any use.
      (4)   In emergency cases where it reasonably appears there is immediate
danger to life or safety of any person or to the safety of other property,
unless a non-residential building or structure as herein described is
immediately repaired or demolished, the Inspector shall cause immediate repair
or demolition of such building or structure and the cost of such repair or
demolition shall be recovered and collected as is provided in §
152.27.
      (5)   If the Inspector determines that the continued use or occupancy of
a non-residential building during the time allowed for repairs, alterations, or
improvements will present a significant threat to life or safety of any person
or to the safety of other property, considering the current state of the
property; the Inspector may order the building to be vacated and cause to be
posted on the main entrance thereof a placard with the following words, "THIS
BUILDING IS UNFIT FOR ANY USE; THE USE OR OCCUPATION OF THIS BUILDING FOR ANY
PURPOSE IS PROHIBITED AND UNLAWFUL." Use or occupation of a building so posted
shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor.
   (B)   (1)   If the owner of any building or structure declared to be in
violation of this chapter shall fail to comply with the order described in
division (A)(l) above, the Inspector may cause the building or structure to be
repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed.
      (2)   If the owner fails to comply with the order described in division
(A)(2) above, the Inspector may cause the building or structure to be
demolished and removed. The duties of the Inspector set forth in this division,
shall not be exercised until the governing body shall have by ordinance ordered
the Inspector to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this chapter with respect
to the particular property or properties which the Inspector shall have found
to be in violation of this chapter and which property or properties shall be
described in the ordinance. No ordinance shall be adopted to require demolition
of a building or structure until the owner has first been given a reasonable
opportunity to bring it into conformity with this chapter. The ordinance shall
be recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds in the county in
which the land is situated and shall be indexed in the name of the property
owner in the grantor index.
   (C)   If any person fails to comply with an order to vacate a building, the
Inspector may file a civil action in the name of the city to remove such
person. The action to vacate the building shall be in the nature of summary
ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as parties-
defendant any person occupying such building.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 152.27 COST OF ABATEMENT DECLARED TAX LIEN.
   The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations or improvements, or of
vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the Inspector shall be a lien
against the real property upon which the cost was incurred; and the lien shall
be recorded in the office of Clerk of the Superior Court of the county. The
cost shall also be placed upon the city's tax books against the property and
may be collected and the lien may be foreclosed in the same manner as taxes and
tax liens are collected and foreclosed or by suit as the city may determine.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 152.28 SALE OF MATERIALS.
   If the building or structure is removed or demolished by the Inspector, the
Inspector shall sell the materials of the building or structure and any
personal property, fixture or appurtenances found in or attached to such, and
shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or
demolition. Any balance remaining shall be deposited in the Superior Court of
the county by the Inspector, shall be secured in a manner as may be directed by
the court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the persons found to be
entitled thereto. Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or
limit, in any way, the power of the municipality to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings, or
otherwise.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 152.29 FAILURE TO SERVE NOTICE; EFFECT.
   Willful failure on the part of any owner or party in interest to receive or
have served upon the person any complaint, notice or order herein provided for
shall not affect or invalidate the proceedings with respect to any owner or
party in interest or any other person.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 152.30 APPEAL.
   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the Inspector or a decision
rendered by the governing body may petition the Superior Court for an
injunction restraining the Inspector from carrying out the order or decision
and the court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining
the Inspector pending a final disposition of the cause. The petition shall be
filed within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision.
Hearing shall be had by the court on a petition within 20 days and shall be
given preference over other matters on the court's calendar. The court shall
hear and determine the issue raised and shall enter the final order or decree
as law and justice may require. It shall not be necessary to file bond in any
amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this section.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 152.31 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
   If any order issued and served in accordance with this chapter is not
complied within the time specified therein, the building or structure with
respect to which the order has been issued is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person who has knowledge of the
issuance of the order to use or occupy the building or structure, or any part
thereof, or to suffer or permit same, or any part thereof, to be occupied or
used therefor. Any person lawfully convicted of violating this chapter or
failing to comply therewith shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and each day that
any violation or failure to comply continues or is allowed to continue shall
constitute and be a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 152.32 SERVICE OF PROCESS, COMPLAINTS.
   Complaints, notices or orders issued by the Inspector pursuant hereto shall
be served upon persons either personally or by certified mail. If the
identities of any owners or the whereabouts of any persons are unknown and
cannot be ascertained by the Inspector in the exercise of reasonable diligence,
the Inspector shall make an affidavit to that effect, then the service of the
complaint, notice or order upon the person may be made by publishing at least
once in a newspaper having general circulation in the city, service being
deemed complete seven days after the date of last publication. A copy of any
notice, complaint or order served by publication shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the notice, complaint or order on
or before the date of the last publication. A copy of the complaint or order
may also be filed by the Inspector in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court
of the county, as in cases of lis pendens notice, as provided by law.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 152.33 STANDARDS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The parties in interest of non-residential buildings and structures shall
have responsibility for and shall ensure that such buildings and structures
under their ownership or control are maintained in compliance with the
following minimum standards of maintenance, sanitation, and safety:
   (A)   Foundation walls, piers, or other foundation supports shall be
structurally sound and capable of bearing loads safely;
   (B)   Walls, sill plates, joists, rafters, or other structural members shall
not list, lean, or buckle to such an extent as to render the building unsafe,
and shall not be rotted, deteriorated or damaged, or have holes or cracks which
might admit rodents;
   (C)   Exterior walls shall be structurally sound, properly supported, free
from defects and damage, and capable of bearing imposed loads safely;
   (D)   Floors or roofs shall not have improperly distributed loads, which are
overloaded, or have insufficient strength to be reasonable safe for the purpose
used. Floors or roofs shall have adequate supporting members and strength to be
reasonably safe for the purpose used. Roofs shall be kept structurally sound
and shall be maintained in such a manner so as to prevent rain or other objects
from penetrating into the interior of the building;
   (E)   Buildings shall be free from dilapidation, decay, unsanitary
conditions, or disrepair, which is dangerous to the health and safety of the
occupants or general public;
   (F)   Buildings and structures shall be free from damage by fire, wind, or
other causes as to render the building unsafe;
   (G)   Exterior surfaces shall be maintained in good repair and shall not be
rotted, deteriorated, or damaged. All exposed exterior wood surfaces shall be
painted or sealed to protect the underlying surface from deterioration. All
exterior surfaces that have been painted shall be maintained free of peeling
and flaking paint. Where 50% or more of the aggregate area of any painted
surface has peeling, flaking or previous paint worn away, the entire surface
shall be repainted in order to prevent further deterioration;
   (H)   The exterior of buildings and structures shall be maintained free of
loose shingles, loose wood, loose cornices, crumbling stucco, stone, or brick,
or other loose and insufficiently anchored objects which constitute a danger of
falling on persons or property;
   (I)   All exterior windows and doors shall be tight fitting, have sashes of
proper size and design, free of rotten wood, broken joints, or broken or loose
mullions. All exterior windows and doors shall be maintained free of broken,
cracked, or missing panes;
   (J)   All exterior openings originally designed as windows or doors shall be
maintained, unless the Inspector approves the enclosure of such opening in a
manner that appropriately fills the space and is weatherproof;
   (K)   All exterior doors or other pedestrian or service openings shall be
maintained in good repair, capable of being safely secured, and have
appropriately designed and installed doors;
   (L)   Gutters and downspouts shall be securely installed and located in a
manner that does not create a hazard to pedestrians, vehicular traffic, or
adjacent property;
   (M)   There are no objects or elements on or protruding from building walls,
roofs, or the surrounding premises, such as electrical boxes, conduits, wires,
open pipes, or unused sign brackets which constitute potential safety hazards;
   (N)   Exterior porches, landings, balconies, stairs, ramps, or fire escapes
shall be properly maintained, structurally sound, and free of defects.
Banisters and railings shall be designed and maintained to minimize the hazard
of falling;
   (O)   Exterior walls that have become exposed as a result of the demolition
of adjacent buildings; such wall shall have all doors, windows, vents, or
similar openings closed with material of the same type comprising the wall and
the exposed wall shall be painted, stuccoed, or bricked and sufficiently
weatherproofed to prevent deterioration of the wall;
   (P)   Buildings and structures including their premises shall not have
insufficiently protected holes, excavations, breaks, projections, obstructions,
and other such dangerous impediments on or around walkways, driveways, parking
lots, alleyways, and other areas which are accessible to and used by persons on
or around the premises;
   (Q)   All interior wall, floor, and ceiling covering materials are in good
condition and compatible with the intended use and in a manner that does not
constitute an unsanitary or hazardous condition;
   (R)   Interior stairs, landing, and ramps shall be properly maintained and
structurally sound;
   (S)   Buildings shall be free of inadequate ventilation, lighting, heating,
or sanitary facilities to such extent as to endanger the health, safety, or
general welfare of the occupants or the general public;
   (T)   All electrical, HVAC, and plumbing systems shall be installed and
maintained in a condition that does not create a health or safety hazard;
   (U)   Chimneys, flues, and vent attachments shall be maintained in a
structurally sound condition, are durable, are smoke tight, are capable of
withstanding the action of flue gases, and provide sufficient draft; and
   (V)   All unoccupied or vacant buildings and structures shall be secured to
prevent entry by unauthorized persons and to prevent occurrences of activities
not permitted by law.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 152.34 REGULATIONS FOR VACATED AND CLOSED BUILDINGS.
   (A)   (1)   If a building has been vacated and closed for a period of two
years after an Inspector has caused the building to be vacated and closed as
described in §
152.26(B)(l), the Inspector may find that the owner has abandoned the intent
and purpose to repair, alter, or improve the building and that the continuation
of the building in its vacated and closed status would be inimical to the
health, safety, and welfare of the city in that it would continue to
deteriorate, would create a fire or safety hazard, would be a threat to
children and vagrants, would attract persons intent on criminal activities, or
would cause or contribute to blight and the deterioration of property values in
the area. Upon such findings, the governing board may, after the expiration of
the two-year period, enact an ordinance and serve such ordinance on the owner,
setting forth the following:
         (a)   If it is determined that the repair of the building to bring it
into compliance with the minimum standards of this chapter can be made at a
cost of not more than 50% of the current value of the building, the ordinance
shall require that the owner either repair or demolish and remove the building
within 90 days.
         (b)   If it is determined that the repair of the building to bring it
into compliance with the minimum standards of this chapter cannot be made at a
cost equal to or less than 50% of the current value of the building, the
ordinance shall require the owner to demolish and remove the building within 90
days.
      (2)   In the case of vacant manufacturing facilities or vacant industrial
warehouse facilities, the building must have been vacated and closed for a
period of five years after the Inspector has caused the building to be vacated
and closed as described in §
152.26(B)(l) before the governing board may take action under this division.
The ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds in the
county wherein the property or properties are located and shall be indexed in
the name of the property owner in the grantor index. If the owner fails to
comply with the ordinance, the Inspector shall effectuate the purpose of the
ordinance.
   (B)   If a property owner causes a building to be vacated and closed at
their own discretion, the following provisions shall apply:
      (1)   Vacated and closed buildings shall be added to a vacated and closed
inventory, maintained by the Inspections and Codes Department.
         (a)   The owner shall give notice to the Inspections and Codes
Department within 15 days after causing a building to be vacated and closed.
         (b)   If a building has been vacated and closed for a period exceeding
15 days and an owner has failed to notify the Inspections and Codes Department,
the Inspector shall cause the building to be added to the vacated and closed
building inventory. The Inspector shall serve a written notice to the owner
stating that the building has been added to the vacated and closed building
inventory and that the provisions of divisions (B)(2) and divisions (B)(3)
below will be enforced.
         (c)   Any owner who has vacated and closed a building prior to the
effective date of this chapter shall comply with the regulations contained
herein within 30 days after the effective date of this chapter. If after 30
days, an owner has failed to notify the Inspections and Codes Department and
have their property added to the vacated and closed building inventory, the
Inspector shall cause the building to be added to the vacated and closed
building inventory. The Inspector shall serve a written notice to the owner
stating that the building has been added to the vacated and closed building
inventory and that the provisions of divisions (B)(2) and(B)(3) below will be
enforced.
      (2)   The materials and methods used for vacating and closing the
building shall be:
         (a)   Plywood or (OSB) oriented strand board cut to tightly fit over
the window and door openings, flush with the outside of the trim molding;
         (b)   Securely attach plywood or (OSB) oriented strand board to the
frame of the opening with screws placed 12 inches on center around the
perimeter of the plywood or oriented strand board; and
         (c)   Plywood or (OSB) oriented strand boards shall be painted black
using an exterior grade paint.
      (3)   Any time after six months from the date that the building has been
added to the vacated and closed building inventory the Inspector determines
that the owner or agent thereof is not actively working, with visible progress
being made to repair, alter, improve or demolish the building, or a building
has been closed and vacated for a period greater than one year, the Inspector
may find that the owner has abandoned the intent and purpose to repair, alter,
improve or demolish the building. In the event, the Inspector shall issue and
cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order requiring the owner, within
the time specified therein, to remove any material which has been placed over
window and exterior door openings.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 152.35 CIVIL PENALTY.
   Inspectors are empowered to issue citations to the owner of any property in
violation of this subchapter. A civil penalty of $50 will be charged for each
day a violation continues to exist after the time specified by the Inspector on
an order has expired and will continue to accumulate until compliance has
occurred up to a maximum penalty of $500. The civil penalty shall be paid
within 30 days after the issue date of a statement of charges. The city may
take one of the following courses of action to collect an unpaid civil penalty:
   (A)   The city may institute a civil action in the nature of a debt in the
appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for the collection of the
civil penalty, attorney fees, and other such relief as provided in G.S. 160A-
175.
   (B)   A lien may be levied against the property owner for the cost of the
citation fee as provided by the authority of the city.
(Ord. 24-50, passed 12-10-2024)
CHAPTER 153: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
   
153.01   Flood damage prevention adopted by reference
§ 153.01 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city’s flood damage prevention ordinance and any and all amendments are
hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. 07-32, passed 11-27-2007)
CHAPTER 154: COMMUNITY APPEARANCE STANDARDS CODE
Section
   
154.01   Purpose
   
154.02   Title
   
154.03   Administration and enforcement
   
154.04   Definitions
   
154.05   Conditions constituting a public nuisance
   
154.06   Appeal
   
154.07   Methods of service
   
154.08   Enforcement and abatement procedures
   
154.09   Cost of abatement
§ 154.01 PURPOSE.
   It is hereby found and determined that areas within the corporate limits of
the city have need for a property maintenance code, because of the existence of
conditions herein determined to be unlawful, constitute a visual blight and
detriment upon the surrounding neighborhood and create substantial and
unreasonable interferences with the reasonable and lawful use and enjoyment of
other premises in the neighborhood, or the conditions inhibit property values,
deter tourism, interfere with the public health, safety and general welfare or
otherwise discourage the happiness, comfort and emotional stability of the
citizenry.
(Ord. 00-29, passed 7-25-2000; Ord. 20-30, passed 11-24-2020; Ord. 24-51,
passed 12-10-2024)
§ 154.02 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known as the "Community Appearance Standards Code of
the City of Kings Mountain" and may be referred to as the "Community Appearance
Code."
(Ord. 00-29, passed 7-25-2000; Ord. 20-30, passed 11-24-2020; Ord. 24-51,
passed 12-10-2024)
§ 154.03 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   General. The Community Appearance Standards Code is hereby created and
the executive in charge thereof shall be known as the Director of Inspections
and Codes.
   (B)   Officers. In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the city and
with concurrence of the City Manager, the Director of Inspections and Codes
shall have the authority to appoint Code Enforcement Officers. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall enforce the provisions of this code, and is hereby
authorized to use either city equipment or private contractors at his or her
discretion.
   (C)   Liability. A Code Enforcement Officer charged with the enforcement of
this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered
liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any
damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act required or
permitted in the discharge of official duties.
   (D)   Right of entry. Code Enforcement Officers shall have the authority to
enter upon property, to obtain an administrative inspection warrant if
necessary, to issue a notice of violation, post a notice of violation on the
premises, to issue a citation, to enter upon or authorize an agent to enter
upon and abate the premises if there is non-compliance with the notice of
violation.
   (E)   Interference with personnel. It shall be unlawful for any person to
interfere, harass or otherwise impede any city employee or agent carrying out
official duties, when acting within the scope of official duties, or when the
city employee or agent has authority to conduct an investigation under the
authority of a lawfully issued administrative inspection warrant and when
carrying out the enforcement of this code after notice of violation has been
issued and the time for compliance has expired.
   (F)   Responsibility of owners and agents. The owner, agent, tenant,
occupant and/or lessee of all residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional or governmental establishments shall be responsible for
compliance with this code.
(Ord. 24-51, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 154.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHRONIC VIOLATOR. A person who owns property whereupon, in the previous
calendar year, the city took remedial action at least three times under any of
its Community Appearance Standards Code.
   JUNK. Any item which has a resale or salvage value or does not have a resale
or salvage value including, but not limited to, dilapidated furniture,
appliances, machinery, equipment, building materials, automobile parts, tires
or other items which are either wholly or partially rusted, wrecked, junked,
dismantled or in an inoperative condition.
   LITTER. Any discarded materials including, but not limited to, garbage,
rubbish, household trash, yard waste, refuse, can, bottle, box, container,
wrapper, paper product, tire, appliance, mechanical equipment or part, tool,
machinery or equipment, wood, automobile parts, vessel, dead animals, solid
waste materials, industrial materials and hazardous waste and other solid
waste.
   OPEN SPACES. Areas of properties or portions thereof that are open to the
exterior, including building openings of residential dwelling units, such as
carports and porches, and any other portion of properties ordinarily exposed to
the outside or public view, including front, side and rear yards, driveways,
parking areas, storage areas, bodies of water, sidewalks, curbs or right-of
ways up to the edge of the pavement or gravel of any public street.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. A condition on a property that creates a visual blight,
substantial and unreasonable interferences with the reasonable and lawful use
and enjoyment of a property, inhibits property values, deters tourism, or
interferes with the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizenry.
   REASONABLE EFFORT. Search of available resources provided by the county such
as: Register of Deeds land records, property tax records or GIS.
   YARD WASTE. Grass, weeds, leaves, tree trimmings, plants, shrubbery
pruning's, and such other similar materials which are generated in the
maintenance of yards and gardens.
(Ord. 24-51, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 154.05 CONDITIONS CONSTITUTING A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying, possessing, or
controlling any lot or parcel of land to have on such lot or parcel of land any
of the following conditions which are hereby declared to be detrimental to the
public health, safety, or general welfare and constitute a public nuisance:
   (A)   Any uncontrolled growth of weeds, grasses or bushes to a height in
excess of 12 inches, causing or threatening to cause:
      (1)   The infestation by rats, mice, snakes, or vermin of any kind;
      (2)   Encroachment upon sidewalks, driveways, or the curb or edge of
pavement of any abutting street;
      (3)   A fire hazard; or
      (4)   A condition in which in any other way is detrimental to the public
health, safety, or general welfare.
      (5)   This division shall not apply to areas which customarily have such
growth in its natural condition, such as predominantly forested areas with
numerous trees, or areas that consist of managed landscaped plantings, shrubs,
or other cultivated and managed vegetation.
   (B)   Any uncontrolled growth of vines, kudzu, honeysuckle or any other
vegetation, causing or threatening to cause:
      (1)   The infestation of rats, mice, snakes, or vermin of any kind;
      (2)   Encroachment upon sidewalks, driveways, curb or edge of payment of
any abutting street, adjoining properties, buildings, structures, or fences;
      (3)   A fire hazard; or
      (4)   A condition in which in any other way is detrimental to the public
health, safety, or general welfare.
      (5)   This division shall not apply to areas which customarily have such
growth in its natural condition, such as predominantly forested areas with
numerous trees, or areas that consist of managed landscaped plantings, shrubs,
or other cultivated and managed vegetation.
   (C)   Any litter which is scattered, discarded, cast, thrown, blown, placed,
swept, or deposited in a persistent, continuous, or ongoing manner so as to
accumulate in any open space. The owner or occupant of any property or dwelling
unit shall exercise reasonable diligence at all times to keep the exterior of
such property or dwelling unit clean of litter, and other used or wasted
materials from being scattered, discarded, cast, thrown, blown, placed, swept,
or deposited on such premises in a persistent, continuous, or ongoing manner,
and shall prevent from drifting or blowing to adjoining premises any such
matter by removing it or ensuring that the same is placed in approved refuse
containers or other appropriate location for collection.
   (D)   Any concentration of unusable building materials, including but not
limited to concrete, steel, and masonry, which is no longer suitable for
building construction, alterations, or repair, and which is located in any open
space.
   (E)   The accumulation, concentration, presence, storage, or placement in
any open space of any junk, including but not limited to, furniture,
appliances, machinery, equipment, building materials, motor vehicle parts,
tires, or any other man-made items which are either in whole, or in part,
wrecked, junked, deteriorated, worn out, dismantled, unusable, or inoperative.
   (F)   The open storage of any discarded freezer, refrigerator, stove,
washer, dryer or any other type of household appliance.
   (G)   Any accumulation of animal or human waste, food or vegetable matter
that is offensive by virtue of odors or vapors or by the inhabitance therein of
rats, mice, snakes, or vermin of any kind which is or may be dangerous or
prejudicial to the public health.
   (H)   Any building or other structure which has been burned, partially
burned or otherwise partially destroyed and which is unsightly or hazardous to
the safety of any person.
   (I)   Any accumulation of litter which is the result of overflowing or
improperly closed trash or garbage containers.
   (J)   Private sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking areas and
similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair and maintained free
from hazardous conditions.
   (K)   Fences, retaining walls, and similar landscape features shall be
maintained in good structural condition and appearance and free from
deterioration. Wooden or other fence features subject to deterioration or
weathering shall be properly maintained to retard deterioration or provide
protection from the weather. Deteriorated features shall be replaced, repaired
or shall be completely removed.
   (L)   Swimming pools, hot tubs and fountains shall:
      (1)   Be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and in good repair;
      (2)   Shall not create a breeding grounds for mosquitoes; and
      (3)   No swimming pool shall be drained during periods of rainfall, nor
shall any pool be drained in a manner which causes the drained water to flow
onto another's property.
   (M)   Landscape pools and ponds shall be maintained in a condition so as to
prevent noxious odors, breeding grounds for mosquitoes or refuge for snakes.
   (N)   Any tree or tree limb which have fallen due to an act of nature or
have been cut which is located in a front or side yard of a residential lot.
   (O)   Any concentration of firewood or logs in any open space not free from
rot and decay.
(Ord. 24-51, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 154.06 APPEAL.
   An owner may request a hearing before the City Manager or his/her designee
to appeal the finding of the Code Enforcement Officer that a public nuisance as
defined in §
154.04 exists on the property. The request for a hearing must be in writing and
must be filed in the office of the City Clerk within ten calendar days after
the issue date of a notice of violation. The City Manager shall fix a time for
the hearing and the initial notice of violation shall be temporarily suspended
pending such hearing. The hearing must be held by the City Manager or his/her
designee within 15 calendar days following receipt of the request for hearing.
At the hearing, the individual affected by the notice of violation shall be
given the opportunity to present evidence to refute the findings which
supported the notice of violation. Upon completion of the hearing, the City
Manager or his/her designee shall consider the evidence and shall either revoke
the initial order, issue a final order which differs from the initial order, or
reinstate the initial order as a final abatement order.
(Ord. 24-51, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 154.07 METHODS OF SERVICE.
   (A)   Notice of violations and citations issued by the Code Enforcement
Officer pursuant to this code shall be served upon persons either personally,
by certified mail, or by posting on the property in conjunction with first
class mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the first-class mail is
returned and notice of violation was posted in a conspicuous place on the
property affected on the day the first-class mail was sent. If the names or
addresses of any owners cannot be ascertained by reasonable effort, notice of
violation shall be given by posting in a conspicuous place on the premises
affected by the notice.
   (B)   Statement of charges for cost incurred by the city for abatement,
civil penalty assessments and appeal decisions shall be served upon persons
personally or by first-class mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the
first-class mail is not returned by the post office within ten calendar days
after the mailing.
(Ord. 24-51, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 154.08 ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURES.
   When any public nuisance as set out in § 154.20 is found to exist on any
property within the corporate limits of the city, the following procedures
shall be followed:
   (A)   Notice of violation. A written notice of violation shall be served to
the owner of the property. The notice shall state the condition constituting
such public nuisance and shall order the conditions to be abated within a
specified time. It shall be unlawful for any person, upon receipt of the notice
of violation to fail to comply within the time specified on the notice. Should
an owner be deemed a chronic violator, as defined by this code, then only one
initial annual notice within the next calendar year is required to be served.
   (B)   Posting of notice. The property may be posted by the Code Enforcement
Officer on the date of the notice of violation in a prominent location on the
street facing facade of any building or yard, with a placard or other
appropriate means of notice declaring the property is a public nuisance
property.
   (C)   Failure to comply. If the owner having been ordered to abate a public
nuisance, fails, neglects, or refuses to abate or remove the condition
constituting the nuisance within the time specified on the notice of violation,
the Code Enforcement Officer shall cause the condition to be removed or
otherwise abated by one of the following courses of action.
      (1)   The Codes Enforcement Officer shall cause the condition to be
removed or otherwise abated by city personnel or private contractor designated
by the Code Enforcement Officer.
      (2)   The city may apply to the appropriate court for an injunction and
order of abatement which would require that the owner correct any unlawful
condition relating to this code on the person's property.
   (D)   Citations. Code Enforcement Officers are empowered to issue citations
to the owner of any property in violation of this code. A civil penalty of $50
will be charged for each day a violation continues to exist after the issuance
of a citation and will continue to accumulate until compliance and abatement
has occurred up to a maximum penalty of $500. The civil penalty will be waived
if the violation is corrected within the time specified on the citation. If the
violation is not corrected within the time specified on the citation, the civil
penalty shall be paid within 30 calendar days after the issue date of a
statement of charges. The city may take one of the following courses of action
to collect an unpaid civil penalty.
      (1)   The city may institute a civil action in the nature of debt in the
appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for the collection of the
civil penalty, attorney fees, and such other relief as provided in G.S. 160A-
175.
      (2)   A lien may be levied against the property owner for the cost of the
citation fee as provided by the authority of the city.
(Ord. 24-51, passed 12-10-2024)
§ 154.09 COST OF ABATEMENT.
   (A)   The actual cost incurred by the city in abating any public nuisance
shall be charged to the owner of the property where the abatement occurred.
   (B)   If the charges for the abatement of a public nuisance are not paid
within 30 calendar days after the issue date of a statement of charges, the
city may take one of the following courses of action to collect the cost
incurred by the city for abatement.
      (1)   The city may institute a civil action in the nature of debt in the
appropriate division of the General Court of Justice for the collection of the
cost incurred by the city for abatement, attorney fees, and such other relief
as provided in G.S. 160A-175.
      (2)   A lien may be levied against the property owner for the cost
incurred by the city for enforcement of this chapter and/or abatement of
violation(s).
(Ord. 24-51, passed 12-10-2024)
CHAPTER 155: HISTORIC LANDMARKS
Section
Historic Landmarks Commission
   
155.01   Establishment
   
155.02   Members; terms
   
155.03   Powers
   
155.04   Rules of procedure
Landmark Designations
   
155.20   Designation by City Council
   
155.21   Steps to be taken
   
155.22   Delay in demolition
Certificate of Appropriateness
   
155.35   Required
   
155.36   Application
   
155.37   Action on application
   
155.38   Hearings
   
155.39   Administrative approval
   
155.40   Review criteria
   
155.41   Certain changes not prohibited
   
155.42   Enforcement
HISTORIC LANDMARKS COMMISSION
§ 155.01 ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established a City Historic Landmarks Commission
(“Commission”) under the authority of G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Part 3C.
(Ord. 98-08, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 155.02 MEMBERS; TERMS.
   (A)   The Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the City
Council, in accordance with the policy for City Council appointments to
authorities, boards, commissions and committees (appointments policy). All
members shall reside within the planning and zoning jurisdiction of the city. A
majority of the members of the Commission shall have demonstrated special
interest, experience or education in history, architecture, archaeology or
related fields. The Commission may appoint advisory bodies and committees as
appropriate.
   (B)   Members of the Commission shall serve terms of three years. Terms
shall be staggered in accordance with the appointments policy.
(Ord. 98-08, passed 4-28-1998; Ord. 13-36, passed 12-10-2013; Ord. 19-21,
passed 11-26-2019)
§ 155.03 POWERS.
   The powers of the Historic Landmarks Commission are as follows:
   (A)   Undertake an inventory of properties of historical, prehistoric,
architectural and/or cultural significance;
   (B)   Recommend to the City Council individual structures, buildings, sites,
areas or objects to be designated by ordinance as “landmarks”;
   (C)   Recommend to the City Council that designation of any building,
structure, site, area or object as a landmark, be revoked or removed for cause;
   (D)   Review and act upon proposals for the alteration or demolition of
designated landmarks;
   (E)   Conduct an educational program with respect to historic landmarks
within its jurisdiction;
   (F)   Cooperate with the state, federal and local government in pursuance of
the purposes of this ordinance; to offer or request assistance, aid, guidance
or advice concerning matters under its purview or of mutual interest. The City
Council, or the Commission when authorized by the City Council, may contract
with the state or the United States, or any agency of either, or with any other
organization provided the terms are not inconsistent with state or federal law;
   (G)   Enter, solely in performance of its official duties and only at
reasonable times, upon private lands for examination or survey thereof.
However, no member, employee or agent of the Commission may enter any private
building or structure without express consent of the owner or occupant thereof;
   (H)   Prepare and recommend the official adoption of a preservation element
as part of the city’s comprehensive plan;
   (I)   Acquire by any lawful means the fee or any lesser included interest,
including options to purchase, to any properties designated as landmarks, to
hold, manage, preserve, restore and improve the same and to exchange or dispose
of the property by public or private sale, lease or otherwise, subject to
covenants or other legally binding restrictions which will secure appropriate
rights of public access and promote the preservation of the property;
   (J)   Restore, preserve and operate historic properties; and
   (K)   Negotiate at any time with the owner of a building, structure, site,
area or object for its acquisition or its preservation, when the action is
reasonably necessary or appropriate.
(Ord. 98-08, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 155.04 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   Prior to any official action the Commission shall adopt rules of procedure
governing its meetings and the conduct of official business and bylaws
governing the appointment of members, term of office, the election of officers
and related matters. A public record shall be kept of the Commission’s
resolutions, proceedings and actions. The Commission shall also prepare and
adopt principles and guidelines for altering, restoring, moving or demolishing
properties designated as landmarks.
(Ord. 98-08, passed 4-28-1998)
LANDMARK DESIGNATIONS
§ 155.20 DESIGNATION BY CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Upon complying with the required landmark designation procedures set
forth herein, the City Council may adopt and from time to time amend or repeal
an ordinance designating one or more historic landmarks. No property shall be
recommended for designation as a landmark unless it is deemed and found by the
Commission to be of special significance in terms of its historical,
prehistoric, design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling and/or
association.
   (B)   The ordinance shall describe each property designated in the
ordinance, the name or names of the owner or owners of the property, those
elements of the property that are integral to its historical, architectural or
prehistoric value, including the land area of the property so designated, and
any other information the governing board deems necessary. For each building,
structure, site, area or object so designated as a landmark, the ordinance
shall require that the waiting period set forth in this chapter be observed
prior to its demolition. A suitable sign for each property designated as a
landmark may be placed on the property at the owner’s consent; otherwise, the
sign may be placed on a nearby public right-of-way.
(Ord. 98-08, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 155.21 STEPS TO BE TAKEN.
   No property shall be designated as a landmark until the following steps have
been taken.
   (A)   As a guide for the identification and evaluation or landmarks, the
Commission shall, at the earliest possible time and consistent with the
resources available to it, undertake an inventory of properties of historical,
architectural, prehistoric and cultural significance within the city.
   (B)   The Commission shall make or cause to be made an investigation and
report on the historic, architectural, prehistoric, educational or cultural
significance of each building, structure, site, area or object proposed for
designation or acquisition. The report shall be forwarded to the Division of
Archives and History, State Department of Cultural Resources.
   (C)   The Department of Cultural Resources, acting through the State
Historic Preservation Officer, or his or her designee, shall either upon
request of the Department or at the initiative of the Commission be given an
opportunity to review and comment upon the substance and effect of the
designation of any landmark. All comments will be provided in writing. If the
Department does not submit its comments to the Commission within 30 days
following receipt by the Department of the report, the Commission and the City
Council shall be relieved of any responsibility to consider the comments.
   (D)   The Commission and the City Council shall hold a joint public hearing
(or separate public hearings) on the proposed ordinance. Reasonable notice of
the time and place thereof shall be given.
   (E)   Following the public hearing(s), the City Council may adopt the
ordinance as proposed, adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems
necessary or reject the proposed ordinance.
   (F)   Upon adoption of the ordinance, the owners and occupants of each
landmark shall be given written notification of the designation insofar as
reasonable diligence permits. One copy of the ordinance and all amendments
thereto shall be filed by the Commission in the office of the Register of Deeds
of Cleveland County. Each landmark shall be indexed according to the name of
the owner of the property in the grantor and grantee indexes in the Register of
Deeds office and the Commission shall pay a reasonable fee for filing and
indexing. A second copy of the ordinance and all amendments thereto shall be
kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and be made available for public
inspection at any reasonable time. A third copy of the ordinance and all
amendments thereto shall be given to the Building Inspector. The fact that a
building, structure, site, area or object has been designated a building,
structure, site, area or object has been designated a landmark shall be clearly
indicated on all tax maps maintained by Cleveland County for a period as the
designation remains in effect.
   (G)   Upon the adoption of the landmark ordinance or any amendments thereto,
it is the duty of the Commission to give notice thereof to the tax supervisor
of Cleveland County. The designation and any recorded restrictions upon the
property limiting its use for preservation purposes shall be considered by the
tax supervisor in appraising it for tax purposes.
(Ord. 98-08, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 155.22 DELAY IN DEMOLITION.
   (A)   (1)   An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing
the demolition, removal or destruction of a designated landmark may not be
denied except as provided in division (C) below. However, the effective date of
a certificate may be delayed for up to 365 days from the date of approval. The
period of delay shall be reduced by the Commission if it finds that the owner
would suffer extreme hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use
or return from the property by virtue of the delay. During the delay period,
the Commission shall negotiate with the owner in an effort to find a means of
preserving the building, structure or site.
      (2)   If the Commission has voted to recommend the designation of a
landmark and final designation has not been made by the City Council, the
demolition or destruction of any building, structure or site on the property of
the designated landmark may be delayed by the Commission for up to 180 days or
until the City Council takes final action on the designation, whichever occurs
first.
   (B)   The City Council may enact an ordinance to prevent the demolition by
neglect of any designated landmark. The ordinance shall provide appropriate
safeguards to protect property owners from undue hardship.
   (C)   An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the
demolition of a building, structure or she determined by the State Historic
Preservation Officer as having statewide significance as defined in the
criteria of the National Register of Historic Places may be denied, except
where the Commission finds that the owner would suffer extreme hardship or be
permanently deprived of all beneficial use or return by virtue of the denial.
(Ord. 98-08, passed 4-28-1998)
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
§ 155.35 REQUIRED.
   (A)   From and after the designation of a landmark, no exterior portion of
any building or other structure (including masonry walls, fences, light
fixtures, steps and pavement, or other appurtenant features), nor any above-
ground utility structure nor any type of outdoor advertising sign shall be
erected, altered, restored, moved or demolished on the landmark until after an
application for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior features has
been submitted to and approved by the Commission. A certificate is required to
be issued by the Commission prior to the issuance of a building permit or other
permit granted for the purposes of constructing, altering, moving or
demolishing structures, which certificate may be issued subject to reasonable
conditions necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. A certificate
of appropriateness shall be required whether or not a building or other permit
is required.
   (B)   For purposes of this chapter, EXTERIOR FEATURES shall include the
architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of
a building or other structure, including the kind and texture of the building
material, the size and scale of the building, and the type and style of all
windows, doors, light fixtures, signs and other appurtenant features. Exterior
features may also include historic signs, color an significant landscape,
archaeological and natural features of the area. In the case of outdoor
advertising signs, exterior features shall be construed to mean the style,
material, size and location of all signs.
   (C)   The state (including its agencies, political subdivisions and
instrumentalities), the city and all public utilities shall be required to
obtain a certificate of appropriateness for construction, alteration, moving or
demolition of designated landmarks.
(Ord. 98-08, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 155.36 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Applications for a certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained
from and when completed, filed with the Zoning Administrator. The application
shall be filed two weeks prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
Commission. Each application shall be accompanied by sketches, drawings,
photographs, specifications, descriptions and other information of sufficient
detail to clearly show the proposed exterior alterations, additions, changes or
new construction. The names and mailing addresses of property owners filing
and/or subject to the application and the addresses of property within 100 feet
on all sides of the property which is the subject of the application must also
be filed. No application which does not include the aforementioned information
will be accepted.
   (B)   It shall be the policy of the Commission, in regard to applications
involving new construction or extensive alterations and/or additions to
existing structures, that a subcommittee of the Commission shall be available
to meet with persons involved in planned or pending applications in order to
advise them informally at an early stage in the development process concerning
the Commission’s guidelines, the nature of the area where the proposed project
will take place, and other relevant factors. The members of the sub-committee,
collectively and individually, shall refrain from any indication of approval or
disapproval. Advice or opinions given by any member of the sub-committee at
such an informal meeting shall not be considered official or binding upon the
Commission.
(Ord. 98-08, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 155.37 ACTION ON APPLICATION.
   The Secretary of the Commission shall notify, by mail, not less than one
week prior to the meeting at which the matter is to be heard, the owners of
property within 100 feet on all sides of the subject property. Applications for
certificates of appropriateness shall be acted upon within 90 days after
filing, otherwise the application shall be deemed to be approved and a
certificate shall be issued. An extension of time may be granted by mutual
consent of the Commission and the applicant. As part of the review procedures,
the Commission may view the premises and seek the advice as it may deem
necessary under the circumstances. The Commission may hold a public hearing on
any application when deemed necessary. The action on an application shall be
approval, approval with conditions or denial and the decision of the Commission
must be supported by specific findings of fact indicating the extent to which
the application is or is not congruous with the special character of the
landmark.
(Ord. 98-08, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 155.38 HEARINGS.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness
the applicant and other property owners likely to be materially affected by the
application shall be given an opportunity to be heard. All meetings of the
Commission shall be open to the public in accordance with the State Open
Meetings Law, G.S. Ch. 143, Art. 33C.
   (B)   The Commission shall have no jurisdiction over interior arrangement,
except as provided below, and shall take no action under this chapter, except
to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, moving or
demolition of buildings, structures, appurtenant features, outdoor advertising
signs or other significant features which would be incongruous with the special
character of the landmark.
   (C)   The jurisdiction of the Commission over interior spaces shall be
limited to specific interior features of architectural, artistic or historical
significance in publicly owned landmarks; and of privately owned landmarks for
which consent for interior review has been given by the owners. The consent of
an owner for interior review has been given by the owners. The consent of an
owner for interior review shall bind future owners and/or successors in title;
provided, the consent has been filed in the Register of Deeds office and
indexed according to the name of the owner of the property in the grantor and
grantee indexes. The landmark designation shall specify the interior features
to be reviewed and the specific nature of the Commission’s jurisdiction over
the interior.
   (D)   In any action granting or denying a certificate of appropriateness, an
appeal by an aggrieved party may be taken to the Board of Adjustment.
   (E)   Written notice of the intent to appeal must be sent to the Commission,
postmarked within 30 days following the decision. Appeals shall be in the
nature of certioraris. Appeals of decisions of the Board of Adjustment shall be
heard by the Superior Court of Cleveland County.
   (F)   The state shall have a right of appeal to the State Historical
Commission, which shall render its decision within 30 days from the date that a
notice of appeal by the state is received by the Historical Commission. The
decision of the Historical Commission shall be final and binding upon both the
state and the Commission.
(Ord. 98-08, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 155.39 ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVAL.
   (A)   Notwithstanding §
155.38, upon receipt of a completed application, the Zoning Administrator may
issue a certificate of appropriateness for minor works.
   (B)   MINOR WORKS are defined as those exterior changes which do not involve
substantial alterations, additions or removals that could impair the integrity
of the property. The minor works shall be limited to those listed in the
Commission’s “Design Guidelines”. No application may be denied without the
formal action of the Commission. All minor works applications approved by the
Zoning Administrator shall be forwarded to the Commission in time for its next
scheduled meeting.
(Ord. 98-08, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 155.40 REVIEW CRITERIA.
   (A)   No certificate of appropriateness shall be granted unless the
Commission finds that the application complies with the principles and
guidelines adopted by the Commission for review of changes. It is the intent of
these regulations to ensure insofar as possible that construction,
reconstruction, alteration, restoration, moving or demolition of buildings,
structures, appurtenant fixtures, outdoor advertising signs or other
significant features of landmarks shall be congruous with the special character
of the landmark. In addition to the principles and guidelines, the following
features or elements of design shall be considered in reviewing applications
for certificates of appropriateness:
      (1)   Lot coverage, defined as the percentage of the lot area covered by
primary structures;
      (2)   Setback, defined as the distance from the lot lines to the
building;
      (3)   Building height;
      (4)   Spacing of buildings, defined as the distance between adjacent
buildings;
      (5)   Proportion, shape, positioning, location, pattern, sizes and style
of all elements of fenestration and entry doors;
      (6)   Surface materials and textures;
      (7)   Roof shapes, forms and materials;
      (8)   Use of regional or local architectural traditions;
      (9)   General form and proportion of buildings and structures and the
relationship of additions to the main structure;
      (10)   Expression of architectural detailing;
      (11)   Orientation of the building to the street;
      (12)   Scale, determined by the size of the units of construction and
architectural details in relation to the human scale and also by the
relationship of the building mass to adjoining open space and nearby buildings
and structures; maintenance of pedestrian scale;
      (13)   Proportion of width to height of the total building facade;
      (14)   Archaeological sites and resources associated with standing
structures;
      (15)   Effect of trees and other landscape elements;
      (16)   Major landscaping which would impact known archaeological sites;
      (17)   Style, material, size and location of all outdoor advertising
signs;
      (18)   Appurtenant features and fixtures, such as lighting;
      (19)   Structural condition and soundness;
      (20)   Walls; physical ingredients, such as brick, stone or wood walls,
wrought iron fences, evergreen landscape masses or combinations of these;
      (21)   Color;
      (22)   Ground cover or paving; and
      (23)   Significant landscape, archaeological and natural features.
   (B)   The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and
Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings shall be the sole principles
and guidelines used in reviewing applications of the state for certificates of
appropriateness.
(Ord. 98-08, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 155.41 CERTAIN CHANGES NOT PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature of a landmark which
does not involve a change in design, materials or outer appearance thereof, the
ordinary maintenance or repair of streets, sidewalks, pavement markings, street
signs or traffic signs; the construction, reconstruction, alteration,
restoration or demolition of any feature which the Building Inspector shall
certify is required by the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous
condition.
   (B)   Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent:
      (1)   The maintenance; or
      (2)   In the event of an emergency, the immediate restoration, of any
existing above-ground utility structure without approval by the Commission.
(Ord. 98-08, passed 4-28-1998)
§ 155.42 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Compliance with the terms of the certificate of appropriateness shall
be enforced by the Zoning Administrator. Failure to comply with the certificate
issued shall be a violation of the zoning ordinance and subject to established
procedures and penalties for the violations.
   (B)   In case any building, structure, site, area or object designated as a
landmark is about to be demolished, whether as a result of deliberate neglect
or otherwise, materially altered, remodeled, removed or destroyed, except in
compliance with this chapter, the City Council, the Commission or other party
aggrieved by the action may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent the unlawful demolition, destruction, material alteration, remodeling
or removal, to restrain, correct or abate the violation, or to prevent any
illegal act or conduct with respect to a building or structure.
(Ord. 98-08, passed 4-28-1998)
CHAPTER 156: UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Section
   
156.01   Regulations adopted by reference
§ 156.01 REGULATIONS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city's Unified Development Ordinance, as adopted by Ord. 21-26, and any
and all subsequent amendments are hereby adopted by reference and incorporated
herein as if set out in full.
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ANNEXATIONS
      
II.   HISTORIC PROPERTY
      
III.   STREET CLOSINGS
      
IV.   SERVICE DISTRICT
TABLE I: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
00-  8-29-  Annexing a tract of land in Cleveland County on tax map 4-51, Block 1, Lot 11
30   2000
01-  2-27-  Annexing a tract of land in Cleveland County on tax map 4-51, Block 1, Lot
18   2001   31, containing 2.82 acres
03-  3-25-  Annexing a tract of land in Cleveland County on tax map 4-51, Block 1, Lot
05   2003   48R, containing 58.024 acres
03-  5-27-  Annexing a tract of land in Cleveland County on tax map 4-26, Block 1, Lot
08   2003   20, containing 12.53 acres
03-  8-26-  Annexing Water Plant, New Camp Creek Church Rd. recreational facility and the
26   2003   lake office/campground facility
03-  12-16- Annexing a tract of land in Cleveland County on tax map 4-51, Block 1, Lot
34   2003   49, containing 14 acres
04-  3-30-  Annexing a tract of land containing 10.1 acres
02   2004
06-  6-27-  Annexing a tract of land in Cleveland County on tax map 4-30, Block 1, Lot
17   2006   21, containing 84 acres:
          (1) beginning at a nail in the center of the bridge over Beasons Creek in the
            centerline of Crocker Road
          (2) beginning at a pipe in the east of Crocker Road at the northwest corner
            of Scarborough’s tract
06-  7-25-  Annexing a tract of land:
20   2006
          (1) in Cleveland County on tax map 4-28, Block 1, Lots 16 and 203, containing
            112 acres
          (2) in Cleveland County located south of Countryside Road, but not touching
            the same, containing 4.19 acres
06-  10-24- Annexation agreement for land with the address of 116 Battleground Road,
31   2006   containing approximately 11.11 acres
            Annexing a tract of land beginning on the right-of-way monument located at
06-  11-14- the intersection of the westerly margin of the right-of-way for N.C. Highway
32   2006   216 with the northwesterly margin of the right-of-way for U.S. Interstate
            Highway 85
06-  11-28- Redrawing the ward lines of the city include annexations
33   2006
06-  11-28- Annexing a tract of land
34   2006
06-  11-28- Annexing a tract of land designated on tax map 4-26, Block 1, Lots 1 and 6,
36   2006   containing 21.45 acres
07-  7-31-  Annexing a tract of land designated on tax map 4-23, Block 1, Lot 45,
26   2007   containing 3.158 acres
07-  7-31-  Annexing a tract of land designated on tax map 221, Block 1, Lots 105 and
27   2007   106, containing 2.490 acres
09-  9-29-  Annexing a tract of land beginning at an iron pin in the western margin of
24   2009   State Highway 161, the common corner of Beulah Mauney and W.A. Queen
09-  9-29-  Annexing a tract of land being 74.64 acres
25   2009
09-  10-27- Annexing a tract of land located on the east side of Kings Mountain
28   2009   Boulevard, a five-acre tract entitled the “Minor Subdivision for Hospice of
            Cleveland County”
09-  10-27- Annexing a tract of land being the full contents of Lot 13, Block C, of
29   2009   Archdale Mines, Inc.
09-  11-24- Annexing a tract of land beginning at the northeast corner boundary of tax
32   2009   map 4-29-A, Block 1, Lot 5U
09-  11-24- Annexing a tract of land being located at the northwest corner of Lot 22 of
33   2009   Crocker Ridge Phase 2, as shown on tax map 4-30
09-  12-15- Annexing a tract of land:
36   2009
          (1) in Cleveland County known as parcel identification number 7761, map 4-8,
            Block 1, Lot 59
          (2) beginning at an iron stake, which is N. 70-32 E. 53.94 feet from an iron
            stake, a common corner of C.C. Whisnant, G.H. Herndon and the city
10-  3-30-  Annexing a tract of land on Cleveland County tax maps as No. 4-68, Block 1,
07   2010   Lot 9, or as parcel identification number 12472
11-  3-29-  Annexing a tract of land designated on tax map 4-29, Block 1, Lot 24 (Dennis
02   2011   and Lou Ann Goforth)
11-  3-29-  Annexing a tract of land designated on tax map 4-28, Block 1, Lot 211, Parcel
03   2011   61589 (T5 @ Kings Mountain LLC)
11-  3-29-  Annexing a tract of land designated on tax map 4-23, Block 1, Lot 59, Parcel
04   2011   60666 (T5 @ Kings Mountain II, LLC)
11-  10-25- Annexing a tract of land designated on tax map 4-28, Block 1, Lots 25 and
19   2011   199, Parcel 10982 and 56145 (T5 @ Kings Mountain V, LLC)
11-  12-12- Annexing a tract of land designated on tax map 4-28, Block 1, Lots 14, 15,
27   2011   21, 51 and 202, Parcels 10978, 57269, 10972 (T5 @ Kings Mountain V and/or
            III, LLC)
15-  10-27- Annexing non-contiguous territory of ATLA/ACSM Land Title Survey of tax
28   2015   parcels 11619, 12874, and 12875 (T4 @ Cleveland County, NC)
16-  8-30-  Annexing contiguous territory being all of Lot No. 1, Parcel 63005,
31   2016   consisting of 4.25 acres
17-  12-19- Extending the corporate limits of the city and annexing non-contiguous
24   2017   territory
20-  5-26-  Annexing "New Lot 1" consisting of 0.71 acres and "New Lot 2" consisting of
09   2020   17.11 acres
20-  9-29-  Annexing non-contiguous territory owned by Matthews Land Company, LLC
19   2020
20-  9-29-  Annexing Parcel Number 11650 owned by E5 Holdings, LLC
20   2020
20-  9-29-  Annexing Parcel Number 11658 owned by Roadside Truck Plaza, Inc.
21   2020
21-  5-25-  Annexing Parcel Numbers 62514, 72747, 13810, 55635, 11081, and 11082 owned by
19   2021   R. Dean Harrell
21-  8-31-  Annexing contiguous territory consisting of 29.88 acres owned by Kenneth F.
31   2021   Davis and Amy C. Davis
21-  10-26- Annexing contiguous territory consisting of 4.276 acres owned by KM
38   2021   Acquisition QOZB 1, LLC
21-  10-26- Annexing noncontiguous territory owned by KM Acquisition QOZB 1, LLC
39   2021
21-  12-14- Annexing contiguous territory owned by Brinkley Properties of Kings Mountain,
46   2021   LLC
22-  3-29-  Annexing contiguous territory owned by Michael Eugene Bumgardner II, Rebecca
07   2022   Cashion Bumgardner, Faylene Falls Voet, Michael Eugene Bumgardner, and
            William Zura Cashion, Jr.
23-  3-28-  Entering into an annexation agreement with the Town of Grover, to annex
04   2023   noncontiguous territory consisting of 23.14 acres owned by the City of Kings
            Mountain.
24-  7-30-  Entering into an annexation agreement with the Town of Grover, to annex two
27   2024   noncontiguous territories consisting of 143.687 and 1.1 acres owned by the
            city
           
 
TABLE II: HISTORIC PROPERTY
 
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
99-  3-30-  Designating the W. Andrew and Jacob S. Mauney Store (1st Andrew Mauney
04   1999   House and Tract) (Mary Neisler) as history property
09-  5-26-  Designating the J.A. Falls House (Withrow’s Funeral Home) as historic
03   2009   property
           
 
TABLE III: STREET CLOSINGS
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
04-19    9-28-2004   Closing a portion of Hawthorne Road that lies between
                     Railroad Avenue and U.S. 29 (South Battleground)
11-14    9-27-2011   Closing a portion of East Mountain Street
11-20    10-25-2011  Closing a portion of Quality Lane (SR 2312)
12-12    6-26-2012   Closing a portion of Oak Street
21-30    8-31-2021   Closing a portion of James Street
                    
 
TABLE IV: SERVICE DISTRICT
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
03-18    6-24-2003   Creating and defining the Downtown Municipal Service
                     District
04-15    6-29-2004   Creating and defining the Downtown Municipal Service
                     District
06-18    6-27-2006   Creating and defining the Downtown Municipal Service
                     District
09-15    6-30-2009   Creating and defining the Downtown Municipal Service
                     District
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to Prior Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
G.S. Section Code Section
G.S. Section                Code Section
1A-1                        151.42,
                            151.99
Ch. 14                      114.07
Ch. 14, Art. 27A            91.02
                            10.99,
                            92.99,
14-4                        96.999,
                            Ch. 130,
                            131.99
                            100.04,
14-145                      100.05;
                            Ch. 112
14-223                      130.02
14-269(B)                   130.04
14-280                      130.05,
                            130.06
14-286                      98.06
14-288.1                    134.05
14-288.2                    130.09
14-288.4(a)(7)              130.06
14-318.1                    96.003
14-399                      97.07
14-415.11                   130.04
14-444                      130.10
15-A-1340.23                114.99
15-27.2                     54.072
Ch. 18B                     114.07,
                            130.10
18B-1001                    110.30
18B-1004                    110.30
Ch. 19A                     110.33
20-5                        116.047
20-11                       74.03
20-134                      73.12
20-140.2                    70.08
20-141                      Ch. 72
20-156                      70.06
20-158                      73.06
20-162                      73.04,
                            98.07
20-163                      73.02
                            Ch. 70,
20-169                      Ch. 71,
                            Ch. 72
20-171                      70.05
20-280                      116.067
25-3-506                    50.13
44A-1 et seq.               101.11
Ch. 74, Art. 7              151.05
75A-1 et seq.               Ch. 91
85B-1 et seq.               110.31
87-14                       150.35
90-86 et seq.               131.01
90-86 - 90-113.8            116.053
90-113.8A - 90-113.14       116.053
90-113.20 et seq.           131.02
Ch. 93B                     110.11
Ch. 105, Art. 2             110.19
Ch. 105, Subch. 1, Art. 5   120.08
Ch. 105, Art. 5             120.99
105-41 (Repealed)           110.10
105-41(b) (Repealed)        110.10
105-42 (Repealed)           110.10
105-88                      110.10
105-103                     110.04
105-105                     110.09
105-109                     110.04
105-164.3(121)              120.01
105-187.1(a)(3)             120.01
105-187.1(a)(8)             120.01
105-236                     118.99
Ch. 105, Art. 9             120.99
105-349                     120.01
106-549.31                  111.17
106-549.33                  111.17
113-127 et seq.             Ch. 91
113A-1 et seq.              151.27
113A-50 et seq.             Ch. 151
113A-56                     151.05
113A-57(3)                  151.44
113A-61(c)                  151.41
113A-64                     151.04
113A-64(b)                  151.27
Ch. 121                     30.03
125-13                      Ch. 94
130A-290                    Ch. 97
Ch. 131F                    Ch. 115
Ch. 132                     30.03
136-141 et seq              101.15
136-143                     101.15
Ch. 139                     151.04
Ch. 143, Art. 21            53.167
Ch. 143, Art. 33C           155.38
143-213(18)                 53.131
143-214.7                   54.002,
                            54.003
143-215.1                   53.143
143-215.1(b)                53.143
143-215.1(d)                53.131
143-215.3(a)(14)            53.131
143-215.3C                  53.154
143-215.6B                  53.167
143-215.6B(f)               53.167
143-215.6B(g)               53.167
143-215.6B(h)               53.167
143-215.6B(i)               53.167
143-215.105 et seq.         Ch. 96
143-318.9 et seq.           32.39
153A-275                    53.130
159-7 et seq.               Ch. 34
159-24                      32.02
                            90.043,
Ch. 160A, Art. 10           90.062,
                            90.065,
                            90.083
Ch. 160A, Art. 19           98.21
Ch. 160A, Art. 19, Part 3C  155.01
160A-22                     31.01
160A-23                     31.01
160A-55 - 160A-59           31.01
160A-63                     31.01
160A-68                     31.01
160A-69                     31.02
160A-70                     31.02
160A-74                     31.08
160A-75                     31.08
160A-77                     Ch. 70
160A-101(7)(c)              31.01
160A-146                    Ch. 32
160A-147                    32.20
160A-148                    32.21
160A-149                    32.22
160A-150                    32.23
160A-151                    32.24
160A-171                    32.02
160A-172                    32.03
160A-173                    32.01
160A-174                    Ch. 96,
                            Ch. 130
                            10.99,
                            90.999,
                            150.99,
160A-175                    152.15,
                            152.35,
                            154.08,
                            154.09
160A-175(c)                 97.14
160A-175(d), (e)            99.15
160A-178                    115.04
160A-181                    130.10
160A-184                    96.004,
                            130.10
160A-191                    130.10
                            10.99,
160A-193                    30.02,
                            54.101
160A-208.1                  120.04
160A-209(c)(8)              Ch. 95
160A-209(c)(20)             Ch. 94
160A-211 (Repealed)         120.02
160A-215                    118.02
160A-215.1                  120.09
160A-215.1(b)               120.07
160A-215.1(d)               120.08
160A-215.1(e)(1)            120.01
160A-215.1(e)(2)            120.01
160A-215.1(f)               120.99
160A-296                    Ch. 90
160A-300 et seq.            Ch. 70
160A-301                    Ch. 73
160A-312                    53.130
160A-341 et seq.            Ch. 95
160A-354                    Ch. 91
160A-350 et seq.            Ch. 91
160A-360 et seq.            32.35
160A-362                    30.02,
                            32.36
160A-411 et seq.            30.02
160A-414                    150.39
160A-417                    150.35,
                            150.99
160A-421                    151.99
160A-426 et seq.            Ch. 98
160A-435                    Ch. 98
160A-436                    150.35
160A-441                    152.01,
                            152.04
160A-441 et seq.            30.02
160A-442                    152.02
160A-443(2)                 152.05
160A-443(3)-(5)             152.07
160A-443(5)                 152.06
160A-443(6)                 152.08
160A-444                    152.13
160A-445                    152.12
160A-446(f)                 152.10
160A-448                    152.04
160D-1201 through 160D-1212 152.01
Ch. 163, Art. 23            31.01
Ch. 163, Art. 24            31.01
163-293                     31.01
164-7                       10.14
1600-1118 through 1600-1125 152.20
                            
 
REFERENCES TO PRIOR CODE
Prior Code Section 2012 Code Section
Prior Code Section 2012 Code Section
1-2                10.05
1-6                10.10
1-8                10.99
1-9                10.09
1-13               10.19
2-1                30.01
2-2                30.01
2-3                30.02
2-4                30.03
2-19               31.01
2-20               31.02
2-21               31.02
2-22               31.02
2-23               31.02
2-24               31.03
2-25               31.04
2-26               31.05
2-27               31.06
2-28               31.07
2-29               31.08
2-30               31.09
2-31               32.01
2-40               32.20
2-41               32.21
2-42               32.22
2-43               32.23
2-44               32.24
2-45               32.02
2-46               32.03
2-60               32.35
2-61               32.36
2-62               32.37
2-63               32.38
2-64               32.39
2-65               32.40
2-66               32.41
2-67               32.41
2-68               32.41
2-69               32.42
2-70               32.43
4-1                150.01
4-2                98.08
4-3                150.15
4-4                150.16
4-5                150.17
4-6                150.18
4-7                150.19
4-20               150.35
4-22               150.36
4-23               150.37
4-24               150.38
4-25               150.39
4-26               150.39
4-35               150.99
4-150              152.01
4-151              152.02
4-152              152.03
4-153              152.04
4-156              152.05
4-157              152.06
4-158              152.06
4-159              152.07
4-160              152.08
4-161              152.09
4-162              152.10
4-163              152.11
4-164              152.12
4-165              152.13
5-20               95.01
5-21               95.02
5-22               95.03
5-23               95.04
5-24               95.05
5-25               95.06
5-26               95.07
5-27               95.08
5-28               95.09
5-29               95.10
5-30               95.11
5-31               95.12
5-32               95.13
5-33               95.14
5-34               95.15
5-35               95.16
5-36               95.17
5-37               95.18
5-38               95.19
5-39               95.20
5-40               95.21
5-41               95.22
5-42               95.23
5-43               95.24
5-50               95.35
5-51               95.36
5-52               95.37
5-53               95.38
5-54               95.39
5-55               95.40
5-56               95.41
5-57               95.42
5-58               95.43
5-59               95.44
5-60               95.44
5-61               95.45
5-62               95.46
5-63               95.47
5-64               95.48
6-1                34.01
6-2                34.02
6-3                34.02
6-4                34.02
6-5                34.02
7-1                98.01
7-2                98.02
7-6                98.03
7-7                98.04
7-8                98.05
7-9                98.06
7-10               98.07
7-20               98.20
7-21               98.21
7-22               98.22
7-23               98.23
8-1                97.01
8-2                97.02
8-3                97.03
8-4                97.04
8-5                97.05
8-6                97.06
8-7                97.99
8-8                97.99
8-9                97.99
8-10               97.07
8-11               97.08
8-12               97.09
8-13               97.10
8-14               97.11
8-15               97.12
8-16               97.13
8-17               97.13
8-18               97.14
8-19               97.15
8-20               97.16
8-21               97.17
8-30               97.30
8-31               97.31
8-32               97.32
8-33               97.33
8-34               97.34
8-35               97.35
8-36               97.36
8-37               97.37
8-38               97.38
8-39               97.39
8-40               97.40
8-41               97.41
8-42               97.42
8-43               97.43
8-44               97.44
8-45               97.45
8-46               97.46
8-47               97.47
8-48               97.48
8-51               97.50
8-52               97.51
8-53               97.52
8-54               97.53
8-55               97.54
8-60               101.01
8-61               101.02
8-62               101.03
8-63               101.04
8-64               101.05
8-65               101.06
8-66               101.07
8-67               101.08
8-68               101.09
8-69               101.10
8-70               101.11
8-71               101.12
8-72               101.13
9-1                96.001
9-2                96.001
9-3                96.001
9-4                96.002
9-5                96.003
9-6                96.003
9-7                96.004
9-8                96.004
9-20               96.015
9-21               96.016
9-22               96.017
9-23               96.018
9-24               96.019
9-30               96.030
9-31               96.031
9-32               96.032
9-33               96.033
9-34               96.034
9-35               96.035
9-40               96.050
9-41               96.051
9-42               96.052
9-43               96.053
9-44               96.054
9-45               96.055
9-46               96.056
9-47               96.057
9-48               96.058
9-49               96.059
9-50               96.060
9-51               96.061
10-1               94.01
10-2               94.02
10-3               94.03
10-4               94.04
10-5               94.05
10-6               94.06
11-1               50.01
11-2               50.02
11-3               50.03
11-4               50.04
11-5               50.05
11-6               50.06
11-7               50.07
11-8               50.07
11-9               50.08
11-10              50.09
11-11              50.10
11-12              50.11
11-13              50.12
11-14              50.12
11-15              50.12
11-16              50.13
11-16              50.99
11-20              51.01
11-21              51.02
11-22              51.03
11-23              51.03
11-24              51.04
11-25              51.05
11-26              51.06
11-29              51.07
11-30              51.08
11-31              51.09
11-32              51.10
11-33              51.11
11-34              51.12
11-35              51.13
11-36              51.14
11-37              51.15
11-38              51.16
11-39              51.17
11-40              51.18
11-41              51.19
11-130             52.01
11-131             52.02
11-132             52.03
11-133             52.04
12-26              110.30
12-28              110.31
12-29              110.31
12-30              110.31
12-31              110.31
12-32              110.31
12-33              110.32
12-34              111.01 -
                   111.22
12-35              110.33
12-36              110.33
12-37              110.33
12-38              110.34
12-50              112.01
12-51              112.02
12-52              112.03
12-53              112.04
12-54              112.05
12-55              112.20
12-56              112.21
12-57              112.22
12-58              112.23
12-59              112.24
12-70              113.01
12-71              113.02
12-72              113.02
12-73              113.02
12-74              113.03
12-75              113.03
12-76              113.04
12-77              113.05
12-78              113.06
12-79              113.07
12-90              114.01
12-91              114.02
12-92              114.03
12-93              114.04
12-95              114.06
12-96              114.07
12-97              114.08
12-97              114.99
12-100             114.09
12-120             115.20
12-121             115.21
12-122             115.22
12-123             115.23
12-124             115.24
12-125             115.25
12-126             115.99
12-127             115.26
12-128             115.27
12-129             115.28
12-130             115.29
12-131             115.30
12-132             115.31
12-133             115.32
12-134             115.33
12-135             115.34
12-136             115.35
13-1               130.01
13-2               130.01
13-3               130.01
13-4               130.02
13-7               130.03
13-10              130.04
13-11              130.05
13-12              130.06
13-13              130.07
13-14              130.08
13-15              130.09
13-16              130.10
13-17              132.01 -
                   132.08
13-18              133.01 -
                   133.09
13-19              134.01 -
                   134.05
13-40              100.01,
                   100.99
13-41              100.02
13-42              100.03
13-43              100.04
13-44              100.05
13-45              100.06
14-4               91.01
14-20              91.15
14-21              91.15
14-22              91.16
14-26              91.17
14-27              91.18
14-28              91.19
14-29              91.20
14-30              91.21
14-31              91.22
14-49              92.15
14-50              92.16
14-51              92.17
14-52              92.18
14-53              92.19
14-54              92.20
14-55              92.21
14-56              92.22
14-57              92.23
14-58              92.24
14-59              92.25
14-60              92.26
14-61              92.27
14-62              92.28
14-63              92.29
14-64              92.30
14-65              92.31
14-66              92.32
14-67              92.33
14-68              92.34
14-69              92.35
14-70              92.36
14-71              92.37
14-72              92.38
14-73              92.39
14-74              92.40
14-75              92.41
14-76              92.42
14-77              92.43
14-79              92.99
14-80              92.55
14-81              92.56
14-82              92.57
14-83              92.58
15-1               33.01
16-1               90.001
16-2               90.002
16-3               90.003
16-16              90.015
16-17              90.016
16-18              90.017
16-19              90.018
16-20              90.019
16-21              90.020
16-22              90.021
16-23              90.022
16-24              90.023
16-25              90.024
16-26              90.025
16-27              90.026
16-28              90.027
16-29              90.028
16-30              90.029
16-31              90.030
16-32              90.031
16-33              90.032
16-34              90.033
16-35              90.034
16-36              90.035
16-37              90.036
16-39              90.037
16-40              90.038
16-41              90.039
16-42              90.040
16-43              90.041
16-44              90.042
16-45              90.043
16-46              90.044
16-47              90.045
16-48              90.046
16-49              90.047
16-50              90.048
16-65              90.060
16-66              90.061
16-67              90.062
16-68              90.063
16-69              90.064
16-70              90.065
16-71              90.066
16-72              90.067
16-73              90.068
16-80              90.080
16-81              90.081
16-82              90.082
16-83              90.083
16-84              90.084
16-95              90.095
16-96              90.096
16-97              90.097
16-98              90.098
16-99              90.099
16-100             90.100
16-101             90.101
16-102             90.102
16-103             90.103
16-104             90.104
16-105             90.105
16-106             90.106
16-107             90.107
16-115             90.120
16-116             90.121
16-117             90.122
16-118             90.123
16-119             90.124
16-120             90.125
16-121             90.126
16-122             90.127
16-125             90.140
16-126             90.141
16-127             90.142
16-128             90.143
16-129             90.144
16-132             93.01
16-133             93.02
16-136             93.03
16-137             93.04
16-141             90.999,
                   93.99
17-16              116.001
17-17              116.002
17-18              116.003
17-19              116.999
17-20              116.020
17-21              116.021
17-22              116.022
17-23              116.023
17-24              116.024
17-25              116.025
17-26              116.026
17-27              116.027
17-28              116.028
17-29              116.029
17-30              116.030
17-31              116.031
17-32              116.032
17-33              116.033
17-34              116.045
17-35              116.046
17-36              116.047
17-37              116.048
17-38              116.049
17-39              116.050
17-40              116.051
17-41              116.052
17-42              116.053
17-43              116.053
17-44              116.054
17-45              116.065
17-46              116.066
17-47              116.067
17-48              116.068
17-49              116.069
17-50              116.070
17-51              116.071
17-52              116.072
17-53              116.073
17-54              116.074
17-55              116.075
17-56              116.090
17-57              116.091
17-58              116.092
17-60              116.093
17-61              116.105
17-62              116.106
17-63              116.107
18-1               70.01
18-2               70.02
18-3               70.03
18-4               70.04
18-5               70.05
18-6               70.06
18-7               70.07
18-8               70.08
18-9               70.09
18-10              70.10
18-11              70.11
18-12              70.12
18-13              70.13
18-14              70.14
18-15              70.15
18-16              70.16
18-30              72.01
18-31              72.02
18-32              72.03
18-33              72.04
18-34              72.05
18-35              72.06
18-36              72.07
18-37              72.08
18-38              72.09
18-39              72.10
18-40              72.11
18-41              72.12
18-42              72.13
18-43              72.14
18-50              71.01
18-51              71.02
18-52              71.03
18-53              71.04
18-54              71.05
18-60              72.25
18-70              73.01
18-72              73.02
18-73              73.03
18-74              73.04
18-75              73.05
18-76              73.06
18-77              73.07
18-78              73.08
18-79              73.09
18-80              73.10
18-81              73.11
18-82              73.12
18-83              73.13
18-84              73.14
18-85              73.15
18-86              73.16
18-87              73.17
                   
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Description
–      2-14-1989   30.03
–      7-25-1989   31.04
09-05    6-30-2009   31.04
25-07    2-25-2025   31.04
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
–      4-12-1988   130.10
88-17    8-9-1988    52.01 -
                     52.04
–      3-28-1989   33.01
                     90.001 -
                     90.003,
                     90.015 -
                     90.048,
                     90.060 -
                     90.068,
                     90.080 -
                     90.084,
–      9-26-1989   90.095 -
                     90.107,
                     90.120 -
                     90.127,
                     90.140 -
                     90.144,
                     90.999,
                     93.01 -
                     93.04,
                     93.99
–      11-28-1989  32.35 -
                     32.41
90-03    2-27-1990   33.01
–      6-5-1990    91.01
–      7-31-1990   91.01
90-15    7-31-1990   33.01
                     34.02,
                     50.08,
–      4-29-1991   50.09,
                     50.13,
                     50.99,
                     51.06
–      5-14-1991   31.01,
                     31.08
                     97.31,
                     97.35,
–      6-25-1991   97.36,
                     97.40,
                     97.50
–      8-27-1991   97.10,
                     97.51
                     91.15 -
                     91.22,
                     92.16 -
                     92.39,
                     92.55 -
                     92.58,
–      11-26-1991  92.99,
                     132.01 -
                     132.08,
                     133.01 -
                     133.09,
                     134.01 -
                     134.05
92-04    2-25-1992   33.01
93-7     3-30-1992   92.18
                     92.15,
                     92.40 -
–      3-31-1992   92.43,
                     101.01 -
                     101.13
                     116.001 -
                     116.003,
                     116.020 -
                     116.033,
                     116.045 -
                     116.054,
–      5-26-1992   116.065 -
                     116.075,
                     116.090 -
                     116.093,
                     116.105 -
                     116.107,
                     116.999
–      6-30-1992   116.093
                     98.01,
92-26    12-15-1992  98.20 -
                     98.23
93-09    5-18-1993   97.50
93-10    5-18-1993   50.13
93-11    5-25-1993   98.08
93-17    6-29-1993   98.23
                     96.075 -
93-24    8-31-1993   96.078,
                     96.999
                     92.37,
93-26    9-28-1993   92.38,
                     92.56
93-28    10-26-1993  32.36
93-31    12-14-1993  119.01
94-02    1-25-1994   53.006
94-22    11-29-1994  33.01
95-12    9-26-1995   130.04,
                     130.99
95-13    11-28-1995  33.01
96-05    5-28-1996   110.30
                     98.35 -
96-15    7-30-1996   98.39,
                     98.99
96-16    8-27-1996   32.20
96-19    8-27-1996   90.098
96-20    8-27-1996   30.02,
                     150.01
96-23    10-29-1996  33.01
97-03    1-28-1997   33.01
97-14    6-24-1997   95.36
97-29    9-30-1997   33.01
98-01    1-20-1998   97.53,
                     97.54
98-04    2-23-1998   51.05
98-06    4-28-1998   152.01
                     155.01 -
                     155.04,
98-08    4-28-1998   155.20 -
                     155.22,
                     155.35 -
                     155.42
99-02    2-23-1999   73.04
99-04    3-30-1999   T.S.O. II
99-08A   4-27-1999   101.06
99-11    5-25-1999   30.04
                     97.01 -
                     97.07,
                     97.09 -
                     97.11,
                     97.30,
                     97.32,
                     97.33,
00-26    6-19-2000   97.35,
                     97.37 -
                     97.39,
                     97.41,
                     97.44,
                     97.48,
                     97.52,
                     97.99
                     120.01 -
00-27    6-27-2000   120.10,
                     120.99
00-29    7-25-2000   154.01 -
                     154.02
00-30    8-29-2000   T.S.O. I
01-18    2-27-2001   T.S.O. I
                     53.001 -
                     53.005,
                     53.020 -
                     53.029,
                     53.040 -
                     53.043,
                     53.055 -
                     53.057,
                     53.070 -
                     53.076,
01-19    3-27-2001   53.090 -
                     53.100,
                     53.115,
                     53.130 -
                     53.139,
                     53.141 -
                     53.154,
                     53.165,
                     53.167 -
                     53.169,
                     53.171,
                     53.999
01-31    5-29-2001   152.01
01-41    6-26-2001   30.05
                     53.042 -
01-47    10-30-2001  90.044,
                     90.049,
                     90.069
01-51    12-11-2001  150.01
                     118.01 -
02-01    1-29-2002   118.05,
                     118.99
02-04    3-26-2002   115.01 -
                     115.07
02-19    8-27-2002   150.38
03-05    3-25-2003   T.S.O. I
03-08    5-27-2003   T.S.O. I
03-18    6-24-2003   T.S.O. IV
03-26    8-26-2003   T.S.O. I
03-34    12-16-2003  T.S.O. I
03-33    12-16-2003  33.01
04-01    2-24-2004   33.01
04-02    3-30-2004   T.S.O. I
04-15    6-29-2004   T.S.O. IV
04-19    9-28-2004   T.S.O. III
05-01    1-25-2005   33.01
05-02    3-29-2005   33.01
05-15    6-28-2005   97.51
06-02    1-31-2006   32.36
                     97.01,
06-11    6-27-2006   97.12,
                     97.99
06-17    6-27-2006   T.S.O. I
06-18    6-27-2006   T.S.O. IV
06-20    7-25-2006   T.S.O. I
06-30    7-25-2006   33.01
06-31    10-24-2006  T.S.O. I
06-32    11-14-2006  T.S.O. I
06-33    11-28-2006  T.S.O. I
06-34    8-29-2006   33.01
06-34    11-28-2006  T.S.O. I
                     131.01 -
06-35    11-28-2006  131.04,
                     131.99
06-36    11-28-2006  T.S.O. I
07-12    4-24-2007   31.01
07-26    7-31-2007   T.S.O. I
07-27    7-31-2007   T.S.O. I
07-32    11-27-2007  153.01
                     110.01 -
08-07    4-29-2008   110.19,
                     110.99
08-23    7-29-2008   91.03,
                     91.99
                     74.01 -
08-24    7-29-2008   74.06,
                     74.99
08-27    8-26-2008   74.03
08-28    9-30-2008   130.04
09-03    5-26-2009   T.S.O. II
09-05    6-30-2009   31.04
09-15    6-30-2009   T.S.O. IV
09-21    6-30-2009   33.01
09-23    8-25-2009   101.02
09-24    9-29-2009   T.S.O. I
09-25    9-29-2009   T.S.O. I
09-26    9-29-2009   92.01
09-28    10-27-2009  T.S.O. I
09-29    10-27-2009  T.S.O. I
09-30A   10-27-2009  96.076
09-32    11-24-2009  T.S.O. I
09-33    11-24-2009  T.S.O. I
09-36    12-15-2009  T.S.O. I
10-07    3-30-2010   T.S.O. I
10-10    4-27-2010   110.19
10-11    5-25-2010   117.01 -
                     117.07
10-16    6-29-2010   33.01
10-22    9-28-2010   102.01 -
                     102.06
10-23    10-26-2010  72.15
11-02    3-29-2011   T.S.O. I
11-03    3-29-2011   T.S.O. I
11-04    3-29-2011   T.S.O. I
11-12    6-28-2011   30.05
11-14    9-27-2011   T.S.O. III
11-18    10-25-2011  53.185 -
                     53.193
11-19    10-25-2011  T.S.O. I
11-20    10-25-2011  T.S.O. III
11-27    12-12-2011  T.S.O. I
12-12    6-26-2012   T.S.O. III
12-24    9-25-2012   Adopting Ordinance
                     53.130 -
13-20    9-24-2013   53.154,
                     53.165 -
                     53.171
13-21    9-24-2013   91.03
                     151.01 -
                     151.05,
                     151.15 -
13-34    11-26-2013  151.27,
                     151.41 -
                     151.44,
                     151.99
13-36    12-10-2013  155.02
14-01    2-25-2014   92.40,
                     92.41
14-15    7-29-2014   91.03
14-16    9-30-2014   50.13
                     54.001 -
                     54.013,
                     54.030 -
                     54.034,
                     54.050 -
15-01    1-15-2015   54.056,
                     54.070 -
                     54.076,
                     54.080,
                     54.100 -
                     54.102
15-06    3-31-2015   92.36,
                     92.37
15-20    9-29-2015   73.04
15-21    9-29-2015   71.06
15-28    10-27-2015  T.S.O. I
16-04    3-29-2016   73.04
16-27    6-28-2016   71.07
16-28    7-26-2016   98.45 -
                     98.48
16-29    8-30-2016   110.30
16-31    8-30-2016   T.S.O. I
16-32    9-27-2016   90.068
16-33    9-27-2016   90.082
17-02    1-31-2017   97.38,
                     97.41
17-03    1-31-2017   50.09
17-06    2-28-2017   130.10
17-08    5-30-2017   71.01
17-09    5-30-2017   71.01
17-10    5-30-2017   71.01
17-16    6-27-2017   71.01
17-20    9-26-2017   71.01
17-22    11-28-2017  71.01
17-23    11-28-2017  71.01
17-24    12-19-2017  T.S.O. I
18-08    5-29-2018   91.16
18-14    7-31-2018   91.04
18-16    8-28-2018   72.25
18-22    11-27-2018  130.10
18-23    11-18-2018  53.185 -
                     53.193
19-01    2-26-2019   32.36,
                     92.01
19-14    7-30-2019   73.04
19-15    7-30-2019   91.03
19-20    11-26-2019  92.24,
                     92.99
                     32.36,
                     92.01,
19-21    11-26-2019  94.01 -
                     94.05,
                     110.30,
                     155.02
19-22    12-17-2019  152.01 -
                     152.13
19-23    12-17-2019  150.01
20-09    5-26-2020   T.S.O. I
20-19    9-29-2020   T.S.O. I
20-20    9-29-2020   T.S.O. I
20-21    9-29-2020   T.S.O. I
20-25    10-27-2020  110.30
20-25(A) 11-5-2020   110.30
20-30    11-24-2020  154.01,
                     154.02
20-33    12-15-2020  30.05
20-34    12-15-2020  30.05
21-14    4-27-2021   90.027
21-15    4-27-2021   96.004
21-19    5-25-2021   T.S.O. I
21-26    6-29-2021   156.01
21-30    8-31-2021   T.S.O. III
21-31    8-31-2021   T.S.O. I
21-38    10-26-2021  T.S.O. I
21-39    10-26-2021  T.S.O. I
21-42    11-10-2021  30.05
21-45    12-14-2021  152.01
21-46    12-14-2021  T.S.O. I
22-01    1-25-2022   73.04
                     99.01 -
22-02    1-25-2022   99.15,
                     99.99
22-07    3-29-2022   T.S.O. I
22-10    4-26-2022   30.05
22-21    6-28-2022   30.05
22-25    8-30-2022   73.04
-        3-20-2023   32.36
22-36    10-25-2022  73.04
23-04    3-28-2023   T.S.O. I
23-20    8-29-2023   53.185 -
                     53.193
23-21    8-29-2023   54.030,
                     54.034
23-22    8-29-2023   151.41
23-25    9-14-2023   30.05
23-26    9-26-2023   71.06
23-33    10-12-2023  102.01 -
                     102.06
23-38    11-9-2023   53.205 -
                     53.226
                     97.38,
24-02    1-11-2024   97.41,
                     97.52,
                     97.99
24-27    7-30-2024   T.S.O. I
24-37    9-12-2024   90.142
24-49    12-10-2024  101.01 -
                     101.15
                     152.01 -
24-50    12-10-2024  152.15,
                     152.20 -
                     152.35
24-51    12-10-2024  154.01 -
                     154.09
                    
 
