COUNTY OF LINCOLN, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2026 S-9 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through Ordinance passed 1-5-2026; and
State legislation current through 2024 North Carolina Legislative Service,
Pamphlet No. 2
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588 www.amlegal.com
OFFICIALS OF LINCOLN COUNTY,
NORTH CAROLINA
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
Jamie Lineberger, Chairman
Bud Cesena, Vice Chairman
Mark Mullen
Trent Carpenter
Alex Patton
Davin Madden, County Manager
Jennifer Farmer, Clerk to the Board
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 2009-05
AN ORDINANCE ENACTING A CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR LINCOLN COUNTY, REVISING,
AMENDING, RESTATING, CODIFYING, AND COMPILING CERTAIN EXISTING GENERAL
ORDINANCES OF LINCOLN COUNTY DEALING WITH SUBJECTS EMBRACED IN SUCH CODE OF
ORDINANCES
   WHEREAS, the present general and permanent ordinances of Lincoln County were
adopted at various times over a number of years and are arranged and classified
in a variety of ways and formats; and
   WHEREAS, enacting a County Code for Lincoln County would provide a means of
standardizing the formats of the various ordinances embraced within it and
would be conducive to the preservation of the public health, peace, safety, and
general welfare of the citizens of Lincoln County and to the proper conduct of
its affairs; and
   WHEREAS, Section 153A-49 of the North Carolina General Statutes empower and
authorize the Board of Commissioners to revise, amend, restate, codify, and
compile any existing ordinances and all new ordinances not heretofore adopted
or published and to incorporate such ordinances into one ordinance in book
form; and
   WHEREAS, the Board has previously authorized a general compilation,
revision, and codification of the ordinances of Lincoln County of a general and
permanent nature and the publication of such ordinance in book form; and
   WHEREAS, it is necessary to provide for the usual daily operation of the
County and for the continued preservation of the public peace, health, safety,
and general welfare of the County that this ordinance take effect at an early
date;
   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT AND IT IS HEREBY ORDAINED AS FOLLOWS:
   Section 1. The general ordinances of Lincoln County as revised, amended,
restated, codified, and compiled in book form are hereby adopted and shall
constitute the "County of Lincoln, North Carolina, Code of Ordinances."
   Section 2. Such Code of Ordinances as hereby adopted in Section 1 shall
consist of the following Titles:
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
10. Rules of Construction: General Penalty
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
30. County Policies
31. County Organizations
32. Emergency Management
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
50. Water
51. Sewer Use
52. Solid Waste
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
70. Parking Regulations
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
90. False Alarms
91. Health and Safety; Nuisances
92. Animals
93. Addressing and Road Naming
94. Hazardous Wastes
95. Fire Prevention and Protection
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
110. Amusements
111. Peddlers and Solicitors
112. Emergency Medical Services
113. Pawnbrokers
114. Sexually-Oriented Businesses
115. Alcoholic Beverages
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
130. General Offenses
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
150. General Provisions
151. Flood Damage Prevention
152. Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control
153. Historic Properties
154. Watershed Protection
155. Subdivision Regulations
156. Zoning Code
   Section 3. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated in this
Code of Ordinances shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date
of this ordinance except as they are included and reordained in whole or in
part in such Code; provided, such repeal shall not affect any offense committed
or penalty incurred or any right established prior to the effective date of
this ordinance, nor shall such repeal affect the provisions of ordinances
levying taxes; appropriating money; annexing or detaching territory;
establishing franchises or granting special rights to certain persons;
authorizing public improvements; authorizing the issuance of bonds or borrowing
of money; authorizing the purchase, sale, or lease of real or personal
property; granting or accepting easements, plats, or dedications of land to
public use; vacating or setting the boundaries of streets, roads, or other
public places; nor shall such repeal affect any other ordinance of a temporary,
limited, transitory, or special nature or pertaining to subjects not contained
in or covered by the Code.
   Section 4. The Code of Ordinances shall be deemed published as of the date
of its adoption and approval by the Board of Commissioners, and the Clerk to
the Board is hereby authorized and ordered to file a copy of such Code of
Ordinances in her office.
   Section 5. Such Code shall be in full force and effect as provided in
Section 6 and shall be presumptive evidence in all courts and places of the
ordinance and all provisions, sections, penalties, and regulations therein
contained and of the date of passage.
   Section 6. This Ordinance shall take effect on ________________, 2009.
ADOPTED this 3rd day of August, 2009.
LINCOLN COUNTY
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
By: ________________________
   Alex E. Patton
   Chairman
ATTEST:
__________________
Amy S. Atkins
Clerk to the Board
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
      Chapter
         
10.   RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time; computing time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.19   Certain ordinances and resolutions not affected by code
   
10.20   Supplementation of code
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for Lincoln County, North Carolina,
shall be designated as the County of Lincoln, North Carolina, Code of
Ordinances, and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code, unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code, other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers, are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain,
ordinary, and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The governing body of Lincoln County, North
Carolina.
      CODE, THIS CODE, or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This county code, as
modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or
sections.
      COUNTY. Lincoln County, North Carolina.
      DAY. A calendar day.
      GOVERNOR. The Governor of North Carolina.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of
those persons or officers.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of the county, unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
      OWNER. Applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or a part of the property.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER, as applied to
any unincorporated entity, shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property, except real property.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
      REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of North Carolina.
      STREET. Any pathway, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway,
dedicated alley, lane, viaduct, bridge, and the approaches thereto within the
county, and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way or area between
abutting property lines.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of the building or land, whether alone
or with others.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Generally. The construction of all ordinances of the county shall be
by the following rules unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the
intent of the legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (B)   Specifically.
      (1)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
"and/or," if the sense requires it.
      (2)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to
be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
      (3)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; and the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future,
if applicable.
      (4)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of
terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, the
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the county exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, the spelling shall be corrected and the word or
words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within the county for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTING TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Saturday, Sunday, or a state holiday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   (A)   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced.
   (B)   All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect, unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication
shall take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided.
   (B)   Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from their
passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force,
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal, or
in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system hereof and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances
repeal any chapter, section, or division, or any portion thereof, the repealed
portions may be excluded from this code by omission from reprinted pages. The
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of
repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of the subsequent ordinances numbered or
omitted are readopted as a new code by the county.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of the code shall be made by
amending the provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
code in language substantially similar to the following: "Section
               of the County of Lincoln, North Carolina, Code of Ordinances, is
hereby amended as follows: . . ." The new provisions shall then be set out in
full as desired.
   (C)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added,
language substantially similar to the following shall be used: "The County of
Lincoln, North Carolina, Code of Ordinances, is hereby amended by adding a
section, to be numbered               , which section shall read as follows: .
. ." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (D)   All divisions, sections, subchapters, chapters, or provisions desired
to be repealed must be specifically repealed by division, section, subchapter,
or chapter number, as the case may be.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and the amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985;
Ord. 30, passed - -; Ord. passed 1-1-1995; Ord. passed - -)
   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (G.S. §
160A-11) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)
      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a "statutory reference" following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
   § 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      This county shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
   Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 132-1 et seq.
§ 10.19 CERTAIN ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS NOT AFFECTED BY CODE.
   (A)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following
ordinances or resolutions, which are not included herein:
      (1)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money for the county, authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county,
or providing any evidence of the county's indebtedness;
      (2)   Any appropriation ordinance or resolution, or any ordinance or
resolution providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget, or
prescribing salaries for county officers and employees;
      (3)   Any ordinance or resolution granting any franchise, permit, or
other right;
      (4)   Any ordinance or resolution approving, authorizing, or otherwise
relating to any contract, agreement, lease, deed, or other instrument;
      (5)   Any ordinance or resolution authorizing or otherwise relating to
any public improvement project or work;
      (6)   Any ordinance or resolution zoning or rezoning specific property or
amending the zoning map; and
      (7)   Any temporary or special ordinance or resolution, or any ordinance
or resolution of limited interest or transitory nature.
   (B)   All of the above ordinances and resolutions are hereby recognized as
continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length
herein.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to omit ordinances of the types enumerated above from the code,
see G.S. § 153A-49
§ 10.20 SUPPLEMENTATION OF CODE.
   (A)   By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this code shall be
prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the Board of
Commissioners. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent
and general parts of ordinances passed by the Board of Commissioners during the
period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The
pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the
code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or
partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have
been inserted, the code will be current through the date of the adoption of the
latest ordinance included in the supplement.
   (B)   In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages.
   (C)   When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency, or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, such as
American Legal Publishing Corporation) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes
in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it
is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the
codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings, and titles of sections
and other subdivisions of the code printed in the supplement, and make changes
in those catchlines, headings, and titles;
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be
inserted in the code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subdivision numbers;
      (4)   Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to
"this chapter," "this subchapter," "this division," and the like, as the case
may be, or to "§§      through      " (inserting section numbers to indicate
the sections of the code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance
incorporated into the code); and
      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the code; but, in no case
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to maintain code by replacement pages, see G.S. § 153A-49
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Authority. This section is adopted pursuant to the authority granted
to the Board of Commissioners in G.S. §§ 153A-121 and 153A-123.
   (B)   Applicability. Except as otherwise provided herein, the system of
penalties provided for in this section shall apply to any violation of any
county ordinance, unless otherwise prohibited by state law. The provisions of
this section shall not apply to the Lincoln County Fire Prevention and
Protection Ordinance (
Chapter 95 of this code), the penalties under which are hereby restored to the
levels at which they were set prior to the effective date of this section.
   (C)   Enforcement. Violations of county ordinances may be enforced by any
one or more of the remedies authorized by G.S. § 153A-123, including, but not
limited to, the following.
      (1)   Civil penalties; escalation of penalties for continuing violations.
Each day that a violation of a county ordinance continues shall be treated as a
separate violation subject to the accrual of the following civil penalties.
Upon being cited by the applicable ordinance administrator or officer
responsible for enforcement (hereinafter referred to as "enforcement officer")
for a violation of a county ordinance, the violator shall be subject to a civil
penalty of $50 per day for each day that the violation continues unabated for a
period of seven days after the citation is issued. Violations continuing beyond
seven days shall be penalized as follows: $100 per day for the eighth through
the fourteenth days; $150 per day for the fifteenth through the twenty-first
days; $200 per day for the twenty-second through the twenty-eighth days; and
$250 per day for each day that the violation continues beyond the twenty-eighth
day. All the penalties shall render the violator subject to a civil action in
the nature of debt if the violator does not pay the penalty within 20 days
after being notified by the enforcement officer of the accrued total of civil
penalties for the violation for which he or she has been cited. The enforcement
officer shall have the discretion to stay the accrual of civil penalties
hereunder, pending reasonable efforts by the violator to bring into compliance
the condition that is the subject of the violation.
      (2)   Repeat violations. After having been once cited for a violation of
a county ordinance, a violator shall be subject to the following civil
penalties for any additional violations within the following 12-calendar-month
period. For a second violation within the period, civil penalties will begin at
$100 per day for each day that the violation continues and will escalate
according to the following schedule: $150 per day for the eighth through the
fourteenth days; $200 per day for the fifteenth through the twenty-first days;
$250 per day for the twenty-second through the twenty-eighth days; and $300 per
day for each day that the violation continues beyond the twenty-eighth day. A
third violation during the same period shall subject the violator to civil
penalties beginning at $200 per day and escalating in a similar fashion for as
long as the violation continues.
      (3)   Injunctive relief or equitable remedy. Notwithstanding the
assessment of civil penalties as provided above, the county may pursue a civil
action seeking a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement or
other equitable remedy against the violator of a county ordinance. The action
may be in addition to, and not in lieu of, civil penalties.
      (4)   Criminal prosecution. A misdemeanor warrant may be issued either
immediately or upon the issuance of a citation, as provided for herein, and the
violator’s failure to pay the penalty within the time provided. A violation of
a county ordinance upon the issuance of a misdemeanor warrant shall be
punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor under G.S. § 14-4 unless otherwise stated
herein, by a maximum sentence of 30 days and/or a maximum fine of $500.
   (D)   Enforcement provisions of ordinances amended. To the extent permitted
by applicable law, the enforcement provisions of all county ordinances that are
subject to enforcement as herein provided are hereby amended to be consistent
herewith. The penalties provided for in this section shall be cumulative and in
addition to other penalties that may apply under the provisions of other county
ordinances.
   (E)   Effective date. The provisions of this section shall become effective
on 7-21-2008, and shall apply to all violations of county ordinances for which
citations are issued on or after that date.
(Ord. 2008-03, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. 2008-06, passed - -2008; Ord. passed 3-
21-2022)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
      Chapter
         
30.   COUNTY POLICIES
         
31.   COUNTY ORGANIZATIONS
         
32.   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES
CHAPTER 30: COUNTY POLICIES
Section
   
30.01   Illegal residents
   
30.02   (Reserved)
   
30.03   Tobacco use in county facilities, county vehicles and on county
properties prohibited
   
30.04   Monthly 911 service charge
   
30.05   Property tax listings
   
30.06   Criminal history checks; volunteer and paid fire department positions
 
   
30.99   Penalty
§ 30.01 ILLEGAL RESIDENTS.
   (A)   Generally. The Board of Commissioners establishes the following
policies with respect to illegal residents and directs county staff as follows.
   (B)   Specifically.
      (1)   To cease and desist local funding for any local programs to the
extent that they serve illegal residents;
      (2)   To reduce expenditures on all federally-funded and state-funded
non-mandated programs to the extent that they serve illegal residents;
      (3)   To discontinue contracting with any local or out-of-county
businesses employing or using identifiable illegal residents where county tax
dollars are being expended;
      (4)   To request the Sheriff to diligently battle the ever-increasing
criminal element which is growing daily with the influx of illegal residents
and to consistently check the immigration status of each undocumented resident
upon his or her arrest by such available means as fingerprints, federally-
verified social security numbers, and other accessible data;
      (5)   To allow the Sheriff to partner with Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (ICE) officials to verify undocumented residents during the
investigation or processing of any public safety infraction or offense and
detain for deportation any illegal residents so identified; and
      (6)   To direct all county departments and agencies, to the extent that
they are able to do so with available information, to begin expenditure
reductions for discretionary services provided to illegal aliens.
(Res. passed 6-18-2007)
§ 30.02 (RESERVED).
§ 30.03 TOBACCO USE IN COUNTY FACILITIES, COUNTY VEHICLES AND ON COUNTY
PROPERTIES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      COUNTY. Lincoln County government, including all agencies and departments
of Lincoln County government.
      COUNTY BUILDING. A building owned, leased as lessor, or the area leased
as lessee and occupied by Lincoln County government.
      COUNTY VEHICLE. A passenger-carrying vehicle owned, leased or otherwise
controlled by Lincoln County government and assigned permanently or temporarily
by Lincoln County government to its employees, agencies, institutions or
facilities for official business.
      HEALTH DEPARTMENT CAMPUS.  The building, and all surrounding real
property owned by Lincoln County, located at 200 Gamble Drive, Lincolnton, NC
28092.
      DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES CAMPUS.  The building, and all surrounding
real property owned by Lincoln County, located at 1136 E. Main Street,
Lincolnton, NC 28092.
      ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE or E-CIGARETTE. An electronic oral device that
employs a mechanical heating element, battery, or electronic circuit,
regardless of its shape or size, and that can be used to heat a liquid nicotine
solution or any other substance, and the use or inhalation of which simulates
smoking. The term shall include any such device, whether manufactured,
distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, or under any
other product name or descriptor.
      SMOKING.  The use of a lighted cigarette, lighted cigar, lighted pipe, or
any other lighted tobacco product as well as electronic cigarettes.
      TOBACCO or TOBACCO PRODUCT.  Any product containing or derived from
tobacco that is intended for human consumption, whether chewed, smoked,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, or ingested by any other means, including, but
not limited to, cigarettes; e-cigarettes; cigars; little cigars; snuff; and
chewing tobacco. A TOBACCO PRODUCT excludes any product that has been approved
by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco
cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical
purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.
Electronic cigarettes are also considered to be a TOBACCO PRODUCT.
   (B)   Prohibition on the use of tobacco or tobacco products in county
buildings.  The use of tobacco or tobacco products is prohibited in all county
buildings.
   (C)   Prohibition on the use of tobacco or tobacco products in county
vehicles. The use of tobacco or tobacco products is prohibited in all county
vehicles.
   (D)   Prohibition on use of tobacco or tobacco products on county campuses.
The use of tobacco or tobacco products is prohibited on the Health Department
campus and the Department of Social Services campus. This prohibition shall
include the buildings, and all grounds surrounding those buildings, that are
owned and operated by Lincoln County.
   (E)   Prohibition on use of tobacco or tobacco products within 50 feet of
county buildings. The use of tobacco or tobacco products is prohibited within
50 feet of all entrances to all county buildings.
   (G)   Enforcement.
      (1)   Enforcement officer. This section shall be enforced by the County
Manager, any department director having supervisory authority over the county
building or county vehicle related to the infraction, any sworn law enforcement
officer, or any county code enforcement officer.
      (2)   Penalty for violation. After verbal or written notice of an
infraction, an individual’s failure to cease tobacco or tobacco product use
shall constitute an infraction, and the individual committing the infraction
shall be issued a citation in the amount of $50.
(Ord. passed 1-22-2024)
§ 30.04 MONTHLY 911 SERVICE CHARGE.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      EMERGENCY TELEPHONE SERVICE ACT. G.S. §§ 62A-40 et seq.
      EXCHANGE ACCESS FACILITY. The access from a particular telephone
subscriber's premises to the telephone system of a service supplier. EXCHANGE
ACCESS FACILITIES includes service supplier-provided access lines, PBX trunks,
and centrex network access registers, all as defined by the tariffs of the
telephone company as approved by the State Utilities Commission. EXCHANGE
ACCESS FACILITIES do not include service supplier-owned and -operated telephone
pay station lines, or Wide Area Telecommunication Service (WATS), Foreign
Exchange (FX), or incoming-only lines.
      911 CHARGE. A contribution to the county for the 911 service start-up
equipment costs, subscriber notification costs, addressing costs, billing
costs, and non-recurring and recurring installation, maintenance, service, and
network charges of a service supplier providing 911 service.
      911 SYSTEM or 911 SERVICE. An emergency telephone system that provides
the user of the public telephone system the ability to reach a public safety
answering point by dialing the digits 911. The term 911 SYSTEM or 911 SERVICE
also includes ENHANCED 911 SERVICE, which means an emergency telephone system
that provides the user of the public telephone system with 911 services and, in
addition, directs 911 calls to appropriate public safety answering points by
selective routing based on the geographic location from which the call
originated, and provides the capability for automatic number identification and
automatic location identification features.
      SERVICE SUPPLIER. A person or entity who provides exchange telephone
service to a telephone subscriber.
      TELEPHONE SUBSCRIBER or SUBSCRIBER. A person or entity to whom exchange
telephone service, either residential or commercial, is provided and in return
for which the person or entity is billed on a monthly basis. When the same
person, business, or organization has several telephone access lines, each
exchange access facility shall constitute a separate subscription.
   (B)   Effective 3-1-1991, there is imposed a monthly 911 service charge, in
the amount specified in division (C) below, upon each exchange access facility
subscribed to by telephone subscribers whose exchange access lines are in the
area served by the 911 service in the county.
   (C)   (1)   The monthly 911 charge is $1 for each exchange access facility
subscribed to by a telephone subscriber whose exchange access line or lines are
located in the county which are in the area served by 911 service. The charge
shall be imposed for a period not to exceed 24 months, and funds derived
therefrom shall be used for non-recurring costs associated with the
implementation of Enhanced 911, including the lease or purchase of emergency
telephone equipment, computer hardware and software, addressing, data base
development and installation, network charges, subscriber notification,
billing, and related non-recurring costs.
      (2)   At the end of the 24-month period, the monthly charge shall be
reduced to $.50 for each exchange access facility subscribed to by a telephone
subscriber whose exchange access line or lines are located in the county which
are in the area served by 911 service. Funds derived therefrom shall be used
solely for recurring costs associated with the operation of the 911 system,
including, but not limited to, ongoing network charges, equipment, and database
service and maintenance costs, and billing costs.
      (3)   Adjustments in the amount of the monthly charge for recurring costs
may be made at any time by the Board of Commissioners to react to changes in
the operating costs for 911 service.
   (D)   There is established the Emergency Telephone System Fund. All revenues
generated pursuant to this section shall be deposited to this Fund and used for
the purposes outlined herein. Monies in the Emergency Telephone System Fund may
be invested in the same manner as other local government revenues, and income
earned from the investments shall be deposited in the Fund.
   (E)   Service suppliers will be responsible for collecting and remitting to
the county the 911 charges as provided by the Public Safety Telephone Act.
Services suppliers collecting the 911 charges are entitled to a 1%
administrative fee as compensation for collecting the charges.
   (F)   Administration and collections activities to enforce and give effect
to the provisions of this section shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions
of the Public Safety Telephone Act, G.S. §§ 62A-5 et seq. 
(Ord. passed 10-8-1990)
§ 30.05 PROPERTY TAX LISTINGS.
   (A)   The County Register of Deeds shall refuse to record any deeds or other
instrument of conveyance (other than a deed of trust or mortgage) until tax
information as described herein shall have been presented to the Register of
Deeds, along with the deed or other conveyance.
   (B)   Information to be obtained on behalf of the Tax Administrator by the
Register of Deeds shall include the following items:
      (1)   Name of the seller or grantor;
      (2)   Name of the buyer or grantee; and
      (3)   Current, correct, and complete mailing address of the grantee.
   (C)   A violation of this section by providing false or misleading
information to the Register of Deeds in order to have a deed recorded shall be
a Class 3 misdemeanor and punishable as by law provided in G.S. § 14-4.
   (D)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, the Register of Deeds may
record a deed without the current mailing address of the grantee when he or she
finds that the overriding public interest requires that the deed be immediately
recorded. Provided, however, that the current mailing address of the grantee is
obtained within 30 days thereafter and duly furnished to the Tax Administrator.
   (E)   This section shall be effective 2-1-1988.
(Ord. passed 12-21-1987; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 30.06 CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECKS; VOLUNTEER AND PAID FIRE DEPARTMENT POSITIONS.
   (A)   In order to protect the citizens of Lincoln County and their
properties, the procedures herein are established to provide for fingerprinting
and criminal history checks on all final applicants for paid or volunteer Fire
Department positions. Subject to division (F) herein, employment with the paid/
volunteer Fire Department services may be denied for those persons convicted of
any crime against a person, or crime against property where intent is an
element, or any drug or gambling related offense.
   (B)   The county, either in its own stead or by and through any of its
agencies, may conduct an investigation of any final candidate for a paid/
volunteer Fire Department position and it shall be a precondition of employment
that an applicant for such a position shall, upon request, provide fingerprints
and all other necessary personal identification including a birth
certification, social security number and driver's license, if available, so
that the Fire Marshal may cause a thorough search to be made of local, state
criminal records to determine if the applicant has a history of criminal
convictions or crimes by the use of the Division of Criminal Information
Network (DCI). The county, either in its own stead or by and through any of its
agencies, may conduct an investigation of any Fire Department paid employee or
volunteer if required by funding or certifying agencies, or if cause is
suspected.
   (C)   All applicants for any position described above must fill out an
Authorization and Release Criminal History Report form and have it notarized in
order for the requesting agency to allow the Lincoln County Fire Marshal's
Office to request the criminal history check to be done.
   (D)   The Lincoln County Communications Director, or designee, shall provide
the findings from the use of the DCI to the Fire Marshal provided that all
necessary agreements with the State Bureau of Investigations Division of
Criminal Information has been executed. A copy of the DCI Servicing Agreement
between Lincoln County Communication Center and Lincoln County Fire Marshal's
Office is attached to Ordinance passed 12-3-2012 and incorporated by reference
as if fully set forth herein.
   (E)   An evaluation of any crime for purpose of employment will take into
account the nature and the circumstances of the offense and the time frame of
the offense as it relates to the essential job functions or position for which
the applicant applied.
   (F)   Disqualifiers for new firefighter. The following enumerated items,
though not exclusive, shall be considered just cause for disqualifying an
applicant or denying an applicant the position for which said applicant
applied:
      (1)   A conviction of or admission to any of the crimes as defined in
Attachment 4 to Ordinance passed December 3, 2012 which Attachment is
incorporated by reference as if fully set forth herein;
      (2)   Use of marijuana within 36 months of the date of application;
      (3)   Use of other illegal or illicit drugs within five years of the date
of application;
      (4)   Admission or conviction of perjury;
      (5)   No current North Carolina driver's license or driver's license
currently suspended, canceled, revoked, or with modified driving privileges at
the time of the application;
      (6)   Not a high school graduate or lacks a North Carolina General
Equivalency Degree (GED);
      (7)   Not a citizen of the United States of America;
      (8)   Failure of the Department's qualifying physical requirements;
      (9)   A DUI conviction within the past five years from the date of
application;
      (10)   If a current domestic violence or personal restraining or
protection order, ordering the applicant to not contact another individual, is
in effect, the processing of the application will be suspended until the order
is no longer in effect. The applicant is responsible for advising the Fire
Department Agency when the order is no longer in effect;
      (11)   If any major traffic violation charges or any criminal charges are
pending, the processing of the application will be suspended until final
disposition of the charge(s). The applicant is responsible for advising the
Fire Department Agency when the order is no longer in effect;
      (12)   The above list is not all-inclusive and does not constitute a
complete and total listing of disqualifiers but is listed for illustrative
purposes only.
   (G)   Prior to denial or termination of employment based upon criminal
history record information (CHRI) received from Lincoln County Communication
Director or designee, the Fire Marshal or designee shall verify the existence
of a record by either obtaining a certified public record or by submitting a
fingerprint card of the individual to the Criminal Information and
Identification Section for verification that the CHRI record belongs to the
individual.
   (H)   If there is any cost involved in attaining the information either
through the background check(s) or fingerprint card check(s) the applicant
shall be responsible for paying the cost and shall pay for services before they
are performed.
   (I)   An access agreement called State Bureau of Investigation Special
Operations Division Non-criminal Justice Access Agreement shall be signed by
the Lincoln County designee(s), Lincoln County Fire Marshal, the Lincoln County
Communications Director.
(Ord. passed 11-19-2012; Ord. passed 12-3-2012)
§ 30.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Violation of this section shall also subject the offender to a civil
penalty in the amount of $25 per occurrence to be recovered by the county.
Offenders shall be issued a written citation which must be paid to the county
within 20 days.
(Ord. passed 10-4-1993; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
CHAPTER 31: COUNTY ORGANIZATIONS
Section
Planning Board
   
31.01   Membership and vacancies
   
31.02   Organization, rules, meetings, and records
   
31.03   Powers and duties
   
31.04   Annual report of activities, analysis of expenditures, and budget
request for ensuing fiscal year
   
31.05   Staff support
   
31.06   Effective date
PLANNING BOARD
§ 31.01 MEMBERSHIP AND VACANCIES.
   (A)   The Planning Board shall consist of nine members who reside within the
county (one member from each township and four at large).
   (B)   The immediate appointments shall be made effective 1-1-1989 according
to the following terms:
      (1)   Three members for one year;
      (2)   Three members for two years; and
      (3)   Three members for three years.
   (C)   Their successors shall be appointed for terms of three years.
Vacancies occurring for reasons other than expiration of terms shall be filled
for the period of the unexpired term. Vacancies shall be filled by the Board of
Commissioners.
   (D)   Faithful attendance at the meetings of the Board is considered a
prerequisite for the maintenance of membership on the Board. Failure to attend
three consecutive meetings shall be deemed adequate cause for summary removal
from the Planning Board by the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 2-20-1989)
§ 31.02 ORGANIZATION, RULES, MEETINGS, AND RECORDS.
   Within 30 days after appointment, the Planning Board shall meet and review
its bylaws adjusting the terms of its Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson.
Thereafter, the term of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be one year,
with eligibility for reelection. The Board may adopt rules for transaction of
its business and shall keep a record of its members' attendance and of its
discussions, findings, and recommendations. All records shall be a public
record. The Board shall meet and all of its meetings shall be open to the
public. A quorum shall consist of five members for the purpose of taking any
official action required by this subchapter. All members of the Board shall
have voting power on all matters of business. However, any member who is a
party at interest to matters under consideration by the Board shall declare the
interest prior to a vote of the Board on the question, and shall abstain from
voting on the question. After declaration of interest, this provision shall not
prohibit the members from participation in discussions of the Board on the
matters prior to the vote.
(Ord. passed 2-20-1989)
§ 31.03 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   It shall be the function and duty of the Planning Board to make
comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future
developments and prepare the plans for physical, and economic growth, as will
best promote the public health, safety, convenience, or the general welfare as
well as efficiency and economy in the development of the county.
   (B)   In general, the Planning Board shall have the power and duty to:
      (1)   Make studies of the area within its jurisdictions and surrounding
areas;
      (2)   Determine objectives to be sought in the development of the county;
      (3)   Prepare and adopt plans for achieving objectives;
      (4)   Develop and recommend policies, ordinances, administrative
procedures, and other means for carrying out plans in a coordinated and
efficient manner;
      (5)   Advise the Board of Commissioners concerning the use and amendment
of means for carrying out plans;
      (6)   Exercise any functions in the administration and enforcement of
various means for carrying out plans that the Board of Commissioners may direct
(i.e., zoning, subdivision development regulations, and the like);
      (7)   Perform any other related duties that the Board of Commissioners
may direct;
      (8)   The Planning Board shall review upon request and make
recommendations to the Board of Commissioners upon the extent, location, and
design of all public structures and facilities, on the acquisition of public
properties, on the opening, abandonment, widening, extension, narrowing, or
other change to streets and other public ways, on the construction, extension,
expansion, or abandonment of utilities whether publicly or privately owned.
However, in the absence of a recommendation from the Board after the expiration
of 30 days from the date on which the question has been submitted in writing to
the Board, the Board of Commissioners may, if it deems wise, take final action;
      (9)   The Planning Board may consult with the Lincolnton Planning
Commission, with the County Soil and Conservation District, and with the
Economic Development Commission as necessary on issues of mutual concern. The
Planning Board may coordinate planning activities with adjoining jurisdictions;
      (10)   The Planning Board may conduct any public hearings as may be
required to gather information necessary for the drafting, establishment, and
maintenance of the Comprehensive Land Use Plan;
      (11)   The Planning Board shall have power to promote public interest in
and an understanding of its recommendations and to that end it may publish and
distribute copies of its recommendations and may employ any other means of
publicity and education as it may deem necessary; and
      (12)   Members of the Planning Board may attend planning conferences or
meetings of planning institutes or hearings upon pending planning legislation,
and the county may pay, from within the Planning Board's budget, the reasonable
traveling expenses incidental to the attendance.
(Ord. passed 2-20-1989)
§ 31.04 ANNUAL REPORT OF ACTIVITIES, ANALYSIS OF EXPENDITURES, AND BUDGET
REQUEST FOR ENSUING FISCAL YEAR.
   The Planning Board shall annually submit to the Board of Commissioners and
County Manager, a written report of its activities, an analysis of the
expenditures to date for the current fiscal year, and its requested budget of
funds needed for operation during the ensuing fiscal year. The Planning Board
is authorized to appoint the committees, and to authorize the expenditures, as
it may see fit, subject to limitations of funds provided for the Planning Board
by the Board of Commissioners and within the framework of county's procurement
and fiscal management procedures.
(Ord. passed 2-20-1989)
§ 31.05 STAFF SUPPORT.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners may authorize and fund employees, and the
County Manager may appoint and/or assign employees, to provide staff support to
the Planning Board.
   (B)   Any position approved by the Board of Commissioners shall be appointed
by the County Manager under the provisions of county personnel policies.
(Ord. passed 2-20-1989)
§ 31.06 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be in full force and effect as an ordinance of the
county from and after the effective date of 3-1-1989.
(Ord. passed 2-20-1989)
CHAPTER 32: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND EMERGENCY SERVICES
Section
General
   
32.001   Short title
   
32.002   Purpose statement
   
32.003   Definitions
Emergency Management Agency
   
32.031   Authority
   
32.032   Establishment; coordinator
   
32.033   Intent
   
32.034   Organization and appointments
   
32.035   Duties and responsibilities of the coordinator
   
32.036   Emergency management plans
   
32.037   Liability
State of Emergency
   
32.066   Authority
   
32.067   Prohibitions and restrictions authorized
   
32.068   Superseding and amendatory proclamations
   
32.069   Termination of proclamation
   
32.070   Absence or disability of chairperson
Hazardous Materials
   
32.106   Authority
   
32.107   Intent and purpose
   
32.108   Right of entry
   
32.109   Liability and fees
GENERAL
§ 32.001 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as "The Lincoln
County Emergency Management Ordinance."
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 32.002 PURPOSE STATEMENT.
   The purposes of this chapter are to set forth the authority and
responsibility of Lincoln County in prevention of, preparation for, response
to, and recovery from natural or man-made emergencies or hostile military or
paramilitary action and to do the following:
   (A)   Reduce vulnerability of people and property of this county to damage,
injury, and loss of life and property.
   (B)   Prepare for prompt and efficient rescue, care, and treatment of
threatened or affected persons.
   (C)   Coordinate with state and federal agencies for the orderly
rehabilitation of persons and restoration of property.
   (D)   Provide for cooperation and coordination of activities relating to
emergency mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery among agencies and
officials of Lincoln County and with similar agencies and officials of other
counties, with state and federal governments, with interstate organizations,
and with other private and quasi-official organizations.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 32.003 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions apply in this chapter:
   CHAIR OF THE BOARD OF COUNTY COMMISSIONERS. The Chair of the Lincoln County
Board of County Commissioners or, in case of the Chair's absence or disability,
the person authorized to act in the Chair's stead. Unless the Board of
Commissioners has specified who is to act in lieu of the Chair with respect to
a particular power or duty set out in this chapter, this term shall mean the
person generally authorized to act in lieu of the Chair.
   COUNTY-AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL. Any person duly
registered, identified and appointed by the coordinator of the county emergency
management agency and assigned to participate in the emergency management
activity.
   EMERGENCY. An occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage,
injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or man-made
accidental, military, paramilitary, weather-related, public health, explosion-
related, riot-related cause, or technological failure or accident, including
but not limited to, a cyber-incident, an explosion, a transportation accident,
a radiological accident, or a chemical or other hazardous material incident.
   EMERGENCY AREA. The geographical area covered by a state of emergency.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT. Those measures taken by the populace and governments
at federal, state, and local levels to minimize the adverse effect of any type
emergency, which includes the never-ending preparedness cycle of planning,
prevention, mitigation, warning, movement, shelter, emergency assistance, and
recovery.
   EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY. The Lincoln County agency charged with
coordination of all emergency management activities for its jurisdiction.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS. Any material defined as a hazardous substance under 29
Code of Federal Regulations, 1910.120(a)(3).
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCY RESPONSE TEAM or HAZMAT TEAM. An organized
group of persons specially trained and equipped to respond to and control
actual or potential leaks or spills of hazardous materials.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENT or HAZARDOUS MATERIALS EMERGENCY. An
uncontrolled release or threatened release of a hazardous substance requiring
outside assistance by a local fire department or hazmat team to contain and
control.
   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Counties and incorporated cities, towns, and
villages.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. A person or entity who causes, directly or indirectly,
the release of a hazardous material creating a hazardous materials incident who
shall be liable for all reasonable costs incurred in responding to and
mitigating the incident pursuant to this chapter, and the Lincoln County fee
schedule. In the event that the responsible party cannot be determined or is
unable to pay, the owner of or person in possession of hazardous materials at
the time of the incident shall be the person liable for such costs.
   STATE OF EMERGENCY. A finding and declaration by the Board of Commissioners
or the Chair of the Board of Commissioners, acting under the authority of G.S.
§ 166A-19.22, that an emergency exists.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
§ 32.031 AUTHORITY.
   Pursuant to G.S. § 166A-19.15, a county emergency management agency has
previously been, and is hereby re-established, as a division of Lincoln County
Emergency Services.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 32.032 ESTABLISHMENT; COORDINATOR.
   The Lincoln County Director of Emergency Services serves as the Coordinator
of the emergency management agency.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 32.033 INTENT.
   (A)   The intent of this chapter is to re-establish an agency that will
ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all of Lincoln County's
resources to combat emergencies as defined in this chapter, and under North
Carolina law.
   (B)   The emergency management agency will be the coordinating agency for
all activity in connection with emergency management. It will be the instrument
through which the Lincoln County Board of Commissioners may exercise its
authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in it during an emergency.
   (C)   This chapter shall not relieve any other Lincoln County department of
the moral responsibilities or authority given to it in the county charter,
local ordinances, or state law nor will it adversely affect the work of any
volunteer agency organized for relief in emergencies.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 32.034 ORGANIZATION AND APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   The Lincoln County Director of Emergency Services shall serve as the
Coordinator of the emergency management agency as required by G.S. § 166A-
19.15.
   (B)   The Coordinator shall designate and appoint Deputy Coordinators to
assume the duties of the Coordinator in his absence or inability to act.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 32.035 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF COORDINATOR.
   (A)   For the purposes of this chapter, the Coordinator shall:
      (1)   Be responsible to the Board of Commissioners in regard to all
phases of emergency management activity.
      (2)   Be responsible for the planning, coordination and operation of the
emergency management activities in Lincoln County.
      (3)   Maintain liaison with the state and federal authorities and the
authorities of other political subdivisions to ensure the most effective
operation of the emergency management plans.
   (B)   The Coordinator's duties shall include, but not be limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to
augment the personnel and facilities of Lincoln County for emergency management
purposes. Such services from persons outside of government may be accepted by
Lincoln County on a volunteer basis.
      (2)   Developing and coordinating plans for the immediate use of all
facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of Lincoln County for the
purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons and property; and
protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public
utilities necessary for the public health, safety, and welfare.
      (3)   Enter into agreements with owners or persons in control of
buildings or other property for the use of such buildings or other property for
the emergency management purposes and designating suitable buildings as public
shelters.
      (4)   Through public informational programs, educating the populace as to
actions necessary and required for the protection of their persons and property
in an emergency, either impending or present.
      (5)   Conducting drills and exercises to ensure the efficient operation
of the emergency management forces and to familiarize residents with emergency
management regulations, procedures and operations.
      (6)   Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies
engaged in any emergency management activities.
      (7)   When personnel, equipment, or supplies for an emergency function
are not available within the local government, the coordinator is authorized to
seek assistance from other governments or from persons outside of government.
      (8)   The assignment of duties, when of a supervisory nature, shall also
include the granting of authority for the persons to carry out duties prior to,
during, and after the occurrence of an emergency.
      (9)   The invoicing of persons liable for hazardous materials release,
and, in the event of non-payment, the discretion to proceed with legal action
to recover costs.
      (10)   To coordinate the voluntary registration of functionally and
medically fragile persons in need of assistance during an emergency either
through a registry established by Lincoln County, the City of Lincolnton or by
the State of North Carolina. All records, data, information, correspondence,
and communications relating to the registration of persons with special needs
or of functionally and medically fragile persons obtained pursuant to this
subdivision are confidential and are not a public record pursuant to G.S. §
132-1 or any other applicable statute, except that this information shall be
available to emergency response agencies, as determined by Lincoln County
Director of Emergency Services. This information shall be used only for the
purposes set forth in this subdivision.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 32.036 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLANS.
   (A)   Comprehensive emergency management plans shall be adopted by
resolution of the Board of Commissioners. In the preparation of these plans as
they pertain to county organization, it is intended that the services,
equipment, facilities, and personnel of all existing departments and agencies
shall be utilized to the fullest extent. All departments and agencies have the
responsibility to perform the functions assigned by these plans and be in a
current state of readiness at all times. These plans shall have the effect of
law whenever an emergency, as defined in this chapter, has been declared.
   (B)   The Coordinator shall prescribe those positions within the emergency
organizational structure for which lines of succession are necessary. In each
instance, the responsible person will designate and keep on file with the
Coordinator a current list of three persons as successors to his position. The
list will be in order of succession and will designate persons best capable of
carrying out all assigned duties and functions.
   (C)   Any individual assigned responsibility in the plans shall be
responsible for carrying out all assigned duties and functions. Duties include
the organization and training of assigned employees and, where needed,
volunteers. Each individual shall formulate the standing operating procedure to
implement the plans.
   (D)   The Coordinator may submit recommended changes to the Board of
Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 32.037 LIABILITY.
   (A)   All functions and other activities relating to emergency management as
provided for in this chapter or elsewhere in the Lincoln County Code of
Ordinances are hereby declared to be governmental functions. Except in cases of
willful misconduct, gross negligence, or bad faith, any emergency management
worker, firm, partnership, association, corporation, or agent complying with or
reasonably attempting to comply with this chapter or any order, rule, or
regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or pursuant
to any ordinance relating to any emergency management measures enacted by
Lincoln County, shall not be liable for the death of or injury to persons, or
for damage to real or personal property as a result of any such activity.
   (B)   Any person, firm, or corporation, together with any successors in
interest, if any, owning or controlling real or personal property who,
voluntarily or involuntarily, knowingly or unknowingly, with or without
compensation, grants a license or privilege or otherwise permits or allows the
designation or use of the whole or any part or parts of such real or personal
property for the purpose of activities or functions relating to emergency
management as provided for in this chapter or elsewhere in the Lincoln County
Code of Ordinances shall not be civilly liable for the death of or injury to
any person or the loss of or damage to the property of any persons where such
death, injury, loss, or damage resulted from, through, or because of the use of
the real or personal property for any of the above purposes, provided that the
use of the property is subject to the order or control of or pursuant to a
request of the county government.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
STATE OF EMERGENCY
§ 32.066 AUTHORITY.
   (A)   A state of emergency may be declared by the Chairperson of the Board
of Commissioners when he or she finds that an emergency exists. The
proclamation shall be in writing. The Chairperson shall take reasonable steps
to give notice to the public of the terms of the proclamation. The Chairperson
shall send reports of the substance of the proclamation to the mass
communications media which serve the affected area. The Chairperson shall
retain a text of the proclamation and provide copies upon request.
   (B)   The proclamation declaring a state of emergency shall include a
definition of the area constituting the emergency area. The emergency area of a
state of emergency declared by Lincoln County shall not include any area within
the corporate limits of the City of Lincolnton or any other municipality, or
within any area of Lincoln County over which the City of Lincolnton or any
other municipality has jurisdiction to enact general police-power ordinances,
unless the municipality's governing body or mayor consents to or requests the
state of emergency's application.
   (C)   The Board of Commissioners or Chair of the Board of Commissioners, if
it has been requested to do so by a mayor of the City of Lincolnton, or another
municipality within the county, may by declaration extend the emergency area of
a state of emergency declared by the requesting municipality to any area within
the county in which the Board of Commissioners or Chair of the Board of
Commissioners determines it to be necessary to assist in the controlling of the
emergency within the requesting municipality. The extension may be with respect
to one or more of the prohibitions and restrictions imposed in that mayor's
municipality pursuant to the authority granted in G.S. § 166A-19.31 and need
not be with respect to all prohibitions and restrictions authorized by that
section. Extension of the emergency area pursuant to this subdivision shall be
subject to the following additional limitations:
      (1)   The extension of the emergency area shall not include any area
within the corporate limits of a different municipality, or within any area of
the county over which a municipality has jurisdiction to enact general police-
power ordinances, unless the mayor or governing body of that other municipality
consents to its application.
      (2)   The Chair of the Board of County Commissioners extending the
emergency area under the authority of this subdivision shall take reasonable
steps to give notice of its terms to those likely to be affected.
      (3)   The Chair of the Board of Commissioners shall declare the
termination of any prohibitions and restrictions extended pursuant to this
subdivision upon the earlier of the following:
         (a)   The Chair's determination that they are no longer necessary.
         (b)   The determination of the Board of County Commissioners that they
are no longer necessary.
         (c)   The termination of the prohibitions and restrictions within the
requesting municipality.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 32.067 PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The proclamation declaring a state of emergency may or may not include
any or all of the following prohibitions and restrictions:
      (1)   Movement of people in public places, including:
         (a)   Imposing a curfew;
         (b)   Directing and compelling the voluntary or mandatory evacuation
of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area within
the jurisdiction of the Lincoln County Board of Commissioners;
         (c)   Prescribing routes, modes of transportation, and destinations in
connection with evacuation; and
         (d)   Controlling ingress and egress of an emergency area, and the
movement of persons within the area.
      (2)   Closure within the emergency area of streets, roads, highways,
bridges, public vehicular areas, or other areas ordinarily used for vehicular
travel.
      (3)   The operation of offices, business establishments, and other places
to or from which people may travel or at which they may congregate.
      (4)   The possession, transportation, sale, purchase, and consumption of
alcoholic beverages.
      (5)   The possession, transportation, sale, purchase, storage, and use of
gasoline, and dangerous weapons and substances, except that this subdivision
does not authorize prohibitions or restrictions on lawfully possessed firearms
or ammunition. As used in this subdivision, the term "dangerous weapons and
substances" has the same meaning as it does under G.S. § 14-288.1. As used in
this subdivision, the term "firearm" has the same meaning as it does under G.S.
§ 14-409.39(2).
      (6)   Other activities or conditions the control of which may be
reasonably necessary to maintain order and protect lives or property during the
state of emergency.
   (B)   The proclamation declaring state of emergency may or may not exempt
from all or any part of prohibitions and restrictions the following persons or
groups of persons while acting in the line of and within the scope of their
respective duties:
      (1)   Law enforcement officers, firefighters and other public employees,
rescue squad members, doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals and other medical
facilities;
      (2)   On-duty military personnel, whether state or federal;
      (3)   On-duty employees of public utilities, public transportation
companies, and newspaper, magazine, radio broadcasting, and television
broadcasting corporations operated for profit; and
      (4)   Such other classes of persons as may be essential to the
preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the safety,
health, and welfare needs of people within the county.
   (C)   Prohibitions and restrictions imposed pursuant to this section shall
expire upon the earliest occurrence of any of the following:
      (1)   The prohibition or restriction is terminated by the Chair of the
Board of Commissioners that imposed the prohibition or restriction.
      (2)   The state of emergency is terminated.
   (D)   This section is intended to supplement and confirm the powers
conferred by G.S. § 153A-121(a), G.S. § 160A-174(a), and all other general and
local laws authorizing counties to enact ordinances for the protection of the
public health and safety in times of riot or other grave civil disturbance or
emergency.
   (E)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or a declaration
enacted or declared pursuant to this section shall be guilty of a Class 2
misdemeanor in accordance with G.S. § 14-288.20A.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 32.068 SUPERSEDING AND AMENDATORY PROCLAMATIONS.
   The Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners may invoke the restrictions
authorized by this chapter in separate proclamations and may amend any
proclamation by means of a superseding proclamation in accordance with the
procedures set forth in §
32.066 and §
32.067 pertaining to the prohibitions and restrictions authorized.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 32.069 TERMINATION OF PROCLAMATION.
   A state of emergency declared under this chapter shall expire when
terminated by the Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners who issued it
following the same procedures set forth in §
32.066.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 32.070 ABSENCE OR DISABILITY OF CHAIRPERSON.
   In the absence or disability of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson of the
Board of Commissioners or such other Commissioner as may be designated by the
Board of Commissioners shall have and exercise all of the powers given the
Chairperson in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
§ 32.106 AUTHORITY.
   The Lincoln County Director of Emergency Services may designate a Hazardous
Materials Coordinator(s) to coordinate operations of the Lincoln County
hazardous materials team.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 32.107 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish the duties of the
Lincoln County Department of Emergency Management as it relates to hazardous
materials emergencies. Such incidents include, but are not limited to, spills,
accidents, illegal dumping and other releases or threatened releases of
hazardous materials requiring control. The Lincoln County Department of
Emergency Management shall have the authority to summarily remove, abate, or
remedy hazardous material emergencies within the jurisdiction of Lincoln County
that are, or potentially are, a threat to public safety.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 32.108 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   When responding to a release or threatened release of hazardous materials
the Lincoln County Department of Emergency Management, along with any agencies
it calls in to provide assistance, may enter onto any private or public
property, or any adjacent or surrounding property where the release or
threatened release occurred.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 32.109 LIABILITY AND FEES.
   Liability for an emergency involving a hazardous material incident shall be
the sole responsibility of the responsible party, as defined herein, and said
person or entity shall be responsible for all reasonable costs and fees
incurred in responding to and mitigating the incident, which may be found in
the Lincoln County Fee Schedule, as amended.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
      Chapter
         
50.   WATER
         
51.   SEWER USE
         
52.   SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
CHAPTER 50: WATER
Section
Water Conservation
   
50.01   Definition of water shortage; curtailment of use required
   
50.02   Declaration of water shortage condition
   
50.03   Stage 0 water shortage watch condition
   
50.04   Stage 1 water shortage condition; voluntary guidelines
   
50.05   Stage 2 water shortage condition; declaration of mandatory
restrictions; illegal acts
   
50.06   Stage 3 water shortage condition; declaration of mandatory
restrictions; illegal acts
   
50.07   Stage 4 water shortage emergency; declaration of mandatory
restrictions; illegal acts
   
50.08   Lifting of restrictions imposed during a water shortage
   
50.09   Violations
   
50.10   Discontinuance of service
   
50.11   Schedule
Cross-Connection Control
   
50.25   Introduction
   
50.26   Objectives
   
50.27   Responsibilities
   
50.28   Definitions
   
50.29   Right of entry
   
50.30   Elimination of cross-connections; degree of hazard
   
50.31   Installation of assemblies
   
50.32   Testing and repair of assemblies
   
50.33   Facilities requiring protection
   
50.34   Connections with unapproved sources of supply
   
50.35   Fire protection systems
   
50.36   Violations
 
   
50.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   North Carolina Guidelines for Cross-Connection Control in Water
Distribution Systems
Cross-reference:
   Sewer Use, see
Ch. 51
   Solid Waste and Recycling, see
Ch. 52
WATER CONSERVATION
§ 50.01 DEFINITION OF WATER SHORTAGE; CURTAILMENT OF USE REQUIRED.
   A WATER SHORTAGE shall be deemed to exist when water demand by customers
connected to the county water system reaches the point where, in the opinion of
the County Manager or his or her designee, continued or increased demand will
equal or exceed the system supply or transmission capabilities and results in
the condition whereby customers cannot be supplied with water to protect their
health and safety. WATER SHORTAGES may also be deemed to exist when the
reservoirs and river system that provides the water supply to the county water
system experience such a demand that water systems throughout the area cannot
be supplied with water to meet their needs. Upon the occurrences, demand must
be substantially curtailed to relieve the water shortage as provided in this
subchapter.
(Ord. passed 6-4-2007)
§ 50.02 DECLARATION OF WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION.
   (A)   In the event that it appears that the demand on the water system may
exceed supply or transmission capabilities, or that the demand on the water
supply may exceed its ability to provide sufficient water for all of the water
users, the County Public Works Department shall so notify the County Manager.
   (B)   Following consultation with the Chairperson of the Board of
Commissioners, the County Manager may declare a Stage 0 water shortage watch.
   (C)   If water supply conditions worsen, following consultation with the
Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners, the County Manager may declare a
Stage 1 water shortage condition requesting voluntary water conservation by
customers of the system.
   (D)   In the event that the voluntary measures of the Stage 1 water shortage
condition fail to alleviate the shortage, the County Manager, after
consultation with the Chairperson, may declare that a Stage 2, Stage 3, or
Stage 4 water shortage condition exists and implement the mandatory procedures
provided hereinafter.
(Ord. passed 6-4-2007)
§ 50.03 STAGE 0 WATER SHORTAGE WATCH CONDITION.
   (A)   In the event that a Stage 0 water shortage watch condition is
declared, an extensive publicity campaign will be initiated using public media
and any other methods as the County Manager may deem appropriate or necessary
to inform the public of an impending water shortage.
   (B)   Stage 0 water shortage watch conditions do not encourage any specific
reduction in use of water beyond normal use.
(Ord. passed 6-4-2007)
§ 50.04 STAGE 1 WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION; VOLUNTARY GUIDELINES.
   (A)   In the event that a Stage 1 water shortage condition is declared, an
extensive publicity campaign will be initiated using public media and any other
methods as the County Manager may deem appropriate or necessary to inform the
public of an existing water shortage. The public shall be encouraged to
voluntarily adhere to the following guidelines:
      (1)   Limit car washing;
      (2)   Limit lawn, garden, and shrubbery watering to the minimum necessary
for plants to survive, and reuse household water when possible;
      (3)   Eliminate washing down of outside areas such as sidewalks, patios,
parking lots, service bays, or aprons;
      (4)   Eliminate continuous running of water while shaving or rinsing
dishes;
      (5)   Limit the use of washing machines and dishwashers and operate only
when fully loaded;
      (6)   Use showers instead of bathtubs for bathing and limit showers to no
more than four-minutes duration;
      (7)   Limit flushing of toilets by multiple usage;
      (8)   Limit hours of operation of water-cooled air conditioners;
      (9)   Use biodegradable and/or disposable dishes;
      (10)   Use flow restriction and other water-saving devices where
possible; and
      (11)   Delay new landscape work until the water shortage has ended.
   (B)   The goal for a Stage 1 water shortage condition is to reduce water
usage by 3% to 5% from a normal level.
(Ord. passed 6-4-2007)
§ 50.05 STAGE 2 WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION; DECLARATION OF MANDATORY
RESTRICTIONS; ILLEGAL ACTS.
   (A)   In determining whether to declare a Stage 2 water shortage condition,
the County Manager shall consider water storage levels, available supply
sources, available usable storage on hand, drawdown rates, projected supply
capability, outlook for precipitation, daily water use patterns, and
availability of water from other sources.
   (B)   Upon the declaration of a Stage 2 water shortage condition, and until
the time as the declaration of water shortage has been rescinded, it shall be
unlawful for any person or entity to use or permit the use of water from the
county water system for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To water lawns, grass, shrubbery, trees, flowers, or vegetable
gardens, except as may be specifically allowed in accordance with a watering
schedule established in accordance with §
50.11; however, shrubbery, trees, flowers, or vegetable gardens may be watered
by use of a hand-held hose;
      (2)   To fill newly constructed swimming or wading pools or to refill
existing swimming or wading pools which have been drained;
      (3)   To operate or induce water into any ornamental fountain, pool,
pond, or other structure making similar use of water (except as otherwise
provided below);
      (4)   To wash automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, or any
other type of mobile equipment, including commercial washing (unless water is
recycled);
      (5)   To wash down outside areas such as streets, driveways, service
station aprons, parking lots, patios, office buildings, or exteriors or windows
of buildings, including residential and commercial construction, or to use
water for other similar purposes;
      (6)   To use water from fire hydrants for any purpose other than
firefighting or other public emergency;
      (7)   To serve drinking water in restaurants, cafeterias, or other food
establishments, except upon request;
      (8)   To operate water-cooled air conditioners or other equipment that
does not recycle cooling water, except when health and safety are adversely
affected; and/or
      (9)   To use water for any unnecessary purpose or to intentionally waste
water.
   (C)   The goal for a Stage 2 water shortage condition is to reduce water
usage by 5% to 10% from a normal level.
   (D)   Incidental uses of water (including birdbaths and garden ponds or
pools) that serve pets, livestock, or other animals are hereby exempted from
these restrictions.
   (E)   Violations of this section.
      (1)   Any violation of a provision of this section shall constitute a
Class 3 misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction as provided in G.S. § 14-4 by a
maximum fine of $500.
      (2)   In addition to the other remedies cited in this section for the
enforcement of its provisions, and pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123, the regulations
in this subchapter may be enforced through the issuance of civil penalties by
the Public Works Department. First offense penalties may be assessed at the
rate of $50 per offense. If the offender continues to violate the provisions of
this subchapter, the second offense may be assessed in the amount of $250 and
the third or greater offense may be assessed in the amount of $500. If the
offender fails to pay the civil penalties within five days after having been
cited, the county may either add the amount of the penalties within five days
after having been cited, the county may either add the amount of the penalties
to the offender’s next water bill or recover the penalties in a civil action in
the nature of debt. Offenders who fail to pay any such penalties added onto
their water bills will be subject to disconnection of service as provided in §
50.10.
      (3)   In addition to, or in lieu of, the foregoing, pursuant to G.S. §
153A-123, the county may seek a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and/or an
order of abatement commanding the offender to correct the unlawful condition or
cease the unlawful activity.
(Ord. passed 6-4-2007; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 50.06 STAGE 3 WATER SHORTAGE CONDITION; DECLARATION OF MANDATORY
RESTRICTIONS; ILLEGAL ACTS.
   (A)   The County Manager may declare a Stage 3 water shortage condition
after considering the factors listed in §
50.05 and determining that the shortage is significantly more urgent than the
Stage 2 level.
   (B)   Upon the declaration of a Stage 3 water shortage condition, and until
the time as the declaration of water shortage has been rescinded, it shall be
unlawful for any person or entity to use or permit the use of water from the
county water system for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To induce water into any pool;
      (2)   To use water outside a structure for any use other than an
emergency involving a fire; however, shrubbery, trees, flowers, or vegetable
gardens may be watered by use of a hand-held hose with an automatic cut-off;
and/or
      (3)   To operate an evaporative air conditioner which recycles water,
except during operating hours of business.
   (C)   The goal for a Stage 3 water shortage condition is to reduce water
usage by 10% to 20% from a normal level.
   (D)   In addition, during a Stage 3 water shortage condition, the following
guidelines shall apply: fire protection shall be maintained wherever possible
by drafting of ponds, rivers, and the like, and all eating establishments shall
be encouraged to use disposable plates and utensils.
   (E)   Violations of this section.
      (1)   Any violation of a provision of this section shall constitute a
Class 3 misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction as provided in G.S. § 14-4 by a
maximum fine of $500.
      (2)   In addition to the other remedies cited in this section for the
enforcement of its provisions, and pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123, the regulations
in this subchapter may be enforced through the issuance of civil penalties by
the Public Works Department. First offense penalties may be assessed at the
rate of $50 per offense. If the offender continues to violate the provisions of
this subchapter, the second offense may be assessed in the amount of $250 and
the third or greater offense may be assessed in the amount of $500. If the
offender fails to pay the civil penalties within five days after having been
cited, the county may either add the amount of the penalties to the offender’s
next water bill or recover the penalties in a civil action in the nature of
debt. Offenders who fail to pay any such penalties added onto their water bills
will be subject to disconnection of service as provided in §
50.10.
      (3)   In addition to, or in lieu of, the foregoing, pursuant to G.S. §
153A-123, the county may seek a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and/or an
order of abatement commanding the offender to correct the unlawful condition or
cease the unlawful activity.
(Ord. passed 6-4-2007; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 50.07 STAGE 4 WATER SHORTAGE EMERGENCY; DECLARATION OF MANDATORY
RESTRICTIONS; ILLEGAL ACTS.
   (A)   The County Manager may declare a Stage 4 water shortage emergency
condition after considering the factors listed in §
50.06 and determining that the shortage is significantly more urgent than the
Stage 3 level.
   (B)   Upon the declaration of a Stage 4 water shortage condition, and until
the time as the declaration of water shortage has been rescinded, it shall be
unlawful for any person or entity to use or permit the use of water from the
county water system for any outside use. The county shall implement emergency
water use restrictions, including enforcement of these restrictions and
assessment of penalties. The county shall also meet with large commercial and
industrial water customers to discuss strategies for reduction of water uses.
   (C)   The goal for a Stage 4 water shortage condition is to reduce water
usage by 20% to 30% from a normal level.
   (D)   Violations of this section.
      (1)   Any violation of a provision of this section shall constitute a
Class 3 misdemeanor, punishable upon conviction as provided in G.S. § 14-4 by a
maximum fine of $500.
      (2)   In addition to the other remedies cited in this section for the
enforcement of its provisions, and pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123, the regulations
in this subchapter may be enforced through the issuance of civil penalties by
the Public Works Department. First offense penalties may be assessed at the
rate of $50 per offense. If the offender continues to violate the provisions of
this subchapter, the second offense may be assessed in the amount of $250 and
the third or greater offense may be assessed in the amount of $500. If the
offender fails to pay the civil penalties within five days after having been
cited, the county may either add the amount of the penalties to the offender’s
next water bill or recover the penalties in a civil action in the nature of
debt. Offenders who fail to pay any such penalties added onto their water bills
will be subject to disconnection of service as provided in §
50.10.
      (3)   In addition to, or in lieu of, the foregoing, pursuant to G.S. §
153A-123, the county may seek a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and/or an
order of abatement commanding the offender to correct the unlawful condition or
cease the unlawful activity.
(Ord. passed 6-4-2007; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 50.08 LIFTING OF RESTRICTIONS IMPOSED DURING A WATER SHORTAGE.
   The County Manager shall lift or reduce the restrictions imposed during a
water shortage when he or she determines, after consultation with the
Chairperson of the Board of Commissioners and any other persons as he or she
deems appropriate, that the conditions which caused the shortage have been
alleviated. The action shall be promptly and extensively publicized.
(Ord. passed 6-4-2007)
§ 50.09 VIOLATIONS.
   This subchapter shall be enforced by the Public Works Department.
(Ord. passed 6-4-2007)
§ 50.10 DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE.
   (A)   In addition to any other applicable remedy, any person or entity who
willfully violates the provisions of this subchapter may be subject to
temporary disconnection of service and payment of the applicable reconnect fee
before service may be restored.
   (B)   Continued gross noncompliance may subject the violator to
discontinuance of service, removal of meter, and forfeiture of all tap fees and
deposits.
   (C)   Reconnection shall thereafter be made only upon payment of all then-
current tap and other fees and deposits.
(Ord. passed 6-4-2007)
§ 50.11 SCHEDULE.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this subchapter, the County Manager
or his or her designee is hereby authorized to establish schedules, during
Stage 2, 3, or 4 emergency conditions described herein, to set forth certain
times or days in which citizens may engage on a limited basis in activities
that are otherwise prohibited under this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 6-4-2007)
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
§ 50.25 INTRODUCTION.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to define the authority of the county as
the water purveyor in the elimination of all cross-connections within its
public potable water supply. This subchapter shall apply to all users connected
to the county's public potable water supply regardless of whether the user is
located within the county or outside of the county. This subchapter will comply
with the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, being 42 U.S.C. 300f et seq., the
North Carolina Administrative Code (Title 15A, Subchapter 18C), and the North
Carolina State Building Code (Volume II) as they pertain to cross-connections
with the public water supply.
(Ord. passed 4-2-2001)
§ 50.26 OBJECTIVES.
   The specific objectives of this subchapter are as follows:
   (A)   To protect the public potable water supply of the county against
actual or potential contamination by isolating within the consumer's water
system, contaminants or pollutants which could, under adverse conditions,
backflow through uncontrolled cross-connections into the public water system;
   (B)   To eliminate or control existing cross-connections, actual or
potential, between the consumer's potable water system(s) and non-potable or
industrial piping system(s); and
   (C)   To provide a continuing inspection program of cross-connection control
which will systematically and effectively control all actual or potential
connections which may be installed in the future.
(Ord. passed 4-2-2001)
§ 50.27 RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Health agency.
      (1)   The North Carolina Department of Environment, Health, and Natural
Resources (Division of Health Services) has the responsibility for promulgating
and enforcing laws, rules, regulations, and policies to be followed in carrying
out an effective cross-connection control program.
      (2)   The Division of Health Services also has the primary responsibility
of ensuring that the water purveyor operates the public potable water system
free of actual or potential sanitary hazards, including unprotected cross-
connections. They have the further responsibility of ensuring that the water
purveyor provides an approved water supply at the service connection to the
consumer's water system.
   (B)   Water purveyor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the water purveyor’s
responsibility to ensure a safe water supply begins at the source and includes
all of the public water distribution system, including the service connection,
and all ends at the point of delivery to the consumer’s water system(s). In
addition, the water purveyor shall exercise reasonable vigilance to ensure that
the consumer has taken the proper steps to protect the public potable water
system. To ensure that the proper precautions are taken, the county is required
to determine the degree of hazard or potential hazard to the public potable
water system; to determine the degree of protection required; and to ensure
proper containment protection through an on-going inspection program.
      (2)   When it is determined that a backflow prevention assembly is
required for the protection of the public system, the county shall require the
consumer, at the consumer's expense, to install an approved backflow prevention
assembly at each service connection, to test immediately upon installation and
thereafter at a frequency as determined by the county, to properly repair and
maintain the assembly or assemblies and to keep adequate records of each test
and subsequent maintenance and repair, including materials and/or replacement
parts.
   (C)   Consumer. The consumer has the primary responsibility of preventing
pollutants and contaminants from entering its potable water system(s) or the
public potable water system. The consumer's responsibility starts at the point
of delivery from the public potable water system and includes all of its water
system(s). The consumers, at their own expense, shall install, operate, test,
and maintain approved backflow prevention assemblies as directed by the county.
The consumer shall maintain accurate records of tests and repairs made to
backflow assemblies and shall maintain the records for a minimum period of
three years. The records shall be on forms approved by the county and shall
include the list of materials or replacement parts used. Following any repair,
overhaul, repiping, or relocation of an assembly, the consumer shall have it
tested to ensure that it is in good operating condition and will prevent
backflow. Tests, maintenance, and repairs of backflow prevention assemblies
shall be made by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester.
   (D)   Certified backflow prevention assembly tester. When employed by the
consumer to test, repair, overhaul, or maintain backflow prevention assemblies,
a backflow prevention assembly tester will have the following responsibilities.
      (1)   The tester will be responsible for making competent inspections,
for repairing or overhauling backflow prevention assemblies and making reports
of the repair to the consumer and responsible authorities on forms approved by
the county. The tester shall include the list of materials or replacement parts
used. The tester shall be equipped with and be competent to use all the
necessary tools, gauges, manometers, and prevention assemblies. It will be the
tester's responsibility to ensure that original manufactured parts are used in
the repair of or replacement of parts in a backflow prevention assembly. It
will be the tester's further responsibility not to change the design, material,
or operational characteristics of an assembly during repair or maintenance
without prior approval of the county. A certified tester shall perform the work
and be responsible for the competency and accuracy of all test and reports. A
certified tester shall provide a copy of all test and repair reports to the
consumer and to Public Works Department within ten business days of any
completed test or repair work. A certified tester shall maintain the records
for a minimum period of three years.
      (2)   All certified backflow prevention assembly testers must obtain and
employ backflow prevention assembly test equipment, which has been evaluated
and/or approved by the county. All test equipment shall be registered with the
Public Works Department. All test equipment shall be checked for accuracy
annually, calibrated, if necessary and certified to the county as to the
calibration, employing an accuracy/calibration method acceptable to the county.
      (3)   All certified backflow prevention assembly testers must become re-
certified every two years through an approved backflow prevention certification
program.
   (E)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable by injunctive
relief, equitable remedy and civil penalties pursuant to §
10.99.
(Ord. passed 4-2-2001; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 50.28 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR-GAP SEPARATION. A physical separation between the free flowing discharge
end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or non-pressure receiving
vessel. An APPROVED AIR-GAP SEPARATION shall be at least double the diameter of
the supply pipe measured vertically above the overflow rim of the receiving
vessel; in no case less than one inch.
   APPROVED. As herein used in reference to a water supply, shall mean a water
supply that has been approved by the State Department of Environment, Health,
and Natural Resources (Division of Health Services). The term APPROVED as
herein used in reference to air-gap separation, a pressure vacuum breaker, an
ASSE approved dual check valve assembly, a double check valve assembly, a
double check detector assembly, a reduced pressure principal backflow
prevention assembly, a reduced pressure principal detector assembly or other
backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall mean an approval by the county.
   BACKFLOW. The undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and
other liquids, gases, or other substances into the distribution pipes of the
consumer or public potable water system from any source or sources.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY, APPROVED. An assembly used for containment
and/or isolation purposes that has been investigated and approved by the county
and has been shown to meet design and performance standards of the American
Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE), the American Water Works Association
(AWWA), or the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research
of the University of Southern California.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE, APPROVED. A device used for isolation purposes
that has been shown to meet the design and performance standards of the
American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE) and the American Water Works
Association (AWWA).
   BACK-PRESSURE BACKFLOW. Any elevation in the consumer water system (by pump,
elevation of piping or steam and/or air pressure) above the supply pressure at
the point of delivery, which would cause, or tend to cause, a reversal of the
normal direction of flow.
   BACK-SIPHONAGE BACKFLOW. A reversal of the normal direction of flow in the
pipeline due to a negative pressure (vacuum) being created in the supply line
with the backflow source subject to atmospheric pressure.
   CONSUMER. Any person, firm, and corporation using or receiving water from
the county potable water system.
   CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system commencing at the point of
delivery and continuing throughout the consumer's plumbing system, located on
the consumer's premises, whether supplied by a public potable water or an
auxiliary water supply. The system(s) may be either a potable water system or
an industrial piping system.
   CONTAINMENT. Preventing the impairment of the public potable water supply by
installing an approved backflow prevention assembly at the service connection.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water which creates a
potential or actual hazard to the public health through the introduction of
hazardous or toxic substances or through the spread of disease by sewage,
industrial fluids, or waste.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any unprotected actual or potential connection or
structural arrangement between a public or a consumer's water system and any
other source or system through which it is possible to introduce any
contamination or pollution, other than the intended potable water with which
the system is supplied. Bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable
sections, swivel or changeover devices, and other temporary or permanent
devices through which or because of which "backflow " can or may occur are
considered to be cross-connections.
   DOUBLE CHECK DETECTOR ASSEMBLY (DCDA). A specially designed assembly
composed of a line-size approved double check valve assembly with a specific
bypass water meter and a meter-sized approved double check valve assembly. The
meter shall register (in U.S. gallons) accurately for only very low rates of
flow and shall show a registration for all rates of flow. This assembly shall
only be used to protect against a non-health hazard (i.e., pollutant).
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY (DCVA). An assembly composed of two
independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly closing shut-off
valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located
test cocks. This assembly shall only be used to protect against a non-health
hazard (i.e. pollutant).
   HAZARD, DEGREE OF. Derived from the evaluation of conditions within a
system, which can be classified as either a "pollutional" (non-health) or a
"contaminant" (health) hazard.
   HAZARD, HEALTH. An actual or potential threat of contamination of a
physical, hazardous, or toxic nature to the public or consumer's potable water
system to such a degree or intensity that there would be a danger to health.
   HAZARD, NON-HEALTH. An actual or potential threat to the quality of the
public or the consumer's potable water system. A NON-HEALTH HAZARD is one that,
if introduced into the public water supply system, could be a nuisance to water
customers, but would not adversely affect human health.
   HEALTH AGENCY. The North Carolina Department of Environment, Health, and
Natural Resources (Division of Health Services), NCDEHNR.
   INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS. Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically, or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, or non-health hazard if introduced into a
public or consumer potable water system. The fluids may include, but are not
limited to, process waters; chemicals; in fluid form; acids and alkalis; oils,
gases; and the like.
   POINT OF DELIVERY. Shall generally be at a point on the customer's property
where the meter is located. The customer shall be responsible for all water
piping and control devices located on the customer's side of the point of
delivery.
   POLLUTION. An impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does
not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and
unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of the waters for domestic use.
   POTABLE WATER. Water from any source which has been investigated by the
North Carolina Department of Environment, Health, and Natural Resources
(Division of Health Services) and which has been approved for human
consumption.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPAL BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY (RP or RPZ). An
assembly containing within its structure a minimum of two independently acting,
approved check valves, together with a hydraulically operating, mechanically
independent, pressure differential relief valve located between the check
valves and at the same time below the first check valve. The first check valve
reduces the supply pressure a predetermined amount so that during normal flow
and at cessation of normal flow, the pressure between the checks shall be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
pressure differential relief valve, by discharge to atmosphere, shall operate
to maintain the pressure between the checks less than the supply pressure. The
unit shall include tightly closing shut-off valves located at each end of the
assembly and each assembly shall be fitted with properly located test cocks.
The assembly is designed to protect against a health hazard (i.e.,
contaminant).
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPAL DETECTOR ASSEMBLY (RPDA). A specially designed
assembly composed of a line-size approved reduced pressure principal backflow
prevention assembly with a specific bypass water meter and a meter-sized
approved reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assembly. The meter
shall register (in U.S. gallons) accurately for only very low rates of flow and
shall show a registration for all rates of flow. This assembly shall be used to
protect against health hazard (i.e., contaminant).
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The terminal end of a service connection from the public
potable water system, i.e., where the county loses jurisdiction and sanitary
control over the water at its point of delivery to the consumer's water system.
   WATER PURVEYOR. The owner or operator of a public potable water system,
providing an approved water supply to the public.
   WATER SUPPLY, APPROVED. Any public potable water supply, which has been
investigated and approved by the North Carolina Department of Environment,
Health, and Natural Resources. The system must be operating under a valid
health permit.
   WATER SUPPLY, AUXILIARY. Any water supply on or available to the premises
other than the purveyor's approved public potable water supply. These auxiliary
waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or
any natural source such as a well, spring, river, stream, or industrial fluids.
These waters may be polluted, contaminated, or objectionable and constitute an
unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have sanitary
control.
(Ord. passed 4-2-2001)
§ 50.29 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   Authorized representative(s) from the county shall have the right to
enter, upon presentation of proper credentials and identification, any
building, structure, or premises during normal business hours, or at any time
during the event of an emergency, to perform any duty imposed by this
subchapter. Those duties may include sampling and testing of water, or
inspections and observations of all piping systems connected to the public
water supply. Where a user has security measures in force which would require
proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user
shall make necessary arrangements with the security guards so that upon
presentation of suitable identification, the county personnel will be permitted
to enter, without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific
responsibilities. Refusal to allow entry for these purposes will result in
discontinuance of water service.
   (B)   On request, the consumer shall furnish to the county any pertinent
information regarding the water supply system on the property where cross-
connections and backflow are deemed possible.
   (C)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable by injunctive
relief, equitable remedy and civil penalties pursuant to §
10.99.
(Ord. passed 4-2-2001; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 50.30 ELIMINATION OF CROSS-CONNECTIONS; DEGREE OF HAZARD.
   (A)   When cross-connections are found to exist, the owner, agent, occupant,
or tenant will be notified in writing to disconnect the same within the time
limit established by the county. Degree of protection required and maximum time
allowed for compliance will be based upon potential degree of hazard to the
public water supply system. The point of service shall be immediately
disconnected if the corrective action has not occurred within the maximum time
limit allowed. No additional notification shall be given other than the
original notification. The maximum time allowed shall begin with the issuance
of the written notification of the violation.
   (B)   The maximum time limits are as follows:
      (1)   Cross-connections with private wells or other auxiliary water
supplies - immediate disconnection;
      (2)   All facilities which pose a health hazard to the potable water
system must have a contaminant assembly in the form of a reduced pressure
principal backflow prevention assembly within 60 days;
      (3)   All industrial and commercial facilities not identified as a
"health hazard" shall be considered non-health hazard facilities. All non-
health hazard facilities must install, as minimum containment assembly, a
double check valve assembly within 90 days;
      (4)   If, in the judgement of the county, an imminent health hazard
exists, water service to the building or premises where a cross-connection
exists will be terminated unless an air gap is immediately provided, or the
cross-connection is immediately eliminated;
      (5)   Based upon recommendation from the county, the consumer is
responsible for installing sufficient internal isolation backflow prevention
assemblies;
      (6)   No person shall fill any bulk water tanks or tankers from the
public water system except when equipped with an air gap or an approved double
check valve assembly properly installed, at the consumer’s expense, and
inspected by the county. Bulk water tanks or tankers shall be filled at sites
in the county designated by the Manager of Public Works; and
      (7)   No person shall fill special use tanks or tankers containing
pesticides, fertilizers, other toxic chemicals, or their residues from the
public water system, except when equipped with an air gap or an approved
reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assembly properly installed, at
the consumers expense, and inspected by the county. Special use tanks or
tankers containing pesticides, fertilizers, other toxic chemicals, or their
residues shall be filled only at sites in the county designated by the Manager
of Public Works.
   (C)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable by injunctive
relief, equitable remedy and civil penalties pursuant to §
10.99.
(Ord. passed 4-2-2001; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 50.31 INSTALLATION OF ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed in accordance
with the specifications furnished by the Public Works Department and/or the
manufacturer's installation instructions and/or in the latest edition of the
State Building Code, whichever is most restrictive.
   (B)   Ownership, testing, and maintenance of the assembly shall be the
responsibility of the customer.
   (C)   All double check valve assemblies must be installed in drainable
vaults, with 18 inches of clearance on all sides wherever below ground
installation is necessary, in accordance with detailed specifications provided
by the Public Works Department. Double check valve assemblies may be installed
in a vertical position with prior approval from the Public Works Department,
provided the flow of water is in an upward direction.
   (D)   Reduced pressure principal assemblies must be installed in a
horizontal position only and can be installed in vault that provides a minimum
of 18 inches of clearance on all sides and is provided with adequate drainage,
to the atmosphere, so as not to allow submersion.
   (E)   The installation of a backflow prevention assembly, which is not
approved, must be replaced with an approved backflow prevention assembly.
   (F)   The installer is responsible to make sure a backflow prevention
assembly is working properly upon installation and is required to furnish the
following information to the Public Works Department within 15 days after
installation:
      (1)   Service address where assembly is located;
      (2)   Owner (and address, if different from service address);
      (3)   Description of assembly's location;
      (4)   Date of installation;
      (5)   Installer (include name, plumbing company represented, plumber's
license number, and project permit number);
      (6)   Type of assembly and size of assembly;
      (7)   Manufacturer, model number, and serial number of assembly; and
      (8)   Test results and report.
   (G)   When it is not possible to interrupt water service, provisions shall
be made for a "parallel installation" of backflow prevention assemblies. The
county will not accept an unprotected bypass around a backflow preventer when
the assembly is in need of testing, repair, or replacement.
   (H)   The consumer shall, upon notification, install the appropriate
containment assembly not to exceed the following time frame:
      (1)   Health hazard - 60 days; and
      (2)   Non-health hazard - 90 days.
   (I)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable by injunctive
relief, equitable remedy and civil penalties pursuant to §
10.99.
(Ord. passed 4-2-2001; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 50.32 TESTING AND REPAIR OF ASSEMBLIES.
   (A)   Testing of backflow prevention assemblies shall be made by a certified
backflow prevention assembly tester. The tests are to be conducted upon
installation and annually thereafter. A record of all testing and repairs is to
be retained by the customer. Copies of the records must be provided to the
Public Works Department within ten business days after the completion of any
testing and/or repair work.
   (B)   Any time that repairs to backflow prevention assemblies are deemed
necessary, whether through annual testing, required testing or routine
inspection by the owner or by the county, these repairs must be completed
within a specified time in accordance with the degree of hazard. If these
repairs are not completed within the specified time period, water service will
be terminated. In no case shall this time period exceed:
      (1)   Health hazard facilities - 14 days; and
      (2)   Non-health hazard facilities - 21 days.
   (C)   All certified backflow prevention assembly testers must obtain and
employ backflow prevention assembly test equipment, which has been evaluated
and/or approved by the county. All test equipment shall be checked for accuracy
annually (at a minimum), calibrated, if necessary, and certified to the county
as such.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any customer or certified tester to submit
any record to the county, which is false or incomplete in any material respect.
It shall be unlawful for any customer or certified tester to fail to submit to
the county any record, which is required by this subchapter. The violations may
result in the termination of service.
   (E)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable by injunctive
relief, equitable remedy and civil penalties pursuant to §
10.99.
(Ord. passed 4-2-2001; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 50.33 FACILITIES REQUIRING PROTECTION.
   Approved backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed on the service
line to any premises that the Public Works Department has identified as having
a potential for backflow. All customers shall follow the North Carolina
Guidelines for Cross-Connection Control in Water Distribution Systems, set out
in
Appendix A of this chapter, in determining the type backflow prevention
assembly required for an installation.
(Ord. passed 4-2-2001)
§ 50.34 CONNECTIONS WITH UNAPPROVED SOURCES OF SUPPLY.
   (A)   No person shall connect or cause to be connected any supply of water
not approved by the State Department of Environment, Health, and Natural
Resources to the water system supplied by the Public Works Department. Any such
connection allowed by the Public Works Department must be in conformance with
the backflow prevention requirements of this subchapter.
   (B)   In the event of contamination or pollution of a public or consumer
potable water system, the consumer shall notify the Public Works Department
immediately in order that appropriate measures may be taken to overcome and
eliminate the contamination or pollution.
   (C)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable by injunctive
relief, equitable remedy and civil penalties pursuant to §
10.99.
(Ord. passed 4-2-2001; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 50.35 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS.
   (A)   All connections for fire protection systems connected with the public
water system, two inches and smaller, shall be protected with an approved dual
check valve assembly as a minimum requirement. All fire systems using toxic
additives or booster pumps shall be protected by an approved reduced pressure
principal assembly at the main service connection.
   (B)   All connections for fire protection systems connected with the public
water system greater than two inches shall be protected with an approved double
check detector assembly as a minimum requirement. All fire protection systems
using toxic or hazardous additives or booster pumps shall be protected by an
approved reduced pressure principal detector assembly at the main service
connection.
   (C)   All existing backflow prevention assemblies two inches and larger
installed on fire protection systems (that were initially approved by the
Public Works Department) shall be allowed to remain on the premises, as long as
they are being properly maintained, tested, and repaired as required by this
subchapter. If, however, the existing assembly must be replaced, or in the
event of proven water theft through an unmetered source, the consumer shall be
required to install an approved assembly as required by this subchapter.
   (D)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable by injunctive
relief, equitable remedy and civil penalties pursuant to §
10.99.
(Ord. passed 4-2-2001; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 50.36 VIOLATIONS.
   Any violation of or noncompliance with the requirements of this subchapter
may result in the termination of service, or may be punishable by injunctive
relief, equitable remedy and civil penalties pursuant to §
10.99.
(Ord. passed 4-2-2001; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 50.99 PENALTY.
   Generally. Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
(Ord. passed 6-4-2007; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
APPENDIX A: NORTH CAROLINA GUIDELINES FOR CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL IN WATER
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS
   These guidelines are supplemental to Section .1006(b) of the "Rules
Governing Public Water Supplies". These guidelines are intended as a minimum
requirement. Public water suppliers may adopt more stringent requirements. Each
supplier of water shall conform to the minimum requirements established in
these guidelines.
   I.   Degree of Hazard:
      A.   Severe: Actual or potential threat of contamination that presents an
imminent danger to the public health with consequence of serious illness or
death.
      B.   Moderate: One that presents foreseeable and significant potential
for pollution, nuisance, aesthetically objectionable or other undesirable
alterations of the drinking water supply.
   II.   Backflow Prevention Assembly Requirements:
 
Degree of Hazard RPZ*   DCVA**  Air Gap
Severe           X      ------- X
Moderate         ------ X       -------
 
   III.   Facilities that require installation of a Backflow Preventer***:
      A.   Moderate Hazard - DCVA:
         1.   Fire sprinkler systems without booster pump facilities or
chemical additives.
         2.   Connection to tanks, lines and vessels that handle non-toxic
substances.
         3.   Lawn sprinkler systems without chemical injection or booster
pumps.
         4.   Most commercial establishments
         5.   Automotive service stations, bakeries and beauty shops with no
health hazard and bottling plants with no back pressure.
         6.   Etc.
*   Reduced Pressure Zone
**   Double Check Valve Assembly
***   This is not intended to be an exhaustive list.
      B.   Severe Hazard - RPZ or Air Gap
         1.   Lawn sprinkler systems with chemical injection or booster pump.
         2.   Wastewater Treatment Plants
         3.   Connection to an unapproved water system or unapproved auxiliary
water supply.
         4.   Connection to tanks, pumps, lines, steam boilers and vessels that
handles sewage, lethal substances, toxic or radioactive substances.
         5.   Fire sprinkler systems with booster pump facilities or chemical
additives.
         6.   Buildings with five or more stories above ground.
         7.   Hospitals and other medical facilities.
         8.   Morgues, mortuaries and autopsy facilities.
         9.   Metal plating facilities.
         10.   Bottling plants (subject to back pressure).
         11.   Canneries.
         12.   Battery manufacturers.
         13.   Exterminators and lawn care companies.
         14.   Chemical processing plants.
         15.   Dairies.
         16.   Film Laboratories.
         17.   Car Wash Facilities.
         18.   Dye Works.
         19.   Laundries.
         20.   Swimming Pools.
         21.   Water front facilities.
         22.   Etc.
   IV.   Approved Backflow Prevention Assemblies:
      Meets American Society of Sanitary Engineering (ASSE) standard and
carries ASSE Seal or is on the University of Southern California approval list.
   V.   Backflow Prevention Assembly Installation:
      Backflow prevention assemblies must be located in a place where it is
readily accessible for regular testing, maintenance and inspection. Bypass
lines parallel to a backflow prevention assembly shall have an approved
backflow prevention assembly installed that is equal to that on the main line.
(Ord. passed 4-2-2001)
CHAPTER 51: SEWER USE
Section
General Provisions
   
51.001   Purpose and policy
   
51.002   Definitions and abbreviations
General Sewer Use Requirements
   
51.015   Prohibited discharge standards
   
51.016   National categorical pretreatment standards
   
51.017   Local limits
   
51.018   State requirements
   
51.019   Right of revision
   
51.020   Dilution
   
51.021   Pretreatment of wastewater
   
51.022   Accidental discharge/slug control plans
   
51.023   Hauled wastewater
   
51.024   Private sewage systems
Fees
   
51.035   Purpose
   
51.036   User charges
   
51.037   Surcharges
   
51.038   Pretreatment program administration charges
Wastewater Discharge Permit Application and Issuance
   
51.050   Wastewater discharges
   
51.051   Wastewater permits
Reporting Requirements
   
51.065   Baseline monitoring reports
   
51.066   Compliance schedule progress reports
   
51.067   Reports of compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline
   
51.068   Periodic compliance reports
   
51.069   Reports of changed conditions
   
51.070   Reports of potential problems
   
51.071   Reports from unpermitted users
   
51.072   Notice of violation; repeat sampling and reporting
   
51.073   Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste
   
51.074   Analytical requirements
   
51.075   Sample collection
   
51.076   Timing
   
51.077   Record keeping
Compliance Monitoring
   
51.090   Monitoring facilities
   
51.091   Inspection and sampling
   
51.092   Search warrants
Confidential Information
   
51.105   Generally
Enforcement
   
51.120   Administrative remedies
   
51.121   Other available remedies
   
51.122   Remedies nonexclusive
Annual Publication of Significant Noncompliance
   
51.135   Generally
Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
   
51.150   Upset
   
51.151   Prohibited discharge standards defense
   
51.152   Bypass
 
   
51.999   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Flood Damage Prevention, see
Ch. 151
   Solid Waste and Recycling, see
Ch. 52
   Water, see
Ch. 50
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.001 PURPOSE AND POLICY.
   (A)   This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the
county, and enables the county to comply with all applicable state and federal
laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.) and the General
Pretreatment Regulations (40 C.F.R. pt. 403).
   (B)   The objectives of this chapter are:
      (1)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the county
wastewater system which will interfere with the operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge;
      (2)   To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the county
wastewater system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated,
into any waters of the state or otherwise be incompatible with the system;
      (3)   To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludges
from the county system;
      (4)   To protect both county personnel who may be affected by sewage,
sludge, and effluent in the course of their employment as well as protecting
the general public;
      (5)   To provide for equitable distribution of the cost of operation,
maintenance, and improvement of the county wastewater system; and
      (6)   To ensure that the county complies with its NPDES or non-discharge
permit conditions, sludge use, and disposal requirements and any other federal
or state laws to which the county wastewater system is subject.
   (C)   This chapter provides for the regulation of direct and indirect
contributors to the county wastewater system, through the issuance of permits
to certain non-domestic users and through enforcement of general requirements
for the other users, authorizes monitoring and enforcement activities, requires
user reporting and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable
distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein.
   (D)   This chapter shall apply to all users of the county wastewater system,
as authorized by G.S. §§ 160A-312 and/or 153A-275. Except as otherwise provided
herein, the POTW Director shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or imposed upon the POTW
Director may be delegated by the POTW Director to other county personnel. By
discharging wastewater into the county wastewater system, industrial users
located outside the county limits agree to comply with the terms and conditions
established in this chapter, as well as any permits, enforcement actions, or
orders issued hereunder.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 51.002 DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      ACT or THE ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as
the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq.
      APPROVAL AUTHORITY. The Director of the Division of Environmental
Management of the North Carolina Department of Environment, Health, and Natural
Resources or his or her designee.
      AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL USER.
         (a)   If the industrial user is a corporation, AUTHORIZED
REPRESENTATIVE shall mean:
            1.   The president, secretary, or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who
performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
            2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual
sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000 (in second-quarter 1980 dollars),
if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in
accordance with corporate procedures.
         (b)   If the industrial user is a partnership or sole proprietorship,
an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a general partner or the proprietor,
respectively.
         (c)   If the industrial user is a federal, state, or local government
facility, an AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE shall mean a director or highest
official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of
the activities of the government facility, or their designee.
         (d)   The individuals described in divisions (a) through (c) above may
designate another AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the
overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having
overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the
written authorization is submitted to the county.
      BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures
for five days at 200°C, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l).
      BUILDING SEWER. A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises of a user
to the POTW.
      BYPASS. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a
user's treatment facility.
      CATEGORICAL STANDARDS. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or
Pretreatment Standard.
      DIRECTOR. The person designated by the county to supervise the operation
of the publicly owned treatment works and who is charged with certain duties
and responsibilities by this chapter, or his or her duly authorized
representative.
      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA). The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, or where appropriate the term may also be used as a designation for the
Administrator or other duly authorized official of the agency.
      GRAB SAMPLE. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time
basis without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time
not to exceed 15 minutes.
      HOLDING TANK WASTE. Any waste from holding tanks, including, but not
limited to, the holding tanks as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers,
septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
      INDIRECT DISCHARGE or DISCHARGE. The discharge or the introduction from
any nondomestic source regulated under § 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank waste discharged into the
system).
      INDUSTRIAL USER or USER. Any person which is a source of indirect
discharge.
      INTERFERENCE. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment
processes, operations, or its sludge process, use, or disposal, which causes or
contributes to a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES or non-
discharge permit or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with
specified applicable state and federal statutes, regulations, or permits. The
term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in
accordance with § 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or any criteria,
guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act
(SWDA) (42 U.S.C. §§ 6901 et seq.), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act, the Marine Protection Research and Sanctuary Act (MPRSA) or more
stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge
management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method
of disposal or use employed by the POTW.
      MEDICAL WASTE. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding,
surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis
wastes.
      NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD. Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in
accordance with § 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which applies to
a specific category of industrial users, and which appears in 40 C.F.R. Chapter
1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
      NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM PERMIT (NPDES PERMIT). A
permit issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342), or pursuant to
G.S. § 143-215.1 by the state under delegation from EPA.
      NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE
STANDARD. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances;
these prohibitions appear in this chapter and are developed under the authority
of § 307(b) of the Act and 40 C.F.R. § 403.5.
      NEW SOURCE.
         (a)   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which
there may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced
after the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment standards under §
307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to the source if the standards are
thereafter promulgated in accordance with § 307(c), provided that:
            1.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is
constructed at a site at which no other source is located;
            2.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
            3.   The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of
an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are
substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility
is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility
is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should
be considered.
         (b)   Construction on a site at which an existing source is located
results in a modification rather than a NEW SOURCE if the construction does not
create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the
criteria of divisions (a)2. or (a)3. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or
adds to existing process or production equipment.
         (c)   For purposes of this definition, construction of a NEW SOURCE
has commenced if the owner or operator has:
            1.   Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous on-site
construction program:
               a.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or
equipment; or
               b.   Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which
is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source
facilities or equipment.
            2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase
of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation
within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be
terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation
under this definition.
      NONCONTACT COOLING WATER. Water used for cooling which does not come into
direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or
finished product.
      NON-DISCHARGE PERMIT. A disposal system permit issued by the state
pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.1.
      PASS THROUGH. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the state
in quantities or concentrations which, alone or with discharges from other
sources, causes a violation, including an increase in the magnitude or duration
of a violation, of the POTW's NPDES or non-discharge permit, or a downstream
water quality standard.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or
assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local government
entities.
      pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed as
standard units, and calculated as the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of
the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
      POLLUTANT. Any "waste" as defined in G.S. § 143-213(18) and dredged
spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste and certain characteristics of
wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity,
or odor).
      POTW DIRECTOR. The County Manager of Public Works.
      POTW TREATMENT PLANT. The portion of the POTW designed to provide
treatment to wastewater.
      PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the
elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant
properties in wastewater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise
introducing the pollution into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be
obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, or process changes or
other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless
allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard.
      PRETREATMENT PROGRAM. The program for the control of pollutants
introduced into the POTW from non-domestic sources which was developed by the
county in compliance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.8 and approved by the approval
authority as authorized by G.S. § 143-215.3 (a)(14) in accordance with 40
C.F.R. § 403.11.
      PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS. Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to pretreatment, other than a pretreatment standard.
      PRETREATMENT STANDARDS. Prohibited discharge standards, categorical
standards, and local limits.
      PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) or MUNICIPAL WASTEWATER SYSTEM. A
treatment works as defined by § 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is
owned in this instance by the county. This definition includes any devices or
systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation
of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes
sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the POTW
treatment plant. For the purposes of this chapter, POTW shall also include any
sewers that convey wastewaters to the POTW from persons outside the county who
are, by contract or agreement with the county, or in any other way, users of
the county's POTW.
      SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE. Substantial physical damage to property, damage
to the user's treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
      SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER. Any industrial user of the wastewater
disposal system who:
         (a)   Has an average daily process wastewater flow of 50,000 gallons
or more;
         (b)   Contributes more than 5% of any design or treatment capacity
(i.e., allowable pollutant load) of the wastewater treatment plant receiving
the indirect discharge;
         (c)   Is required to meet a national categorical pretreatment
standard; or
         (d)   Is found by the county, the Division of Environmental
Management, or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have the
potential for impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing
industrial users, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of sludge,
the system's effluent quality, or compliance with any pretreatment standards or
requirements.
      SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE or REPORTABLE NONCOMPLIANCE. A status of
noncompliance defined as follows:
         (a)   Violations of wastewater discharge limits:
            1.   Chronic violations - 66% or more of the measurements exceed
(by any magnitude) the same daily maximum limit or the same average limit in a
six-month period;
            2.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations - 33% or more of
the measurements are more than the TRC times the limit (maximum or average) in
a six-month period. There are two groups of TRCs:
               a.   For conventional pollutants, BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and
grease TRC = 1.4; and
               b.   For all other pollutants TRC = 1.2.
            3.   Any other violation(s) of an effluent limit (average or daily
maximum) that the control authority believes has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through; or endangered
the health of the sewage treatment plant personnel or the public; and/or
            4.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health/welfare or to the environment and has resulted in
the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge.
         (b)   Violations of compliance schedule milestones, contained in a
pretreatment permit or enforcement order, for starting construction, completing
construction, and attaining final compliance by 90 days or more after the
schedule date;
         (c)   Failure to provide reports for compliance schedule, self-
monitoring data, baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, and
periodic compliance reports within 30 days from the due date;
         (d)   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; and/or
         (e)   Any other violation or group of violations that the control
authority considers to be significant.
      SLUG LOAD. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could
cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in §
51.015.
      STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC). A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of
the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1987.
      STORM WATER. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
      SUSPENDED SOLIDS. The total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is
removable by laboratory filtering.
      UPSET. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and
temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of
factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An UPSET does not include
noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
      WASTEWATER. The liquid- and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes
from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, mobile sources,
treatment facilities and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface
water, and storm water that may be present, whether treated or untreated, which
are contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
      WASTEWATER PERMIT. As set forth in §
51.051.
      WATERS OF THE STATE. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourse,
waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage
systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following abbreviations shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      BOD. Biochemical Oxygen Demand.
      C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations.
      COD. Chemical Oxygen Demand.
      EPA. Environmental Protection Agency.
      gpd. Gallons per day.
      l. Liter.
      mg. Milligrams.
      mg/l. Milligrams per liter.
      G.S. North Carolina General Statutes.
      NPDES. National Pollution Discharge Elimination System.
      O&M. Operation and Maintenance.
      POTW. Publicly-Owned Treatment Works.
      RCRA. Resource Conservation and Recovery Act.
      SIC. Standard Industrial Classification.
      SWDA. Solid Waste Disposal Act.
      TSS. Total Suspended Solids.
      TKN. Total Kjeldahl Nitrogen.
      U.S.C. United States Code.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS
§ 51.015 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS.
   (A)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the POTW,
directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which causes interference
or pass through. These general prohibitions apply to all users of a POTW
whether or not the user is a significant industrial user or subject to any
national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
   (B)   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed into the POTW the
following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
      (1)   Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of
less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. § 261.21;
      (2)   Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction
of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference;
      (3)   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through;
      (4)   Any wastewater having a pH less than five or more than nine or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage to the
POTW or equipment;
      (5)   Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding
pollutants, (BOD, and the like) in sufficient quantity, (flow or concentration)
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to cause interference
with the POTW;
      (6)   Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 150°F (66°C), or
which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in
interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the
introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104°F (40°C);
      (7)   Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors,
or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems;
      (8)   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW Director in accordance with §
51.023;
      (9)   Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to
prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair;
      (10)   Any substance which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other
product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for
reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case,
shall a substance discharged to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance
with sludge use or disposal regulations or permits issued under § 405 of the
Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being
used;
      (11)   Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the
treatment process, including, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions, which consequently imparts sufficient color to the treatment
plant's effluent to render the waters injurious to public health or secondary
recreation or to aquatic life and wildlife or to adversely affect the
palatability of fish or aesthetic quality or impair the receiving waters for
any designated uses;
      (12)   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
except as specifically approved by the POTW Director in compliance with
applicable state or federal regulations;
      (13)   Storm water, surface water, ground water, arterisan well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized
water, noncontact cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater, unless
specifically authorized by the POTW Director;
      (14)   Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in
concentrations greater than 100 mg/l;
      (15)   Any sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment
of industrial wastes;
      (16)   Any medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the POTW
Director in a wastewater discharge permit;
      (17)   Any material containing ammonia, ammonia salts, or other chelating
agents which will produce metallic complexes that interfere with the county
wastewater system;
      (18)   Any material that would be identified as hazardous waste according
to 40 C.F.R. pt. 261 if not disposed of in a sewer except as may be
specifically authorized by the POTW Director;
      (19)   Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to violate
State Water Quality Standards for toxic substances as described in 15A NCAC 2B
.0200;
      (20)   Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      (21)   Recognizable portions of the human or animal anatomy;
      (22)   Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming in the county wastewater system;
and/or
      (23)   At no time, shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard
meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the
system) be more than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive
limit (LEL) of the meter.
   (C)   Pollutants, substances, wastewater, or other wastes prohibited by this
section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be
discharged to the county wastewater system. All floor drains located in process
or materials storage areas must discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment
facility before connecting with the system.
   (D)   When the POTW Director determines that a user(s) is contributing to
the POTW, any of the above enumerated substances in the amounts which may cause
or contribute to interference of POTW operation or pass through, the POTW
Director shall:
      (1)   Advise the user(s) of the potential impact of the contribution on
the POTW in accordance with §
51.120; and
      (2)   Take appropriate actions in accordance with this chapter for the
user to protect the POTW from interference or pass through.
   (E)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as
described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 51.016 NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. Users subject to categorical pretreatment standards are
required to comply with applicable standards as set out in 40 C.F.R. Chapter 1,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 and incorporated herein.
   (B)   Specifically.
      (1)   Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in
terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
POTW Director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance
with 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(C).
      (2)   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is
mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the POTW Director
shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40
C.F.R. § 403.6(e).
      (3)   A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment
standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 C.F.R. § 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are
fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the
categorical pretreatment standard.
      (4)   A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard
in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.15.
   (C)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as
described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 51.017 LOCAL LIMITS.
   (A)   To implement the general and specific discharge prohibitions listed in
this chapter, industrial user-specific local limits will be developed ensuring
that the POTW's maximum allowable headworks loading is not exceeded for
particular pollutants of concern for each industrial user. Where specific local
limits are not contained for a given parameter or pollutant in an industrial
user permit, the following limits will apply to all users:
250 mg/l    BOD
250 mg/l    TSS
40 mg/l     TKN
0.003 mg/l  arsenic
0.003 mg/l  cadmium
0.090 mg/l  copper
0.035 mg/l  cyanide
0.049 mg/l  lead
5.00 mg/l   MBAS
0.0003 mg/l mercury
0.170 mg/l  nickel
50.0 mg/l   O/G
0.005 mg/l  silver
0.05 mg/l   total chromium
0.340 mg/l  zinc
0.100 mg/l  phenol
 
   (B)   Industrial user-specific local limits for appropriate pollutants of
concern shall be included in wastewater permits and are considered pretreatment
standards. The POTW Director may impose mass limits in addition to, or in place
of, the concentration-based limits above in accordance with categorical
standards.
   (C)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as
described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 51.018 STATE REQUIREMENTS.
   State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case
where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or
those in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 51.019 RIGHT OF REVISION.
   The county reserves the right to establish limitations and requirements
which are more stringent than those required by either state or federal
regulations if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in §
51.001 or the general and specific prohibitions in §
51.015, as is allowed by 40 C.F.R. § 403.4.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 51.020 DILUTION.
   No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt
to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the national
categorical pretreatment standards, unless expressly authorized by an
applicable pretreatment standard, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation
developed by the county or state. Any violation of this section shall be
subject to the penalties as described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 51.021 PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as
necessary to comply with this chapter and wastewater permits issued under §
51.051 and shall achieve compliance with all national categorical pretreatment
standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in §
51.015 within the time limitations as specified by EPA, the state, or the POTW
Director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance
shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed
plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be
submitted to the county for review, and shall be approved by the POTW Director
before construction of the facility. The review of the plans and operating
procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of
modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the
county under the provisions of this chapter. Any subsequent changes in the
pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be
approved by the POTW Director prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
   (B)   Additional pretreatment measures.
      (1)   Whenever deemed necessary, the POTW Director may require users to
restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate
points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams,
and any other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine
the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
      (2)   The POTW Director may require any person discharging into the POTW
to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable
storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater
discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization.
      (3)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the POTW Director, they are necessary for the proper handling of
wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, and sand; except
that the interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All
interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the POTW Director
and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
The interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as
needed, by the user at their expense.
      (4)   Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be
required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter.
   (C)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as
described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 51.022 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   At least once every two years, the POTW Director shall evaluate
whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug
control plan. The POTW Director may require any user to develop, submit for
approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the POTW Director may
develop such a plan for any user.
   (B)   An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum,
the following:
      (1)   Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
      (2)   Description of stored chemicals;
      (3)   Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW Director of any
accidental or slug discharge, as required by §
51.070; and
      (4)   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug
discharge. The procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and
maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and
unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building
of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic
pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency
response.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 51.023 HAULED WASTEWATER.
   (A)   Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations
designated by the POTW Director, and at such times as are established by the
POTW Director. The waste shall not violate this subchapter or any other
requirements established by the county. The POTW Director may require septic
tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits.
   (B)   The POTW Director shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain
wastewater discharge permits. The POTW Director may require generators of
hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The POTW
Director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The
discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of
this chapter.
   (C)   Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations
designated by the POTW Director. No load may be discharged without prior
consent of the POTW Director. The POTW Director may collect samples of each
hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW Director
may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load
prior to discharge.
   (D)   Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every
load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the
industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and
addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The
form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste
constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes.
   (E)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as
described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 51.024 PRIVATE SEWAGE SYSTEMS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, from and after 3-
18-1997, a direct connection to the public sewer system shall be made pursuant
to this chapter for all new construction within the boundaries of the county
where public sewer service is available, and each malfunction for which a
repair permit becomes necessary to repair a private system within the area
described above. No further permits shall be issued for private sewage systems
in the area described above after 3-18-1997. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions, however, repair permits may be issued and direct connections not
required for malfunctions described above if the situations meet the criteria
of the County Health Inspectors for the issuance of repair permits. Direct
connections shall not be required for a publicly owned or nonprofit outdoor
recreation facility, which is used less than 180 days per year.
      (2)   For purposes of this section, public sewer is “available” where a
public sewer line:
         (a)   Passes within 400 feet of the existing or proposed structure, as
the case may be; and
         (b)   Either touches the lot on which the existing or proposed
structure is located or lies within a right-of-way adjacent to the lot where
the structure is located.
      (3)   Upon connection to a public sewer system, any septic tank,
cesspool, or similar private disposal facility, not used for back-up, shall be
abandoned and filled with suitable materials.
      (4)   This chapter shall be subject to enforcement by mandatory or
prohibitory injunctions and orders of abatement, and violations of this chapter
shall subject the offender to criminal and/or civil liability as provided in
G.S. Chapter 153A.
   (B)   Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of
this section, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage
disposal system complying with the provisions of this section.
   (C)   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal
system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the County
Health Inspectors. The application for the permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the county, which the applicant shall supplement by any plans,
specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the County
Health Inspectors.
   (D)   A permit for private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the Sanitarian. The
Sanitarian shall be allowed to inspect the work at any stage of construction
and, in any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the Sanitarian
when the work is ready for final inspection and before any underground portions
are covered. The inspection shall be made within 48 hours of the receipt of
notice by the Sanitarian.
   (E)   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the State Department of Natural
Resources and Community Development, Division of Environmental Management. No
permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing
subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is not large
enough to accommodate both a septic tank, its drainage field, plus a reserve
drainage field. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to
any public sewer or natural outlet.
   (F)   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal
facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the county.
   (G)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the County Health
Inspectors.
   (H)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as
described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 3-21-
2022)
FEES
§ 51.035 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to provide for the recovery of costs
from users of the county's wastewater disposal system for the implementation of
the program established herein. The applicable charges or fees shall be set
forth in the county's schedule of charges and fees.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 51.036 USER CHARGES.
   (A)   A user charge shall be levied on all users, including, but not limited
to, persons, firms, corporations or governmental entities that discharge, cause
or permit the discharge of sewage into the POTW.
   (B)   The user charge shall reflect at least the cost of debt service,
operation, and maintenance (including replacement) of the POTW.
   (C)   Each user shall pay its proportionate cost based on volume and/or mass
of concentration of flow.
   (D)   The County Manager shall review annually the sewage contributions of
users, the total costs of debt service, operation and maintenance of the POTW
and will make recommendations to the Board of Commissioners for adjustments in
the schedule of charges and fees as necessary.
   (E)   Charges for flow to the POTW not directly attributable to the users
shall be distributed among all users of the POTW based upon the volume of flow
of the users.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 51.037 SURCHARGES.
   (A)   All users of the POTW are subject to waste surcharges on discharges
which exceed the levels as set forth in §
51.017 and/or individual discharge permits or pretreatment permits.
   (B)   Allocations which are exceeded shall be assessed surcharges as
follows:
 
% Above Limits Surcharge
0 to 25%       $200
26 to 50%      $500
>51%           $2,000
 
   (C)   The volume of flow used in determining the total discharge of
wastewater for payment of user charges and surcharges shall be based on the
following:
      (1)   Metered water consumption as shown in the records of meter readings
maintained by the county;
      (2)   If required by the county or at the individual dischargers opinion,
other flow monitoring devices which measure the actual volume of wastewater
discharged to the sewer. The devices shall be accessible and safely located,
and the measuring system shall be installed in accordance with plans approved
by the county. The metering system shall be installed and maintained at the
users expense according to arrangements that may be made with the county; and/
or
      (3)   Where any user procures all or part of his or her water supply from
sources other than the county, the user shall install and maintain at his or
her own expense a flow measuring device of a type approved by the county.
   (D)   (1)   The character and concentration of the constituents of the
wastewater used in determining surcharges shall be determined by samples
collected and analyzed by the county.
      (2)   Samples shall be collected in such a manner as to be representative
of the actual discharge and shall be analyzed using procedures set forth in 40
C.F.R. pt. 136.
   (E)   The determination of the character and concentration of the
constituents of the wastewater discharge by the POTW Director or his or her
duly appointed representatives shall be binding as a basis for charges.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 51.038 PRETREATMENT PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION CHARGES.
   The schedule of charges and fees adopted by the county may include charges
and fees for:
   (A)   Reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment
program;
   (B)   Monitoring, inspections, and surveillance procedures;
   (C)   Reviewing slug control plans, including accidental and/or slug load
discharge procedures and construction plans and specifications;
   (D)   Permitting; and/or
   (E)   Other fees as the county may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements of the pretreatment program.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE
§ 51.050 WASTEWATER DISCHARGES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to connect or discharge to the POTW
without first obtaining the permission of the county. When requested by the
POTW Director, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics
of its wastewater within seven days of the request. The POTW Director is
authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require
users to update this information. Any violation of this section shall be
subject to the penalties as described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 51.051 WASTEWATER PERMITS.
   (A)   Generally. All significant industrial users shall obtain a significant
industrial user permit prior to the commencement of discharge to the POTW.
Existing industrial users who are determined by the POTW Director to be
significant industrial users shall obtain a significant industrial user permit
within 180 days of receiving notification of the POTW Director's determination.
Industrial users who do not fit the significant industrial user criteria may at
the discretion of the POTW Director be required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit for non-significant industrial users.
   (B)   Significant industrial user determination. All persons proposing to
discharge non-domestic wastewater, or proposing to change the volume or
characteristics of an existing discharge of non-domestic wastewater shall
request from the POTW Director a significant industrial user determination. If
the POTW Director determines or suspects that the proposed discharge fits the
significant industrial user criteria, he or she will require that a significant
industrial user permit application be filed.
   (C)   Significant industrial user permit application. Users required to
obtain a significant industrial user permit shall complete and file with the
county, an application in the form prescribed by the POTW Director, and
accompanied by an application fee in the amount prescribed in the schedule of
charges and fees. Significant industrial users shall apply for a significant
industrial user permit within 90 days after notification of the POTW Director's
determination in division (B) above. In support of the application, the user
shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following
information:
      (1)   Name, address, and location, (if different from the address);
      (2)   Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes for pretreatment,
the industry as a whole, and any processes for which categorical pretreatment
standards have been promulgated;
      (3)   Analytical date on wastewater constituents and characteristics,
including, but not limited to, those mentioned in §§
51.015 through
51.024, any of the priority pollutants (§ 307(a) of the Act) which the
applicant knows or suspects are present in the discharge as determined by a
reliable analytical laboratory, and any other pollutant of concern to the POTW;
sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures
established by the EPA pursuant to § 304 (g) of the Act and contained in 40
C.F.R. pt. 136, as amended;
      (4)   Time and duration of the indirect discharge;
      (5)   Average daily and 30-minute peak wastewater flow rates, including
daily, monthly, and seasonal variations, if any;
      (6)   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details
to show all sewers, floor drains, sewer connections, direction of flow and
appurtenances by the size, location, and elevation;
      (7)   Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials which are or could be accidentally or
intentionally discharged;
      (8)   Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the
discharge which are limited by any county, state, or federal pretreatment
standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards
are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional operation
and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user
to meet applicable pretreatment standards;
      (9)   If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the
pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the user will provide
the additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be
longer than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment
standard. The following conditions apply to this schedule.
         (a)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards. No increment in the schedule shall
exceed nine months.
         (b)   No later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and
the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the
POTW Director including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule. In no event
shall more than nine months elapse between the progress reports to the POTW
Director.
      (10)   Each product produced by type, amount, process, or processes and
rate of production;
      (11)   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day);
      (12)   Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of plant and
proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;
      (13)   If subject to a categorical standard, a baseline monitoring report
in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.12(b) and 15A NCAC 2H .0908(a), as outlined
in §
51.065; and
      (14)   Any other information as may be deemed by the POTW Director to be
necessary to evaluate the permit application.
   (D)   Application signatories and certification. All wastewater discharge
permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and contain the following certification statement:
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations."
   (E)   Application review and evaluation. The POTW Director will evaluate the
data furnished by the user and may require additional information.
      (1)   The POTW Director is authorized to accept applications for the
county and shall refer all applications to the POTW staff for review and
evaluation.
      (2)   Within 30 days of receipt the POTW Director shall acknowledge and
accept the complete application; or if not complete, shall return the
application to the applicant with a statement of what additional information is
required.
   (F)   Tentative determination and draft permit.
      (1)   The POTW staff shall conduct a review of the application and an on-
site inspection of the significant industrial user, including any pretreatment
facilities, and shall prepare a written evaluation and tentative determination
to issue or deny the significant industrial user permit.
      (2)   If the staff's tentative determination in division (F)(1) above is
to issue the permit, the following additional determinations shall be made in
writing:
         (a)   Proposed discharge limitations for those pollutants proposed to
be limited;
         (b)   A proposed schedule of compliance, including interim dates and
requirements, for meeting the proposed limitations; and
         (c)   A brief description of any other proposed special conditions
which will have significant impact upon the discharge described in the
application.
      (3)   The staff shall organize the determinations made pursuant to
divisions (F)(1) and (F)(2) above and the county's general permit conditions
into a significant industrial user permit.
   (G)   Permit synopsis. A fact sheet providing a brief synopsis of the
application shall be prepared by the POTW staff for submission to the applicant
and the approval authority and shall be made available to the public upon
request. The contents of the fact sheets shall include at least the following
information:
      (1)   A sketch and detailed description of the industrial facilities and
pretreatment facilities including the location of all points of discharge to
the POTW and all established compliance monitoring points; and
      (2)    A quantitative description of the discharge described in the
application which includes at least the following:
         (a)   The rate or frequency of the proposed discharge; if the
discharge is continuous, the average daily flow;
         (b)   The actual average daily discharge in pounds per day of any
limited pollutant and any pollutant identified in the application as know or
suspected present; and
         (c)   The basis for the pretreatment limitations including the
documentation of any calculations in applying categorical pretreatment
standards.
   (H)   Final action on significant industrial user permit applications.
      (1)   The POTW Director shall take final action on all applications not
later than 90 days following receipt of a complete application.
      (2)   The POTW Director is authorized to:
         (a)   Issue a significant industrial user permit containing the
conditions as are necessary to effectuate the purposes of this chapter and G.S.
§ 143-215.1;
         (b)   Issue a significant industrial user permit containing time
schedules for achieving compliance with applicable pretreatment standards and
requirements;
         (c)   Modify any permit upon not less than 60 days notice and pursuant
to division (J) below;
         (d)   Revoke any permit pursuant to §
51.120;
         (e)   Suspend a permit pursuant to §
51.120; and
         (f)   Deny a permit application when in the opinion of the POTW
Director the discharge may cause or contribute to pass-through or interference
of the wastewater treatment plant or where necessary to effectuate the purposes
of G.S. § 143-215.1.
   (I)   Hearings.
      (1)   Initial adjudicatory hearing. An applicant whose permit is denied,
or is granted subject to conditions he or she deems unacceptable, a permittee/
user assessed a civil penalty under §
51.999 or one issued an administrative order under §
51.120 shall have the right to an adjudicatory hearing before a hearing officer
designated by the POTW Director upon making written demand, identifying the
specific issues to be contested, to the POTW Director within 30 days following
receipt of the significant industrial user permit, civil penalty assessment, or
administrative order. Unless the written demand is made within the time
specified herein, the action shall be final and binding. The hearing officer
shall make a final decision on the contested permit, penalty, or order within
45 days of the receipt of the written demand of a hearing. The POTW Director
shall transmit a copy of the hearing officer's decision by registered or
certified mail.
         (a)   New permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the
General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a newly issued permit,
the terms and conditions of the entire permit are stayed and the permit is not
in effect until either the conclusion of judicial review or until the parties
reach a mutual resolution.
         (b)   Renewed permits. Upon appeal, including judicial review in the
General Courts of Justice, of the terms or conditions of a renewed permit, the
terms and conditions of the existing permit remain in effect until either the
conclusion of judicial review or until the parties reach a mutual resolution.
      (2)   Final appeal hearing. Any decision of a hearing officer made as a
result of an adjudicatory hearing held under division (I)(1) above may be
appealed, to the Board of Commissioners upon filing a written demand within ten
days of receipt of notice of the decision. Hearings held under this division
(I)(2) shall be conducted in accordance with the county. Failure to make
written demand within the time specified herein shall bar further appeal. The
Board of Commissioners shall make a final decision on the appeal within 90 days
of the date the appeal was filed and shall transmit a written copy of its
decision by registered or certified mail.
      (3)   Official record. When a final decision is issued under division (I)
(2) above, the Board of Commissioners shall prepare an official record of the
case that includes:
         (a)   All notices, motions, and other like pleadings;
         (b)   A copy of all documentary evidence introduced;
         (c)   A certified transcript of all testimony taken, if testimony is
transcribed. If testimony is taken and not transcribed, then a narrative
summary of any testimony taken; and
         (d)   A copy of the final decision of the Board of Commissioners.
      (4)   Judicial review. Any person against whom a final order or decision
of the Board of Commissioners is entered, pursuant to the hearing conducted
under division (I)(2) above, may seek judicial review of the order or decision
by filing a written petition within 30 days after receipt of notice by
registered or certified mail of the order or decision, but not thereafter, with
the Superior Court of Lincoln County along with a copy to the county. Within 30
days after receipt of the copy of the petition of judicial review, the Board of
Commissioners shall transmit to the reviewing court the original or a certified
copy of the official record.
   (J)   Permit modification.
      (1)   (a)   Modification of permits shall be subject to the same
procedural requirements as the issuance of permits except as follows:
            1.   Changes in the ownership of the discharge when no other change
in the permit is indicated;
            2.   A single modification of any compliance schedule not in excess
of four months; and/or
            3.   Modification of compliance schedules (construction schedules)
in permits for new sources where the new source will not begin to discharge
until control facilities are operational.
         (b)   Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a
reasonable time schedule for compliance.
      (2)   Within nine months of the promulgation of a national categorical
pretreatment standard, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to the
standards shall be revised to require compliance with the standard within the
time frame prescribed by the standard. Where a user, subject to a national
categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application
for a wastewater discharge permit as required by division (C) above, the user
shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 180 days after the
promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard.
      (3)   A request for a modification by the permittee shall constitute a
waiver of the 60-day notice required by G.S. § 143.215.1(b) for modifications.
   (K)   Permit conditions.
      (1)   The POTW Director shall have the authority to grant a permit with
the conditions attached as he or she believes necessary to achieve the purpose
of this chapter and G.S. § 143-215.1. Wastewater permits shall contain, but are
not limited to, the following:
         (a)   A statement of duration (in no case more than five years);
         (b)   A statement of non-transferability;
         (c)   Applicable effluent limits based on categorical standards or
local limits or both;
         (d)   Applicable monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and
record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification
of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and
sample type based on federal, state, and local law;
         (e)   Notification requirements for slug loads; and
         (f)   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for
violation of pretreatment standards and requirements and any applicable
compliance schedule.
      (2)   In addition, permits may contain, but are not limited to, the
following:
         (a)   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, and/or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
         (b)   Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or
maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater
pollutants or properties;
         (c)   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology or
construction of appropriate containment devices, and the like, designed to
reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment
works;
         (d)   Development and implementation of spill control plans or other
special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately
prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges;
         (e)   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the municipal wastewater system;
         (f)   The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
management of the wastewater discharged to the system;
         (g)   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
         (h)   Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for
tests, and reporting schedules;
         (i)   Requirements for immediate reporting of any instance of
noncompliance and for automatic resampling and reporting within 30 days where
self-monitoring indicates a violation(s);
         (j)   Compliance schedules for meeting pretreatment standards and
requirements;
         (k)   Requirements for submission of periodic self-monitoring or
special notification reports;
         (l)   Requirements for maintaining and retaining plans and records
relating to wastewater discharges as specified in §
51.077 and affording the POTW Director, or his or her representatives, access
thereto;
         (m)   Requirements for prior notification and approval by the POTW
Director of any new introduction of wastewater pollutants or of any significant
change in the volume or character of the wastewater prior to introduction in
the system;
         (n)   Requirements for the prior notification and approval by the POTW
Director any change in the manufacturing and/or pretreatment process used by
the permittee;
         (o)   Requirements for immediate notification of excessive,
accidental, or slug discharges, or any discharge which could cause any problems
to the system;
         (p)   A statement that compliance with the permit does not relieve the
permittee of responsibility for compliance with all federal and state
pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the terms
of the permit; and
         (q)   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW Director to
ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
   (L)   Permits duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period,
not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year
or may be stated to expire on a specific date.
   (M)   Permit transfer. Wastewater permits are issued to a specific user for
a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be reassigned or
transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or
changed operation.
   (N)   Permit reissuance. A significant industrial user shall apply for
permit reissuance by submitting a complete application in accordance with this
section a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the existing permit.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 51.065 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS.
   (A)   Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical
pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing
categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the
POTW shall submit to the POTW Director a report which contains the information
listed in division (B) below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their
discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to
the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the
POTW Director a report which contains the information listed in division (B)
below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use
to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give
estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
   (B)   Users described above shall submit the information set forth below:
      (1)   Identifying information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner;
      (2)   Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility;
      (3)   Description of operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the
operation(s) carried out by the user. This description should include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from
the regulated processes;
      (4)   Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily
and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined
wastestream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(e);
      (5)   Measurement of pollutants.
         (a)   The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each
regulated process;
         (b)   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the POTW
Director, or regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process.
Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass,
where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily
operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in §
51.074; and
         (c)   Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in §
51.075.
      (6)   Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized
representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements;
      (7)   Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the
user will provide the additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date
in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for
the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this
section must meet the requirements set out in §
51.066; and
      (8)   Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must
be signed and certified in accordance with §
51.051.
   (C)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as
described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 51.066 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORTS.
   (A)   Generally. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance
schedule required by §
51.065.
   (B)   Specifically.
      (1)   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates
for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction
and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the
applicable pretreatment standards (the events include, but are not limited to,
hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts
for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation).
      (2)   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months.
      (3)   The user shall submit a progress report to the POTW Director no
later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of
compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps
being taken by the user to return to the established schedule.
      (4)   In no event shall more than nine months elapse between the progress
reports to the POTW Director.
   (C)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as
described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 51.067 REPORTS OF COMPLIANCE WITH CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD DEADLINE.
   Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable
categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject
to the pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the POTW
Director a report containing the information described in §
51.065. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established in accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R. § 403.6(c), this
report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production
rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards
expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or
other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual
production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must
be signed and certified in accordance with §
51.051.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 51.068 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS.
   (A)   Municipalities may sample and analyze user discharges in lieu of
requiring the users to conduct sampling and analysis.
   (B)   All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by
the POTW Director but in no case less than twice per year (in June and
December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the
measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period.
All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with
§
51.051.
   (C)   All wastewater samples must be representative of the user’s discharge.
Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly
operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The
failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative
of its discharge.
   (D)   If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the POTW Director,
using the procedures prescribed in §
51.074, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 51.069 REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Each user must notify the POTW Director of any planned significant
changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature,
quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 60 days before the change.
   (B)   The POTW Director may require the user to submit the information as
may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the
submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under §
51.051.
   (C)   The POTW Director may issue a wastewater discharge permit under §
51.051 or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under §
51.051 in response to changed condition or anticipated changed conditions.
   (D)   For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are
not limited to, flow increases of 10% or greater, and the discharge of any
previously unreported pollutants.
   (E)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as
described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 51.070 REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS.
   (A)   In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to,
accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a
noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems
for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the POTW Director
of the incident. This notification shall include the location of this
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective
actions taken by the user.
   (B)   (1)   Within five working days following the discharge, the user
shall, unless waived by the POTW Director, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
user to prevent similar future occurrences.
      (2)   The notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall
the notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability
which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter.
   (C)   (1)   A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin
board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of
a discharge described in division (A) above.
      (2)   Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a
discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedures.
   (D)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as
described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 51.071 REPORTS FROM UNPERMITTED USERS.
   All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the POTW Director as the POTW Director may require. Any
violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 51.072 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING.
   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify
the POTW Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user
shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the
repeat analysis to the POTW Director within 30 days after becoming aware of the
violation. The user is not required to resample if the POTW Director monitors
at the user’s facility at least once a month, or if the POTW Director samples
between the user’s initial sampling and when the user received the results of
this sampling. Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties
as described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 51.073 NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   (A)   The municipality may choose to prohibit the discharge of hazardous
waste.
   (B)   Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify
the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state
hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a
substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40
C.F.R. pt. 261. The notification must include the name of the hazardous waste
as set forth in 40 C.F.R. pt. 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type
of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than
100 kilograms of the waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification
also shall contain the following information to the extent the information is
known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, as estimation of the mass and
concentration of the constituents in the wastestream discharge during the
calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the
wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All
notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge
commences. Any notification under this division (B) need to be submitted only
once for each hazardous waste discharge. However, notifications of changed
conditions must be submitted under §
51.069. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to
pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards under the self-monitoring requirements of §§
51.065,
51.067, and
51.068.
   (C)   Discharges are exempt from the requirements of division (A) above,
during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of
hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specific in
40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of
nonacute hazardous waste in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute
hazardous waste as specified in 40 C.F.R. §§ 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires
a onetime notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more
than the quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional
notification.
   (D)   In the case of any new regulation under § 3001 of RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the POTW Director, the EPA
Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste
authorities of the discharge of the substance within 90 days of the effective
date of the regulations.
   (E)   In the case of any notification made under this section, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous waste generated to the degree it has determined to be economically
practical.
   (F)   The provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law.
   (G)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as
described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 51.074 ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as
part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed
in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. pt. 136, unless
otherwise specified in any applicable pretreatment standard. If 30 C.F.R. pt.
136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures
approved by EPA.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 51.075 SAMPLE COLLECTION.
   (A)   Except as indicated in division (B) below, the user must collect
wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In
the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the POTW Director may
authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab
samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative
sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be
required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits.
   (B)   Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH cyanide, phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection
techniques.
   (C)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as
described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 51.076 TIMING.
   (A)   Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date
postmarked.
   (B)   For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail
facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of
the report shall govern.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 51.077 RECORD KEEPING.
   Users subject to the reporting requirements of this chapter shall retain,
and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information
obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this chapter and any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities
undertaken by the user independent of the requirements. Records shall include
the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person
(s) taking the samples; the date analyses were performed; who performed the
analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of the
analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three
years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any
litigation concerning the user or the county, or where the user has been
specifically notified of a longer retention period by the POTW Director. Any
violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
COMPLIANCE MONITORING
§ 51.090 MONITORING FACILITIES.
   (A)   The county requires the user to provide and operate at the user's own
expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The
monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the
county may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship
on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or
sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or
parked vehicles.
   (B)   There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility
to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The
facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in
a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
   (C)   (1)   Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling
and monitoring/facilities shall be provided in accordance with the county's
requirements and all applicable local construction standards and
specifications.
      (2)   Construction shall be completed within 90 days following written
notification by the county.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 51.091 INSPECTION AND SAMPLING.
   The county will inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the
purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are being complied
with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or
discharged shall allow the county, approval authority and EPA or their
representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the
premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and
copying or in the performance of any of their duties. The county, approval
authority and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property the
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring
and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which
would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their
premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards
so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the
county, approval authority and EPA will be permitted to enter, without delay,
for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. Denial of the
POTW Director's, approval authority's, or EPA's access to the user's premises
shall be a violation of this chapter. Unreasonable delays may constitute denial
of access.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 51.092 SEARCH WARRANTS.
   If the POTW Director, approval authority, or EPA has been refused access to
a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program of the county designed to verify compliance
with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the POTW
Director, approval authority, or EPA may seek issuance of a search warrant from
the County Superior Court.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
§ 51.105 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires,
permit applications, permits, and monitoring programs and from inspections
shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without
restriction unless the user specifically request and is able to demonstrate to
the satisfaction of the POTW Director that the release of the information would
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection
as trade secrets of the user. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data.
   (B)   When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made
available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available upon
written request to governmental agencies for uses related to this chapter, the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, non-discharge
permit, and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that the portions
of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in
judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as
confidential information.
   (C)   All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall
be made available to officials of the approval authority and EPA upon request.
   (D)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as
described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 51.120 ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES.
   (A)   Notification of violation. Whenever the POTW Director finds that any
industrial user has violated or is violating this chapter, wastewater permit,
or any prohibition, limitation, or requirements contained therein or any other
pretreatment requirement the POTW Director may serve upon such a person a
written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days from the
date of this notice, any explanation for the violation and a plan for the
satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the county by the user.
Submission of this plans does not relieve the discharger of liability for any
violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation.
   (B)   Consent orders. The POTW Director is hereby empowered to enter into
consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents
establishing an agreement with the person responsible for the noncompliance.
The orders will include specific action to be taken by the discharger to
correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order.
Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as an administrative order
issued pursuant to division (D) below.
   (C)   Show cause hearing.
      (1)   The POTW Director may order any industrial user who causes or is
responsible for an unauthorized discharge, has violated this chapter or is in
noncompliance with a wastewater discharge permit to show cause why a proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. In the event the POTW Director
determines that a show cause order should be issued, a notice shall be served
on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed
enforcement action, the reasons for the action, and a request that the user
show cause why this proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice
of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail
(return receipt requested) at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be
made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
      (2)   The POTW Director shall review the evidence presented at the
hearing and determine whether the proposed enforcement action is appropriate.
      (3)   A show cause hearing under this section is not a prerequisite to
the assessment of a civil penalty under §
51.999 nor is any action or inaction take by the POTW Director under this
section subject to an administrative appeal under §
51.051.
   (D)   Administrative orders. When the POTW Director finds that an industrial
user has violated or continues to violate this chapter, permits or orders
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement the POTW Director may
issue an order to cease and desist all the violations and direct those persons
in noncompliance to do any of the following:
      (1)   Immediately comply with all requirements;
      (2)   Comply in accordance with a compliance time schedule set forth in
the order;
      (3)   Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a
continuing or threatened violation; and/or
      (4)   Disconnect unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other
related appurtenances are installed and properly operated within a specified
time period.
   (E)   Emergency suspensions.
      (1)   The POTW Director may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/
or wastewater permit when the suspension is necessary in order to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the
environment, interferes with the POTW or causes the POTW to violate any
conditions of its NPDES or non-discharge permit.
      (2)   Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment
service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the
contribution. A hearing will be held within 15 days of the notice of suspension
to determine whether the suspension may be lifted or the user's waste discharge
permit terminated. In the event of a failure to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the POTW Director shall take the steps as demand necessary
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. The POTW Director
shall reinstate the wastewater permit and the wastewater treatment service upon
proof of the elimination of the noncompliant discharge. The industrial user
shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful
contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the
POTW Director prior to the date of the above-described hearing.
   (F)   Termination of permit. Any user who violates the following conditions
of this chapter, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to
have its permit terminated:
      (1)   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of his or her discharge;
      (2)   Failure to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater
constituents and characteristics;
      (3)   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose
of inspection or monitoring; or
      (4)   Violation of condition of the permit.
   (G)   Noncompliance. Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the
proposed termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an
opportunity to show cause under this section why the proposed action should not
be taken.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 51.121 OTHER AVAILABLE REMEDIES.
   (A)   Remedies, in addition to those previously mentioned in this chapter,
are available to the POTW Director who may use any single one or combination
against a noncompliant user.
   (B)   Additional available remedies include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Criminal violations. The District Attorney for the Judicial
District may, as the request of the county, prosecute noncompliant users
pursuant to the provisions of G.S. § 143-215.6B;
      (2)   Injunctive relief. Whenever a user is in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or any order or permit issued hereunder, the POTW
Director, through the County Attorney, may petition the Superior Court of
Justice for the issuance of a restraining order or a preliminary and permanent
injunction which restrains or compels the activities in question;
      (3)   Water supply severance. Whenever an industrial user is in violation
of the provisions of this chapter or an order or permit issued hereunder, water
service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only recommence,
at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated ability to
comply; and
      (4)   Public nuisances. Any violation of the prohibitions or effluent
limitations of this chapter or of a permit or order issued hereunder, is hereby
declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the
POTW Director.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 51.122 REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The POTW
Director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in
accordance with the county's enforcement response plan. However, the POTW
Director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant.
Further, the POTW Director is empowered to take more than one enforcement
action against any noncompliant user.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
ANNUAL PUBLICATION OF SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE
§ 51.135 GENERALLY.
   At lease annually, the POTW Director shall publish in the largest daily
newspaper circulated in the service area, a list of those industrial users
which were found to be in significant noncompliance, also referred to as
reportable noncompliance in 15A NCAC 2H.0903(b)(10), with applicable
pretreatment standards and requirements during the previous 12 months.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS
§ 51.150 UPSET.
   (A)   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of division (B) below are met.
   (B)   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      (1)   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      (2)   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      (3)   The user has submitted the following information to the POTW
Director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset. If this information is
provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days:
         (a)   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         (b)   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         (c)   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   (C)   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of any upset shall have the burden of proof.
   (D)   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   (E)   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 51.151 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS DEFENSE.
   A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in §
51.015 or the specific prohibitions in §
51.015 if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its
discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would
cause pass through or interference and that either:
   (A)   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or
interference; or
   (B)   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the county was
regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference,
was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
§ 51.152 BYPASS.
   (A)   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of divisions (B) and (C) below.
   (B)   (1)   If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall
submit prior notice to the POTW Director, at least ten days before the date of
the bypass, if possible.
      (2)   A user shall submit oral notice to the POTW Director of an
unanticipated bypass that exceed applicable pretreatment standards within 24
hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall
also be provided within five days of this time the user becomes aware of the
bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and
its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if
the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to
continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent
reoccurrence of the bypass. The POTW Director may waive the written report on a
case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours.
   (C)   (1)   Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW Director may take an
enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless:
         (a)   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
         (b)   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         (c)   The user submitted notices as required under division (B) above.
      (2)   The POTW Director may approve an anticipated bypass, after
considering its adverse effects, if the POTW Director determines that it will
meet the three conditions listed in division (C)(1) above.
   (D)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as
described in §
51.999 herein.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 51.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of
this chapter, or the orders, rules, regulations, and permits issued hereunder,
may be fined up to $10,000 per day violation.
   (B)   In determining the amount of the civil penalty, the POTW Director
shall consider the following:
      (1)   The degree and extend of the harm to the natural resources, to the
public health, or to public or private property resulting from the violation;
      (2)   The duration and gravity of the violation;
      (3)   The effect on ground or surface water quantity or quality or on air
quality;
      (4)   The cost of rectifying the damage;
      (5)   The amount of money saved by noncompliance;
      (6)   Whether the violation was committed willfully or intentionally;
      (7)   The prior record of the violator in complying or failing to comply
with the pretreatment program; and
      (8)   The cost of enforcement to the county.
   (C)   Appeals of civil penalties assessed in accordance with this section
shall be as provided in §
51.051.
(Ord. passed 8-22-1994)
CHAPTER 52: SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Purpose and intent
   
52.10   Definitions
   
52.11   Solid waste on property; prohibitions; removal
   
52.12   Littering and scavenging prohibited
   
52.13   Tires
Pre-collection of Solid Waste
   
52.20   General requirement
   
52.21   Containers
   
52.22   Residential requirements
   
52.23   Commercial, institutional, and industrial requirements
   
52.24   Recycling and convenience sites
   
52.25   Recyclable materials; yard waste; requirements
Franchising; Collection and Transportation of Solid Waste
   
52.30   General requirement
   
52.31   Residential requirements
   
52.32   Commercial, industrial, and institutional requirements
   
52.33   Permitting of solid waste collectors and transporters
   
52.34   Franchising solid waste collectors
   
52.35   Hazardous solid waste and liquid waste
   
52.36   Lot clearing and construction
   
52.37   Casualty damaged solid waste
   
52.38   Demolition landfills
Landfill Site
   
52.80   Metal drums restricted
   
52.81   Limitations
   
52.82   Unlawful entry to landfill site
   
52.83   Refusal to allow deposit
   
52.84   Tampering with equipment
Administration and Enforcement
   
52.93   Use fees
   
52.94   Administration; enforcement
   
52.95   Operations; procedures and regulations
 
   
52.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Emergency Medical Services, see
Ch. 112
   Flood Damage Prevention, see
Ch. 151
   Hazardous Wastes, see
Ch. 94
   Health and Safety; Nuisances, see
Ch. 91
   Sewer Use, see
Ch. 51
   Water, see
Ch. 50
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The purpose of this chapter is for the management of solid waste and
recyclables for the county.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017)
§ 52.10 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, definitions of words contained in G.S. §
130A-290 shall have the meanings ascribed therein. The following definitions
are additionally defined words not contained in the statutory definitions, and
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The Lincoln County Board of Commissioners, hereafter
referred to as the BOARD.
   BUILDING MATERIALS. Lumber, bricks, plaster, loam, and other substances
accumulated as a result of repairs to an existing building or the construction
of a new building, and demolition wastes of old buildings or structures.
   BULK CONTAINER.  A metal container of not less than one-half cubic yard. The
container is to be of tight construction and constructed so that it may be
handled and emptied by a special truck.
   CASUALTY DAMAGE.  Damage to or loss of property due to a sudden or
unexpected event.
   COMMERCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any office, retail store,
wholesale store, bottling plant, printing establishment, private club,
hospital, group of mobile homes, apartment, group of apartments, religious,
charitable, or government office, or similar establishment, provided, however,
that the establishment shall not be construed to refer to individual mobile
homes or individual apartments.
   COVERED. Encased by a tarpaulin, camper cover, metal cover, rigid cover,
plastic, canvas, or other suitable material that is secured to prevent
spillage, leakage or materials from blowing from the vehicle. Solid waste in
plastic bags shall not be considered COVERED.
   DEMOLITION LANDFILL. A landfill that is limited to receiving concrete,
brick, wood, and uncontaminated earth.
   GARBAGE RECEPTACLES.  Receptacles for garbage constructed of metal or
plastic, of substantial construction, watertight, rodent-proof, with tight-
fitting lids, provided with handles sufficient for safe and convenient
handling, kept in serviceable condition, and covered at all times.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. A solid waste, or combination of solid wastes, that because
of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious
characteristics may:
      (1)   Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in serious
irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; or
      (2)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of,
or otherwise managed.
   INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENTS. Factories, processing plants, and other
manufacturing enterprises.
    MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Land used or intended to be used, leased, or rented
for occupancy by three or more manufactured homes, which are mounted on a
permanent frame, anchored in place by a foundation or other stationary
supports, and to be used for living purposes.
   OPERATING PROCEDURES MANUAL. Document containing expanded and detailed
information concerning county rules and regulations for landfill operation,
scale house policies, office procedures, and other areas as determined by the
Solid Waste Manager.
   PUTRESCIBLE WASTE.  Solid waste capable of being decomposed by
microorganisms with sufficient rapidity as to cause nuisances from odors and
gases, such as kitchen wastes, offal, and carcasses.
   RECYCLING AND CONVENIENCE SITE. A manned dropoff site provided by the county
for disposal of household refuse and recyclables.
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT, MULTIPLE.  Any duplex, group of apartments, or group of
mobile homes.
   RESIDENTIAL UNIT, SINGLE.  Any dwelling place occupied by one family.
   RUBBISH.  Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage,
but including paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather,
tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass,
crockery, dust, the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and other
combustible materials or similar materials.
   SOLID WASTE COLLECTOR. Any person or firm who collects or transports solid
wastes by authority granted by the county.
   WASTE. Litter, rubbish, refuse, building material, garbage, and
miscellaneous unusable or unwanted materials.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017)
§ 52.11 SOLID WASTE ON PROPERTY; PROHIBITIONS; REMOVAL.
   (A)   Prohibitions. Generally, it shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Maintain, allow, cause or permit the accumulation of excessive,
unsightly, or improperly contained (as determined by the provisions of this
chapter relating to containers) solid waste upon premises owned, occupied, or
controlled by that person; or
      (2)   In any manner, place or allow to remain on property any solid waste
in such a quantity and manner as to constitute a nuisance;
      (3)   Cause or create the likelihood of injury to the health or welfare
of other persons; or
      (4)   Cause or create the likelihood of injury to adjoining property.
   (B)   Notice to remove.  Notwithstanding any provision of division (A) of
this section, no person shall be deemed to have violated the provisions of this
section who, within ten days after receiving a written notice to remove from
the Solid Waste Manager or designee, removes the prohibited solid waste from
the property.
   (C)   Restaurants.  Food service establishments shall be subject to state
regulations governing the sanitation of food service establishments. All
restaurants shall be required to have a bulk container.
   (D)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense, and shall be subject to monetary fines and
injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 52.12 LITTERING AND SCAVENGING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to litter the ground on a county-
owned property (including a recycling and convenience site) by throwing,
dumping, or dropping thereon any solid waste as defined in §
52.10.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to pilfer or scavenge at any
county solid waste management facility, a county recycling and convenience
site, or any sanitary landfill site. This includes all county employees.
   (C)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense, and shall be subject to monetary fines and
injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 52.13 TIRES.
   All scrap tires shall be delivered to the designated scrap tire disposal
facility and disposed of in the approved manner as provided in the Scrap Tire
Disposal Act (G.S. § 130A-309, Pt. 2B). Any violation of this section shall be
punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation
shall be subject to punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and shall be subject to monetary
fines and injunctive relief as provided in § 
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
PRE-COLLECTION OF SOLID WASTE
§ 52.20 GENERAL REQUIREMENT.
   Solid waste that shall be accumulated or stored prior to being disposed of
shall be handled in the manner provided in this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017)
§ 52.21 CONTAINERS.
   Containers or receptacles shall be used for the collection and storage of
solid wastes, and shall be constructed as to accommodate and properly control
wastes prior to disposal. Containers and receptacles shall be maintained in
serviceable condition at all times and located so that no unsightly condition,
health hazards, or nuisances are created, and in such a manner as to be
durable, watertight, fly-proof, and rodent-proof. Under no condition shall
liquid or putrescible wastes be stored in open containers or receptacles.
Automobiles, including but not limited to, cars, pickup trucks, non-enclosed
trailers, and boats, shall not be considered appropriate garbage containers or
receptacles. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense, and shall be subject to monetary fines and
injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 52.22 RESIDENTIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Solid waste from single-family residential units shall be placed in
appropriate garbage receptacles.
   (B)   Solid waste from multiple residential units, including but not limited
to, manufactured home parks, duplexes, apartments, and condominiums, shall be
placed in garbage receptacles or bulk containers. If a bulk container is not
provided, a sufficient number of containers shall be provided to hold at least
one week’s accumulation of garbage. Garbage receptacles and bulk containers
shall be emptied on a regular basis so as to prevent a public health hazard or
nuisance.
   (C)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense, and shall be subject to monetary fines and
injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 52.23 COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL, AND INDUSTRIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Solid waste from commercial, institutional, and industrial establishments
shall be placed in garbage receptacles, bulk containers, or other containers.
Liquid or putrescible wastes shall be placed in containers constructed of
durable metal or plastic that are watertight and have tight-fitting lids, with
handles sufficient for convenient handling. Any violation of this section shall
be punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the
violation shall be subject to punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a
violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and shall be subject to
monetary fines and injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 52.24 RECYCLING AND CONVENIENCE SITES.
   Recycling and convenience sites are provided by the county at designated
places for the exclusive use of county residents, and shall be used as
specified in this chapter for the disposal of household solid waste and
recyclable material only. Dead animals, hazardous wastes, demolished
structures, and additional items as described in the Operating Procedures
Manual shall not be disposed of at recycling and convenience sites. Recycling
and convenience sites shall not be used by commercial, institutional, or
industrial establishments. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as
a Class 3 misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be
subject to punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and shall be subject to monetary
fines and injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 52.25 RECYCLABLE MATERIALS; YARD WASTE; REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Prohibited waste materials. No person may dispose of those solid waste
materials in a landfill that are prohibited by G.S. § 130A-309.10(f).
   (B)   Yard waste.  Leaves, grass trimmings, tree trimmings, shrubbery
trimmings, or other yard waste shall be accepted at the designated yard waste
area at the landfill site and must be emptied from bags before being accepted.
Yard waste may be accepted at designated recycling and convenience sites and
the landfill.
   (C)   Penalty. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class
3 misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense, and shall be subject to monetary fines and
injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
FRANCHISING; COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION OF SOLID WASTE
§ 52.30 GENERAL REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Franchise vehicles used for the collection and transportation of solid
wastes shall be loaded and moved in such a manner that the contents will not
fall, leak, or spill onto a county property, and shall be covered by an
approved method. Solid waste in plastic bags shall not be considered covered.
If spillage should occur, the materials shall be picked up immediately by the
person or collector and returned to the vehicle or container.
   (B)   If any object of solid waste is discovered on county property other
than specifically designated for that use, bearing a person’s name, address, or
any other means of identification of a person or persons, it shall be prima
facie evidence of ownership. The Solid Waste Manager or designee shall make an
attempt to contact the person or persons so identified, and advise those
individuals to clean up the objects of solid waste by taking them to a
designated county landfill, with those individuals being advised to return to
the Solid Waste Manager or designee within ten days with a receipt from a
county landfill indicating the deposit of the objects in the landfill. If the
person or persons fail to comply with the specific directions of the Solid
Waste Manager or designee, the failure to comply shall be considered a
violation of this chapter.
   (C)   No waste generated outside the boundaries of the county may be
disposed of at a county landfill site or at a recycling and convenience site.
   (D)   Solid waste collectors and transporters permitted by the county to
haul municipal solid waste must dispose of municipal solid waste at facilities
permitted and operated within the county. Municipal solid waste generated
within the county must be disposed at the county landfill at 5291 Crouse Road,
Crouse, NC.
   (E)   Commercial, industrial, and institutional establishments shall be
totally responsible for the proper collection and transportation of any and all
of their solid wastes. All commercial, industrial, and institutional
establishments failing to comply with the terms, conditions, and provisions of
this chapter shall be subject to all fines, penalties, and punishment contained
herein.
   (F)   The landfill shall be designated to accept solid waste generated
exclusively by residents, businesses, and other institutions located in the
county.
   (G)    No person, except permitted private collectors, county or municipal
collectors, shall collect or remove any solid waste within the county for
disposal.
   (H)   Penalty. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class
3 misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense, and shall be subject to monetary fines and
injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 52.31 RESIDENTIAL REQUIREMENTS.
   All residential solid wastes generated within the county shall be conveyed
to an approved and permitted in the county sanitary landfill site or a county-
operated solid waste management facility by approved and licensed private
agencies or by individuals. Individuals residing in the county may deposit
household wastes at recycling and convenience sites in accordance with this
chapter. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense, and shall be subject to monetary fines and
injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 52.32 COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL, AND INSTITUTIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Commercial, industrial, and institutional establishments shall provide for
disposal of solid waste by authorized collection agencies, or shall be
individually responsible for disposal of waste in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. No commercial, industrial, or institutional wastes
shall be disposed of at recycling and convenience sites. Commercial,
industrial, and institutional establishments shall be subjected to any fees as
may be approved by the Board or as may be provided by this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.33 PERMITTING OF SOLID WASTE COLLECTORS AND TRANSPORTERS.
   (A)   No person may engage in the business of solid waste collection and/or
transportation prior to receiving all required county permits.
   (B)   All persons who collect or transport solid waste in the county must
apply annually for a permit before collecting or transporting solid wastes. The
applicant shall furnish the following information to the Solid Waste Manager
during the application process:
      (1)   Name of applicant and whether a sole proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, or other business entity, with a disclosure of the ownership’s
interest;
      (2)   Home address, business address and both business and home phone
number of applicant;
      (3)   A list of equipment used by applicant in his or her everyday
business;
      (4)   Number of individuals employed by the business;
      (5)   Experience of the applicant in solid waste collection;
      (6)   License plate numbers of all solid wastes trucks used in the
business;
      (7)   Planned routes and/or areas of the county the applicant expects to
serve;
      (8)   Location of disposal facility to be used;
      (9)   Schedule of charges the applicant plans to charge for services;
      (10)   Proof of liability insurance.
   (C)   The applicant may cause to be inspected all facilities and equipment
used in the solid waste collection/transporting business before a permit is
issued by the county to the applicant, when it is determined that all equipment
used by the applicant's business is found to be clean and in good working
condition.
   (D)   An applicant who has been denied a permit may request a hearing before
the County Manager. The County Manager shall keep summary notes of the hearing
and notify the applicant at least ten days after the hearing, in writing, of
his or her decision. If the permit is still denied, the applicant may appeal
the County Manager’s decision to the Board of County Commissioners. The Board
of County Commissioners shall either affirm the denial or direct the Solid
Waste Manager to issue the permit to the applicant.
   (E)   A permit to collect and transport solid wastes in the county shall
expire annually on September 1.
   (F)   A permitted solid waste collector/transporter shall submit a quarterly
report to the county containing the following information:
      (1)   Number of customers added or deleted since the last quarterly
report;
      (2)   Any changes in routes or areas served by the business;
      (3)   Any new, deleted, or replaced equipment added to the business;
      (4)   Any other pertinent information requested by the county.
   (G)   No permit issued pursuant to this chapter is assignable.
   (H)   Penalty. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class
3 misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense, and shall be subject to monetary fines and
injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 52.34 FRANCHISING SOLID WASTE COLLECTORS.
   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. § 153A-136(a)(3), the Board may grant a license to
any person, firm, or corporation to engage in the collection and transportation
of solid wastes. The Board may additionally grant general or exclusive
franchises to those licensed or permitted under this chapter. The exclusive
right to collect and transport solid wastes for compensation within the entire
county or specified areas of the county may be granted in order to prohibit any
non-franchised persons, firms, or corporations from engaging in the same
service within the area where the exclusive right has been granted. The
franchise license and permit shall be displayed at the place of business.
   (B)   The county may charge a license fee after an application is submitted
and approved for licensing.
   (C)   No person may be issued a franchise by the Board unless he or she
holds a license to engage in the business of solid waste collector issued by
the county.
   (D)   Applications for franchises shall be filed with the County Manager, or
his or her designee, through the Solid Waste Manager or designee, on forms
prescribed by the County Manager, and shall include a copy of the applicant’s
license application to the Solid Waste Manager and any other information the
County Manager deems pertinent.
   (E)   The County Manager may grant a franchise only upon finding that the
applicant will render prompt, efficient, and continuing service to the area for
which the franchise is granted, and that the applicant has sufficient equipment
and personnel to render service to all persons generating solid wastes within
the service area.
   (F)   The County Manager shall determine the area for which a franchise is
granted.
   (G)   No person may engage in the business of solid waste collection unless
that person holds both a franchise and a license issued by the county
authorizing the collection and transportation of solid wastes.
   (H)   The Board shall have the authority pursuant to G.S. § 153A-136(a)(4)
to approve all rates charged by solid waste collectors prior to granting a
franchise. The Board may classify rates according to the type of service
provided (residential, commercial, institutional, or industrial collection), so
that reasonable compensation may be provided in accordance with the public
interest. Rate schedules may be amended no more than once a year (annually) and
must receive Board approval prior to implementation.
   (I)   A franchise shall be for a minimum term of one year, but may be
granted for up to three years in accordance with G.S. § 153A-136(a)(3), and may
be renewable.
   (J)   A solid waste collector franchised under this chapter shall present to
each prospective customer, in advance of any agreement with that customer, a
schedule of rates as authorized by this chapter. All solid wastes shall be
removed from the customer’s premises at least once a week, provided the
customer is no more than 30 days in arrears in payment of the required
collection charges.
   (K)   The Board may grant temporary franchises for the collection,
transportation, or disposal of solid wastes to provide service in the event of
abandonment of an existing franchise or for other causes.
   (L)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Board may
grant non-exclusive franchises for the collection of commercial, industrial,
institutional, and construction and demolition wastes throughout the county.
   (M)   All disputes regarding the granting of a franchise and disagreements
concerning franchised areas shall be determined by the Board.
   (N)   No franchise issued pursuant to this chapter is assignable without the
prior consent of the Board.
   (O)   A solid waste collector granted a franchise under this chapter shall
give 30 days’ written notice to the county before abandoning the franchise.
   (P)   The Board may terminate or suspend any or all portions of a franchise
for any of the following reasons:
      (1)   Loss of the franchisee’s license to operate as a solid waste
collector;
      (2)   Failure of the franchisee to comply with the authorized fee
schedule;
      (3)   Failure of the franchisee to render prompt and effective services
to persons within the service area;
      (4)   Failure of the franchise to comply with any provision of this
chapter or applicable regulations of the North Carolina Department of
Environmental Quality.
   (Q)   During a natural emergency, the county reserves the right to suspend a
franchise license or portion thereof, for a period of 30 days in order to meet
specific conditions of the natural emergency.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017)
§ 52.35 HAZARDOUS SOLID WASTE AND LIQUID WASTE.
   No hazardous solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290, or liquid waste
shall be placed in any receptacle used for collection of waste by the county.
Hazardous or highly combustible waste shall not be disposed of at any county
solid waste management facility. County Solid Waste may assist in managing the
disposition of certain materials to appropriate facilities for processing. Any
violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor, and any
person convicted of the violation shall be subject to punishment as provided in
G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense,
and shall be subject to monetary fines and injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 52.36 LOT CLEARING OR CONSTRUCTION.
   Materials such as trees, shrubbery, or underbrush resulting from land being
cleared will not be picked up by county staff. Building materials shall be
collected, removed, and disposed of by the contractor or builder, or in the
event of his or her failure to do so, by the owner of the property. No such
materials shall be disposed of at recycling and convenience sites. Any
violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor, and any
person convicted of the violation shall be subject to punishment as provided in
G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense,
and shall be subject to monetary fines and injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 52.37 CASUALTY DAMAGED SOLID WASTE.
   No owner, occupant, tenant, or lessee of any commercial, industrial, or
residential premises shall permit the solid waste from any building or other
structure that has been damaged beyond repair by fire, storm, or other
casualty, to remain on the premises for more than six months after the event,
unless subject to ongoing investigations by the Fire Marshal or other local or
state entity. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense, and shall be subject to monetary fines and
injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 52.38 DEMOLITION LANDFILLS.
   (A)   Generally.  The authority to regulate demolition debris landfill is
pursuant to G.S. § 130A-294(a)(5c). Delegation of authority and responsibility
of demolition debris landfills shall be issued by the North Carolina Resources,
Solid Waste Section. The Department of Environmental Quality shall retain
exclusive authority and responsibility for the assessment under .0701 of
administrative penalties for violations of the Solid Waste Management Act or
Rules.
   (B)   Application requirements.  All persons, businesses, corporations, and
public entities shall obtain a permit from the county before constructing,
opening, or operating a demolition debris landfill. Additionally, all
applicants shall meet the requirements of the County Unified Development
Ordinance (UDO). Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the individuals or
organizations, who operate a permitted demolition debris landfill, from
establishing charges to those persons disposing of debris waste at the
permitted site. The county shall approve all permitted demolition debris
landfill rate schedules before the site can be opened for use. The county shall
be notified of any changes in charges after a permitted site is opened for use.
Applications for permits to construct and use demolition landfills in the
county must be submitted to the county. A minimum of four sets of plans must be
submitted at the time the application is submitted. The following information
is required by the county before a permit can be processed:
      (1)   A map or aerial photograph accurately showing the area within one-
fourth mile of the site and identifying the following:
         (a)   The entire property owned or leased by the person providing the
disposal site;
         (b)   The location of all homes, industrial buildings, public or
private utilities, roads, wells, watercourses, and other applicable details
regarding the general topography;
         (c)   If site is in a 100-year floodplain, provide map showing
relationship;
      (2)   An approval letter from the unit of local government having zoning
authority over the area where the site will be located;
      (3)   Location of the site on a county road map;
      (4)   The types of wastes to be disposed of;
      (5)   Any other information pertinent to the suitability of the proposed
site;
      (6)   A construction plan application for a proposed or existing
demolition landfill must be submitted to the county with the following
information:
         (a)   A plot plan of the proposed site, by a North Carolina-licensed
surveyor, showing the property boundaries, proposed landfill limits, access
controls, and features such as roads, streams, and the like;
         (b)   Provisions for controlling erosion;
         (c)   Procedures for promoting vegetation growth at the site on all
completed areas;
         (d)   A copy of deed or other legal description of the site;
         (e)   The types of materials to be disposed of at the site;
         (f)   Name and phone number of responsible individual;
         (g)   Projected use of land after completion of the fill;
         (h)   Any other information pertinent to the proposed construction
plan.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017)
LANDFILL SITE
§ 52.80 METAL DRUMS RESTRICTED.
   Metal 55-gallon drums, such as oil and chemical containers, shall not be
accepted at the landfill site, unless the drums have both ends (top and bottom)
completely removed and meet other requirements of this chapter. Any violation
of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor, and any person
convicted of the violation shall be subject to punishment as provided in G.S. §
14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and
shall be subject to monetary fines and injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 52.81 LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   From time to time, certain solid waste may arrive at the landfill site
that, in the opinion and judgment of the operators of the site, would be
hazardous or detrimental to personnel or operators. The operators may delay the
unloading of these wastes until the Director of Health, or his or her
representative, has the opportunity to review the situation and decide upon the
disposition of the waste. With regard to the decision upon the disposition,
appeal may be made by the hauler to the County Manager, whose decision shall be
final and not subject to appeal.
   (B)   In order to properly operate the landfill site, the duly authorized
landfill operators of necessity must exercise discretion as to where certain
types of solid wastes are unloaded. Persons delivering wastes to the landfill
site shall be required to discharge the wastes at locations as directed by the
operator. This provision shall under no circumstances empower landfill site
operators to require that drivers make or attempt maneuvers that would abuse or
injure equipment or that would jeopardize the safety of the driver or
equipment.
   (C)   No solid waste from outside the county shall be accepted at the
landfill site or at recycling and convenience sites.
   (D)   Penalty. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class
3 misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense, and shall be subject to monetary fines and
injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 52.82 UNLAWFUL ENTRY TO THE LANDFILL SITE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to enter the landfill or a recycling and
convenience site outside of times of normal operations, except persons
specifically authorized. Any person violating this provision shall be
prosecuted for trespass under state law. Any violation of this section shall be
punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation
shall be subject to punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and shall be subject to monetary
fines and injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 52.83 REFUSAL TO ALLOW DEPOSIT.
   The operator of a landfill site or a solid waste management facility shall
not allow the deposit therein of solid waste from a vehicle that has been
loaded or moved in such a manner as to fail to comply with the provisions of
this chapter. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense, and shall be subject to monetary fines and
injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 52.84 TAMPERING WITH EQUIPMENT.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to operate, tamper with,
enter, pilfer, or damage any structures, equipment, or machinery at the
landfill site. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense, and shall be subject to monetary fines and
injunctive relief as provided in §
52.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 52.93 USER FEES.
   Any person depositing solid waste at a county-operated solid waste
management facility shall pay user fees as determined by the Board.
   (A)   Purpose and intent. The provisions of this chapter are to impose fees
for the availability and use of a disposal facility provided by the county.
Availability fees imposed shall not exceed the cost of providing for the
facility, and shall be imposed on all improved property in the county that
benefits from the availability of the facility. Fees for the use of the
facility shall not exceed the cost of operating the facility and may be imposed
only on those who use the facility.
   (B)   Authority. This chapter is adopted under the authority of G.S.§ 153A-
292.
   (C)   Applicability. This chapter is applicable to all owners of improved
real property in the county that benefit from the availability of the facility,
as well as commercial, municipal, and industrial users of the facility, subject
to the provisions of G.S. §153A-292.
   (D)   Fees. Except as otherwise herein provided, fees and rates may be found
in the Operating Procedures Manual.
      (1)   A yearly fee shall be imposed on the improved property of each
owner (as of January 1 of the calendar year for which the fee is collected)
within the county that benefits from the availability of the facility. For the
purposes of this subchapter, UNIT means a potential generator of solid waste
and  shall include, but not be limited to, each individual residence, mobile
home, and/or available mobile home site, apartment unit, condominium unit,
commercial enterprise, manufacturer, industrial plant, utility, church, school,
hospital, rest home facility, and nonprofit institution. This fee shall be
applied separately for each individual business, store, or other entity within
a commercial enterprise.
      (2)   A tonnage fee shall be imposed on all solid waste deposited by
commercial, municipal, and industrial entities that use the facility; provided,
however, that this fee shall not apply to solid waste deposited by commercial
and municipal haulers that is collected from residential customers within the
county.
      (3)   A tonnage fee shall be collected from commercial, municipal and
industrial haulers that deposit stumps, limbs, leaves, concrete, brick, wood,
and uncontaminated earth in the demolition landfill.
   (E)   Collection.
      (1)   Improved real property.  The fee imposed upon owners of all
improved property that benefit from the availability of the facility shall be
billed with property taxes pursuant to G.S. § 153A-293 and shall be payable in
the same manner as property taxes, provided, however, that in the event of
nonpayment, the fee shall be collected in any manner in which delinquent
personal or real property taxes can be collected, and that until paid, the fees
imposed shall constitute a lien on the real property described on the bill that
includes the fee. In conjunction with and in the same manner as used for
billing owners for property taxes, the County Tax Administrator shall bill
owners who are not otherwise subject to taxation for the availability fees
imposed by this section.
      (2)   Partial exemption for elderly or disabled owners.  Owners of this
class of residential property described hereinafter shall be liable for only
50% of the availability fee imposed under this chapter. The following class of
property is designated a special class of property: property owned by a North
Carolina resident, if, as of January 1 of the year for which benefit of this
section is claimed:
         (a)   The owner is either 65 years of age or older or is totally and
permanently disabled;
         (b)   The owner’s income does not exceed the income eligibility limit
as defined in G.S. § 105-277.1; and
         (c)   The owner makes the required application. The Tax Administrator
shall have the responsibility to develop and supply the required application to
eligible applicants.
      (3)   Married applicants residing with their spouses.  For married
applicants residing with their spouses, the disposable income of both spouses
must be included, whether or not the property is registered in both names.
Property owned and occupied by spouses as tenants by the entirety shall be
entitled to the full benefit of this classification if either of them meets the
age or disability requirements herein provided.
      (4)   Commercial, municipal, and industrial users. As a condition for the
disposition of solid waste of all kinds by commercial, municipal, and
industrial users at the facility, the users shall pay the fees charged
hereunder for the use of the facilities at the time of the disposition of the
solid waste products, or shall run an account approved by the Board as defined
in the Operating Procedures Manual, which account shall be payable in full on a
monthly basis. In the event of nonpayment of the monthly account, the privilege
of the monthly account may be suspended, thereby requiring the delinquent user
to pay at the time any further solid waste is deposited at the facility by the
delinquent user. Until the account is fully paid, the suspension, as herein
provided, may remain in full force and effect. The county retains rights to
seek collection of unpaid fees.
   (F)     Effective date. This chapter shall be effective as of its adoption.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017)
§ 52.94 ADMINISTRATION; ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Public Works and/or Planning Director(s), or their designee(s),
shall be charged with the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. If the
Director(s) finds that any of the provisions of this chapter are being
violated, they shall notify the persons responsible for such violations, in
writing, indicating the nature of violation and ordering the actions necessary
to correct the violation. They shall also take any other action authorized by
this section to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its
provisions.
   (B)   The Director(s) shall have the discretion to stay the accrual of civil
penalties pending reasonable efforts by the violator to correct the violation.
The owner of the property on which the violation occurs may submit to the Code
Enforcement Official a written request for extension of the order’s specified
time limit for correction of the violation. On determining that the request
includes enough information to show that the violation cannot be corrected
within the specified time limit for reasons beyond the control of the person
requesting the extension, the Code Enforcement Official may extend the time
limit as reasonably necessary to allow timely correction of the violation.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017)
§ 52.95 OPERATIONS; PROCEDURES AND REGULATIONS.
   Procedures and regulations for the administration and implementation of this
chapter are set forth in the Operating Procedures Manual and incorporated by
reference into this chapter as if fully set forth herein. The Operating
Procedures Manual may be modified or amended from time to time by the County
Manager.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Generally.  Any person violating any provision of this chapter for
which no specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
52.99.
   (B)   In accordance with G.S. § 153A-123, any person violating any
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction shall be punished for each offense by a fine or imprisonment. Each
day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The following
penalties are hereby established:
 
Warning Citation           Correct violation within ten days
First Citation             $25 (Correct violation within ten days)
Second and Subsequent      $50 per day for the first through the seventh days
                           $100 per day for the eighth through the fourteenth
                           days
                           $150 per day for the fifteenth through the twenty-
Citations for Same Offense first days
                           $250 per day for the twenty-second through the
                           twenty-eighth days
                           $500 per day thereafter
 
   (C)   If the offender fails to pay the civil penalties within 20 days after
having been cited, the county may recover the penalties in a civil action in
the nature of debt.
   (D)   Repeat violations.  After having been once cited for a violation this
chapter, a violator shall be subject to the following civil penalties for any
additional violations within the following 12-calendar-month period. For a
second violation within the period, civil penalties will begin at $100 per day
for each day that the violation continues and will escalate according to the
following schedule: $150 per day for the eighth through the fourteenth days;
$200 per day for the fifteenth through the twenty-first days; $250 per day for
the twenty-second through the twenty-eighth days; and $300 per day for each day
that the violation continues beyond the twenty-eighth day. A third violation
during the same period shall subject the violator to civil penalties beginning
at $200 per day, and escalating in the same fashion for as long as the
violation continues.
   (E)   Injunctive relief or equitable remedy.  Notwithstanding the assessment
of civil penalties as provided above, the county may pursue a civil action
seeking a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement or other
equitable remedy against the violator of this chapter. The action may be in
addition to, and not in lieu of, civil penalties.
   (F)   Criminal prosecution.  A misdemeanor warrant may be issued either
immediately or upon the issuance of a citation and the violator’s failure to
pay the penalty within the time provided. A violation of this chapter upon the
issuance of a misdemeanor warrant shall be punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor
under G.S. § 14-4 by a maximum sentence of 30 days and/or a maximum fine of
$500.
(Ord. passed 9-18-2017)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
      Chapter
         
70.   PARKING REGULATIONS
         
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 70: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
   
70.01   Intent
   
70.02   Title
   
70.03   Geographic coverage
   
70.04   Designation of enforcement official
   
70.05   Authorization of parking by law enforcement officials, county
officials, employees, and the like
   
70.06   Designation of public parking areas
   
70.07   Unauthorized parking
   
70.08   Designation of handicapped parking spaces
   
70.09   Special event parking
   
70.10   Removal of illegally parked vehicles
   
70.11   Appeals process
   
70.12   Effective date
§ 70.01 INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide for orderly, safe, and
controlled parking on county-owned, leased and/or operated property and to
protect the general welfare of the citizens of the county.
(Ord. passed 5-4-1992; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 70.02 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Parking Ordinance
of Lincoln County, North Carolina."
(Ord. passed 5-4-1992)
§ 70.03 GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE.
   These regulations shall apply to all real property owned, leased, and/or
operated by Lincoln County and held and maintained for governmental and related
purposes to provide services to its citizens and those properly utilizing the
facilities thereon.
(Ord. passed 5-4-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 70.04 DESIGNATION OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL.
   The County Manager may designate the officials as deemed advisable to
administer and enforce the rules and regulations contained in this chapter. An
employee who occupies, or is tasked with operating, the real property upon
which this chapter is being enforced is authorized to report violations of the
regulations herein.
(Ord. passed 5-4-1992; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 70.05 AUTHORIZATION OF PARKING BY LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS, COUNTY
OFFICIALS, EMPLOYEES, AND THE LIKE.
   The County Manager may authorize law enforcement officials, county
officials, agents, employees or other officials to park on county-owned
property referred to in §
70.03. The County Manager may authorize the designation of reserved parking
spaces to be used only by those designated officials. Reserved parking spaces
shall be identified by a posted sign that indicates the designated official(s)
that is authorized to park in the reserved space. Any unauthorized vehicle
found parked in a reserved parking space will be considered in violation of
this chapter. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as an
infraction and shall be subject to a penalty of not more than $50 as provided
in G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. passed 5-4-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 70.06 DESIGNATION OF PUBLIC PARKING AREAS.
   The County Manager, or their designee, may authorize and prescribe public
parking for those persons properly utilizing facilities located upon the
properties described in §
70.03. The County Manager, or their designee, may erect signage on the
properties designating the authorized uses allowed to park on said properties
and those unauthorized.
(Ord. passed 5-4-1992; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 70.07 UNAUTHORIZED PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle upon the properties
described in §
70.03, unless the person has been authorized to as provided in this chapter.
Any violation of this section shall be punishable as an infraction, and shall
be subject to a penalty of not more than $50 as provided in G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. passed 5-4-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 70.08 DESIGNATION OF HANDICAPPED PARKING SPACES.
   (A)   The county shall designate handicapped parking spaces in county-owned
parking lots as required by federal and state statute. The designated
handicapped parking spaces will be identified with a sign that is in accordance
with all federal and state guidelines.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park in a designated
handicapped parking space unless their vehicle displays a state-issued
handicapped license plate, placard, or identification card or a disabled
veteran registration plate issued pursuant to G.S. § 20-79.4.
   (C)   Any vehicle displaying an out-of-state handicapped license plate,
placard, or other evidence of handicap issued by the appropriate authority of
the appropriate jurisdiction may park in any space reserved for the
handicapped.
   (D)   Any vehicle that is deemed to be illegally parked in a designated
handicapped parking space will be removed from the county-owned parking lot in
accordance with §
70.10.
   (E)   Violation of this section shall be punishable as an infraction, and
shall be subject to a penalty of not more than $50 as provided in G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. passed 5-4-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 70.09 SPECIAL EVENT PARKING.
   (A)   The county reserves the right to close or limit access to county-owned
parking lots during special events. Appropriate signs and/or barriers would be
placed at all entrances of the affected county-owned parking lot(s).
   (B)   Requests for special event parking must be submitted in writing to the
County Manager's office for approval. The request must be submitted at least
two weeks before the special event.
   (C)   If the request is denied, the County Manager's decision may be
appealed to the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 5-4-1992)
§ 70.10 REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES.
   Any motor vehicle found parked in violation of this chapter may be removed
or towed away from the property described in §
70.03, by or under the direction of the official described in §
70.04, at the expense of the vehicle owner.
(Ord. passed 5-4-1992; Ord. passed 6-16-2025)
§ 70.11 APPEALS PROCESS.
   The owner of any motor vehicle which has been removed from county property
in accordance with this chapter may appeal to the Board of Commissioners for a
full or partial refund for the costs associated with the removal and storage of
the motor vehicle.
(Ord. passed 5-4-1992)
§ 70.12 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The effective date of this chapter is 6-1-1992.
(Ord. passed 5-4-1992)
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
Golf Carts
   
71.01   Purpose
   
71.02   Definitions
   
71.03   Operation of golf carts allowed; exceptions
   
71.04   Rules and regulations
 
   
71.99   Penalty
GOLF CARTS
§ 71.01 PURPOSE.  
   The purpose of the subchapter shall be to establish a golf cart ordinance
within the county to promote the health, safety and welfare of persons
operating cart(s) within the county, and to protect the safety of their
passengers and other users of roads. Golf carts, if properly used, are an
effective way to travel for short distances within the county. However, to
insure the public safety and welfare, the operation of golf carts must not only
comply with normal regulations intended to protect the operator and passengers
in a vehicle that is primarily designed for operation on a golf course or
recreational purposes, but also to comply with the terms and conditions of this
subchapter. This subchapter establishes the basic, minimum standards of care to
be used by the operators of golf carts on public roads, streets and highways.
Likewise, public safety requires that golf carts, used as a means of
transportation, must also meet certain minimum safety standards that can only
be assured through a system of registration and inspection.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 12-3-2018; Ord. 2019-2, passed 5-6-2019)
§ 71.02 DEFINITIONS. 
   For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings.
   DRIVER'S LICENSE. A valid license issued to operate a motor vehicle issued
by North Carolina or any other state.
   GOLF CART. As defined in G.S. § 20-4.01(12b), a vehicle designed and
manufactured for operation on a golf course for sporting or recreational
purposes and that is not capable of exceeding speeds of 20 miles per hour
(mph).
   LIMITED VISIBILITY. Any condition in which visibility is restricted by fog,
mist, falling snow, heavy rainstorms, sandstorms or any other similar causes.
   OPERATOR. A person at least 16 years of age.
   OWNER. The title holder of the golf cart.
   PUBLIC ROAD OR STREET. Any road or street, whether state maintained or
privately owned, that is open for public access, but that contains no more than
two lanes and a turn lane.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 12-3-2018; Ord. 2019-2, passed 5-6-2019)
§ 71.03 OPERATION OF GOLF CARTS ALLOWED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Allowed. The operation of golf carts on the public streets, roads and
highways within the unincorporated areas of the county, and on property owned
or leased by the county, in compliance with the provisions of this subchaper,
shall be permitted; however, it shall be unlawful to operate any golf cart at
any place or in any manner not authorized herein.
   (B)   Exceptions.  The operation of golf carts is not subject to the
provisions of this subchapter under the following circumstances:
      (1)   The operation of golf carts at golf courses, private clubs or on
private property, with the consent of the property owner;
      (2)   The operation of golf carts within gated or limited access
communities unless the streets of the community are dedicated for public use
and maintained by the state;
      (3)   The use of a golf cart in connection with a parade, a festival or
other special event, provided the consent of the sponsor is obtained, and
provided such vehicle is only used during such event; and
      (4)   The use of golf carts by the County Sheriff on official police
business, or the use of golf carts by county personnel for official business on
county-owned property and county-leased property, including cemeteries, parks
and greenways.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 12-3-2018; Ord. 2019-2, passed 5-6-2019)
§ 71.04 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The subchapter establishes guidance in the interest of public safety.
   (A)   Golf carts shall not be operated on or alongside a public road or
street with a posted speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour. The County
Sheriff has designated certain roads that meet the speed limit criteria as
being unsafe for use by golf carts, attached to Ord. 2019-2, as Exhibit “A”.
The Sheriff may add and revise such roads from time to time. In such cases, no
golf cart shall be operated on those designated roads.
   (B)   Golf carts may cross a road with a posted speed limit greater than 35
mph. However, once this segment of road has been traversed, the golf cart is
still required to travel only on or along a roadway with a speed limit of 35
mph or less. Golf carts must cross in a manner that is the most direct route in
order to decrease crossing distance, i.e., no riding along a road or crossing
at an angle. Even if the speed limit is 35 mph or less, golf carts shall not be
operated on any sections of roadway with four or more lanes. Under no
circumstance is a golf cart allowed to cross a control access facility other
than at bridges which cross over or under a control access facility.
   (C)   Any owner of a golf cart shall be responsible for all liability
associated with operation of the golf cart, and must have liability insurance
coverage that will cover the use of a golf cart, in an amount not less than
required by state law for motor vehicles operated on public highways in the
state.
   (D)   Anyone who operates a golf cart must be 16 years of age or older.
   (E)   Any person who operates a golf cart on public streets and roads must
adhere to all applicable state and local laws, regulations and ordinances,
including but not limited to, those banning the possession and use of alcoholic
beverages, and all other illegal drugs. In addition, no golf cart containing
any open container of alcohol shall be operated on public roads.
   (F)   The operator of the golf cart shall comply with all traffic rules and
regulations adopted by the state and the county that govern the operation of
motor vehicles.
   (G)   An operator shall not allow the number of people in the golf cart at
any one time to exceed the maximum capacity specified by the manufacturer. The
operator shall not allow passengers to ride on any part of a golf cart not
designed to carry passengers, such as the part of the golf cart designed to
carry golf bags; this is included only as an example and is not an exhaustive
list.
   (H)   An operator shall operate the golf cart at a speed which is the lesser
of either:
      (1)   Twenty miles per hour; or
      (2)   The speed that is reasonable and prudent for the existing
conditions.
   (I)   Golf carts must be operated at the right edge of the roadway and the
operator thereof must yield to all vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
   (J)   Operators must park golf carts in designated spaces in such a manner
that multiple golf carts can utilize the space. All parking rules and limits
apply. No parking on sidewalks is allowed.
   (K)   Golf carts must have basic equipment supplied by the manufacturer,
including a vehicle identification or serial number. Required equipment must
include: a rearview mirror, two headlights and two tail lights permanently
affixed if the golf cart is operated under any conditions of limited
visibility, and a rear triangle reflector of the same type required by state
law.
   (L)   If a mechanical turn signal indicator is not installed on a golf cart,
then the operator must use hand signals for turns.
   (M)   Violation. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as an
infraction, and shall be subject to a penalty of not more than $50 as provided
in G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 12-3-2018; Ord. 2019-2, passed 5-6-2019; Ord. passed 3-
21-2022)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of §§
71.01 et seq. shall constitute an infraction in accordance with G.S. § 14-4
(b)20.
(Ord. 2018-01, passed 12-3-2018; Ord. 2019-2, passed 5-6-2019; Ord. passed 3-
21-2022)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
90.   FALSE ALARMS
         
91.   HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
         
92.   ANIMALS
         
93.   ADDRESSING AND ROAD NAMING
         
94.   BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
         
95.   FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
         
96.   SPECIAL EVENTS AND MASS GATHERINGS
CHAPTER 90: FALSE ALARMS
Section
   
90.01   Purpose
   
90.02   Definitions
   
90.03   Response to alarm; determination of validity
   
90.04   Review of false alarm determinations
   
90.05   Service charge assessment for false alarms
   
90.06   Prohibited acts
 
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to encourage alarm users and alarm
companies to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness of alarm
systems and to reduce or eliminate false alarms; thereby reducing unnecessary
use of limited Sheriff's Office resources and hidden costs associated with
investigating alarms that are false.
   (B)   This section governs alarm systems intended to summon a law
enforcement officer response, establishes fees, provides penalties for
violations, establishes a system of administration, and sets conditions for the
suspension of response or revocation of registration.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2012)
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM SIGNAL. A detectable signal, either audible or visual, generated by an
alarm system, to which the Sheriff's Office may respond.
   ALARM SYSTEM.
      (1)   Any single device or assembly of equipment designed to signal the
occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity requiring immediate attention
and to which the Sheriff's Office responds, but does not include alarms
installed in motor vehicles or fire box alarms accessible to or able to be
activated by the general public.
      (2)   Further, alarm systems that are operated by the county, state or
federal government and installed on premises occupied or used by such entities
for governmental purposes (including schools) shall not be subject to this
chapter. The categories of alarms for which a Sheriff's Office response may be
requested for purposes of this chapter may include, but not necessarily be
limited to, burglary, holdup, robbery, duress, panic, fire or smoke.
   ALARM SYSTEMS COORDINATOR. The County Manager of Lincoln County or designee.
   ALARM USER. Any person, corporation, partnership, proprietorship, or any
other entity owning or leasing an alarm system, or on whose premises an alarm
system is maintained for the protection of such premises.
   AUTOMATIC DIAL PROTECTION. An automatic dialing device or an automatic
telephone dialing alarm system and shall include any system, which, upon being
activated, automatically initiates to the Lincoln County Sheriff's Office or to
the designated communications center a recorded message or code signal
indicating a need for Sheriff's Office response. This does not apply to a life
safety alert system utilizing residential transmitting equipment designated for
direct or indirect telephone access to dedicated control receiving equipment.
   DEFENSES TO FALSE ALARMS. An alarm user may raise, as an affirmative defense
to a false alarm service fee assessment, that a false alarm was caused by
action of the telephone company, telephone line outage, power outage lasting
longer than the life of a fully charged battery, or other extraordinary
circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user, subscriber
or proprietor alarm owner.
   FALSE ALARM.
      (1)   The activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic
failure, malfunction, improper installation, or the negligence of the alarm
user, his employees or agents, and signals activated to summon Sheriff's Office
personnel, which revealed upon inspection by the responding officer no evidence
indicating an entry without authorization, robbery, or that such other crime
was attempted in or on or against the premises, nor any evidence of fire or
smoke which would have activated a properly functioning alarm system.
      (2)   A false alarm shall not include an alarm which can reasonably be
determined to have been caused or activated by unusually violent conditions of
nature nor does it include other extraordinary circumstances not reasonably
subject to control by the alarm user. In addition, an alarm activated during an
alarm system testing procedure shall not be considered a false alarm if the
alarm user first notifies and receives permission from the user's alarm company
and/or the Communications Center. An alarm is not considered false as it
relates to this section, when said alarm is activated within five days of
initially becoming operable.
   SHERIFF. The Sheriff of Lincoln County or designee.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2012)
§ 90.03 RESPONSE TO ALARM; DETERMINATION OF VALIDITY.
   (A)   Sheriff's Office response. Whenever an alarm is activated in the
county and the Sheriff's Office responds, the investigating officer on the
scene of the activated alarm system shall inspect the area and shall determine
whether the Sheriff response was in fact necessary as indicated by the alarm
system or whether the alarm was false as defined by this chapter.
   (B)   Notification. If the investigating officer at the scene of the
activated alarm system determines the alarm to be false, the officer shall have
a notation added to the county's computer-aided dispatch (CAD) system of the
false alarm and the alarm system coordinator, or designee, shall notify the
owner by first-class mail.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2012)
§ 90.04 REVIEW OF FALSE ALARM DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   Request for review. The alarm systems coordinator or designee shall,
when requested by an alarm user, review the determination that an alarm was
false. The alarm user requesting such review shall provide the following
information in writing:
      (1)   Alarm user's name;
      (2)   Address at which alarm is installed;
      (3)   Date of false alarm that is being contested;
      (4)   Facts upon which request for review of the false alarm
determination is made;
      (5)   Specific defenses to the false alarm assessment.
   (B)   The alarm system coordinator shall notify the owner of his decision in
writing within a reasonable time.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2012)
§ 90.05 SERVICE CHARGE ASSESSMENT FOR FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   Excessive false alarms. It is hereby found and determined that four or
more false alarms within any 12-month period is excessive and constitutes a
public nuisance. (Only one false alarm per calendar day will be assessed for
each alarm system, upon finding common cause. COMMON CAUSE is defined as a
technical difficulty or malfunction causing the system to generate a series of
false alarms, all of which occurs within a calendar day. The series of false
alarms shall be counted as one false alarm only if the cause of the series of
alarms is repaired before generating additional false alarms during the next
24-hour calendar day.)
   (B)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   (a)   All excessive false alarms within a 12-month period shall be
charged the fines and charges set out below, which shall be considered a bill
owed by the alarm user to the county and may be collected from the alarm user
as a civil penalty. Each service charge incurred for false alarms at the
premises shall be paid within 30 days from the date of receipt of the invoice.
Failure to pay any such charge, bill or fee shall result in discontinuance of
Sheriff's Office response.
         (b)   Eligibility for Sheriff's Office response to alarm calls will be
made upon receipt of any prior unpaid, civil penalties assessed pursuant to
this section and receipt of the applicable charges as set forth below:
 
Number of False Alarms Penalty
4th through 5th        $25 per occurrence
6th through 8th        $50 per occurrence
9th through 11th       $100 per occurrence
12th or more           $200 per occurrence
 
   (C)   Year. For the purposes of this section, a year shall mean a 12-month
period beginning on January 1 and ending on December 31.
   (D)   Discontinuance of Sheriff's Office response. The failure of an alarm
user to make payment of any service charge imposed under this section within 30
days from the date of receipt on invoice shall result in discontinuance of
Sheriff's Office response to alarms that may occur at the premises described,
until payment is received. (With exception of receiving a separate indication
that there is a crime or incident in progress the premises, requiring a
Sheriff's Office response such as holdup alarm; panic alarm; duress alarm; or
other alarm indicating an authorized person(s) is on the premises and
intentionally activating the alarm to cause a Sheriff's Office response.)
   (E)   Responsibility to pay service fees or penalties subject to this
section shall be the responsibility of the alarm subscriber or alarm user,
jointly and severally. The owner of a proprietor alarm shall be solely
responsible.
   (F)   Penalty. Any violation of this section shall be subject to the
penalties as described in §
90.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2012; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 90.06 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this
chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to activate a burglary or robbery/
holdup or panic or fire alarm for the purpose of summoning Sheriff's personnel
when no such action or other action dangerous to life or property is being
committed or attempted or involved on the premises, or otherwise to cause a
false alarm.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for an alarm user to fail to reimburse Lincoln
County, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, for response(s) by
Lincoln County Sheriff's Office to any false alarm(s).
   (D)   Any violation of this section shall be subject to the penalties as
described in §
90.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2012; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Methods of enforcement. The county may enforce the provisions of this
chapter by one or combination of the following methods:
   (A)   Civil penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter
may be fined by a civil penalty of up to $100 which may be recovered by the
county in a civil action in the nature of a debt if the violator does not pay
the penalty within 30 days from the date the violator is notified of the
penalty. Any other service charges imposed by this chapter may be collected by
the county as a civil penalty in a civil action, in addition to the fines and
fees set out above.
   (B)   Equitable remedy. The county may apply to a court of competent
jurisdiction for an injunction, abatement order or any other appropriate
equitable remedy.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2012)
CHAPTER 91: HEALTH AND SAFETY; NUISANCES
Section
Noise
   
91.01   Authority
   
91.02   Loud, raucous, and disturbing noise
   
91.03   Cooperation of complainants
   
91.04   Exempted activities
Junkyard Control
   
91.15   Intent
   
91.16   Title
   
91.17   Geographic coverage
   
91.18   Definitions
   
91.19   Enforcement officer
   
91.20   General standards
   
91.21   Exemptions
   
91.22   Fencing and screening requirements
   
91.23   Maintenance
   
91.24   Registration of preexisting junkyards
   
91.25   Nonconforming existing junkyards
   
91.26   Permit required for junkyards
   
91.27   Enforcement
   
91.28   Effective date
Abandoned Structures
   
91.35   Purpose; intent
   
91.36   Duties of County Manager or designee
   
91.37   Powers of County Manager or designee
   
91.38   Standards for enforcement
   
91.39   Procedure for enforcement
   
91.40   Methods of service of complaints and orders
   
91.41   In rem action by County Manager or designee; placarding
   
91.42   Costs of lien on premises
   
91.43   Alternative remedies
   
91.44   Demolition permit and bond
Protection of Private Property
   
91.50   Trespass while hunting, fishing, trapping, loitering or operating an
all-terrain vehicle on private property
   
91.51   Proof of compliance
   
91.52   Enforcement
 
   
91.99   Penalty
NOISE
§ 91.01 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted to the Board of
Commissioners in G.S. § 153A-133 and for the purpose of regulating the
production or emission of noises or amplified speech, music, or other sounds
that tend to annoy, disturb, or affect the health and well-being of the
citizens of the county.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 6-6-2014)
§ 91.02 LOUD, RAUCOUS, AND DISTURBING NOISE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons, regardless of
number, to willfully make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud,
raucous, and disturbing noise, which term shall mean any sound which, because
of its volume level, duration, and character, annoys, disturbs, injures, or
endangers the comfort, health, peace, or safety of reasonable persons of
ordinary sensibilities within the limits of the county. The term LOUD, RAUCOUS,
AND DISTURBING NOISE shall be limited to loud, raucous, and disturbing noises
heard upon the public streets, in any public park, in any school or public
building or upon the grounds thereof while in use, in any church or hospital or
upon the grounds thereof while in use, upon any parking lot open to members of
the public as invitees or licensees, or in any occupied residential unit which
is not the source of the noise or upon the grounds thereof.
   (B)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense, and shall be subject to monetary fines and
injunctive relief as provided in §
91.99 herein.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 6-6-2014; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 91.03 COOPERATION OF COMPLAINANTS.
   Before initiating a civil or criminal proceeding pursuant to this
subchapter, the county, its officers, and staff members, and/or the County
Sheriff, shall have the option of requesting the complaining party to sign a
sworn statement of the alleged offense and to require the cooperation of the
complaining party in court appearances arising from the complaint. Nothing
contained in this subchapter shall obligate the county, its officers, and staff
members, and/or the County Sheriff, to pursue civil or criminal proceedings
hereunder where the complaining party is unwilling to sign the sworn statement
and cooperate in court appearances arising therefrom.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 6-6-2014)
§ 91.04 EXEMPTED ACTIVITIES.
   Specifically exempted from this subchapter are the following:
   (A)   All noise generated in the normal day-to-day operations of any
otherwise lawful commercial, industrial enterprise or government facility
(provided that the noise may only occur between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:
00 p.m.), or in the usual and customary activities of civic or community
organizations, including holiday observances and any other occasional or
ceremonial activities.
   (B)   All noise generated in the normal day-to-day operations of any
otherwise lawful farm.
   (C)   All noise that would otherwise be considered a loud, raucous or
disturbing noise generated by the use of a firearm by the owner, licensee or
invitee on the property, provided either:
      (1)   Said use occurs between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. and
is otherwise lawful; or
      (2)   Said use was essential, in the person's reasonable estimation, for
the purpose of lawfully defending person or property from attack, or for
disposing of or destroying certain destructive animals, fowl, birds, reptiles
or insects that are a menace to public health and have become a nuisance upon
the person's premises.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 12-4-2006; Ord. passed 6-6-2014)
JUNKYARD CONTROL
§ 91.15 INTENT.
   The purpose and intent of this subchapter is to support and complement the
various land use ordinance enacted in the county by the adoption of policies
and regulations concerning the use and maintenance of junkyards for the
following purposes:
   (A)   To promote the safety, health, welfare, and convenience of and
enjoyment of travel on and the protection of the public investment along the
primary and secondary roads within the county;
   (B)   To prevent unreasonable distraction of operators of motor vehicles and
to prevent interference with the effectiveness of traffic regulations;
   (C)   To keep the county attractive and promote the prosperity, economic
well-being, and general welfare of the county;
   (D)   To preserve and enhance the natural scenic beauty of areas in the
vicinity of the primary and secondary roads;
   (E)   To achieve responsible economic growth in areas of the county
compatible with growth and development in nearby areas; and
   (F)   To protect the public from health nuisances and safety hazards by
controlling vectors, concentrations of volatile or poisonous materials, and
sources of danger to children.
(Ord. passed 1-8-1990; Ord. passed 6-6-2014)
§ 91.16 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Junkyard Control
Ordinance of Lincoln County, North Carolina."
(Ord. passed 1-8-1990; Ord. passed 6-6-2014)
§ 91.17 GEOGRAPHIC COVERAGE.
   These regulations shall be in effect in all unincorporated portions of the
county which are not under the jurisdiction of any municipal zoning ordinance
unless this subchapter is adopted by reference in these areas.
(Ord. passed 1-8-1990; Ord. passed 6-6-2014)
§ 91.18 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD. Any establishment or place of business which is
maintained, used, or operated for storing, keeping, buying, or selling wrecked,
scrapped, ruined, or dismantled motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts and shall
include any establishment or place of business upon which five or more
unlicensed, used motor vehicles which cannot be operated under their own power,
are not being restored to operable condition or are kept or stored for a period
of 15 days or more.
   FARM. Singularly or jointly owned land parcel or contiguous parcels on which
agricultural operations are conducted as the primary use. Agricultural
operations include, but are not limited to, cultivation of crops, the husbandry
of livestock, and forestry.
   GARAGE. Any establishment or place of business which is maintained and
operated for the primary purpose of making mechanical and/or body repairs to
motor vehicles, and which may store as many as five motor vehicles that are not
capable of being driven under their own power and are not being restored to
operable condition, regardless of length of time that individual motor vehicles
are stored or kept at the property.
   HEALTH or SAFETY NUISANCE. A motor vehicle, used machinery, or other used
materials may be declared a health nuisance or safety hazard when it is found
to be:
      (1)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes or other insects,
snakes, rats, or other pests;
      (2)   A point of collection for pools or ponds of water;
      (3)   A point of concentration of gasoline, oil, or other flammable or
explosive materials;
      (4)   So located that there is a danger of the vehicle falling or turning
over;
      (5)   A source of danger for children through entrapment in areas of
confinement that cannot be opened from the inside or from exposed surfaces of
metal, glass, or other rigid material; and/or
      (6)   A point of concentration of car radiators, batteries, or other
materials that pose either immediate or long-term environmental degradation.
   JUNK. Old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash,
rubber, refrigerators, stoves, household appliances, salvaged building
materials, salvaged machinery parts, dismantled or wrecked automobiles, or
parts thereof, iron and steel and other scrap ferrous or non-ferrous material.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES. A vehicle that does not display a current license
plate and that:
      (1)   Is partially dismantled or wrecked;
      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it
originally was intended to move; or
      (3)   Is more that five years old and appears to be worth less than $100.
   JUNKYARD. Any establishment, commercial or noncommercial, place of business,
or place which is maintained, operated, or used for storing, keeping, buying,
or selling junk or for maintenance or operation of an automobile graveyard. An
establishment or place of business which stores or keeps for a period of 15
days or more materials within the meaning of "junk" as defined in this
subchapter which had been derived or created as a result of industrial or
commercial activity shall be deemed to be a junkyard within the meaning of this
subchapter. A JUNKYARD is created when 600 square feet or more of "junk
materials" are kept on a site. Materials enclosed in closed buildings, solid
waste containers, or rolling stock are excluded.
   JUNKYARD CONTROL ACT. G.S. §§ 136-141 through 136-155 which delegate to the
State Department of Transportation the responsibility to regulate "junkyards"
and "automobile graveyards" located on interstate and federal-aid primary
system highways.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any machine designed or intended to travel over land by self-
propulsion or while attached to any self-propelled vehicle.
   PRIMARY ROADS or PRIMARY SYSTEMS. The portion of connected highways as more
officially designated or as may hereafter be so designated as PRIMARY ROADS or
PRIMARY SYSTEMS by the State Department of Transportation or other appropriate
authority.
   PUBLIC ROAD. Any road or highway which is now or hereafter designated and
maintained by the State Department of Transportation as part of the State
Highway System.
   RECYCLING CENTER. A temporary or permanent site at which glass, aluminum
cans, paper, plastic, clothes, to similar materials commonly collected for
recycling are collected and moved off site or kept on site in buildings,
storage bins, solid waste containers, truck trailers, and other rolling stock.
   RESIDENCE. A house, an apartment, a group of homes, or a single room
occupied or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters for one or more
humans.
   SCHOOL. Any public or private institution for the teaching of children under
18 years of age which is recognized and approved by the State Board of
Education or other appropriate licensing board.
   SECONDARY ROADS. All roads, paved or unpaved, accepted for maintenance by
the State Department of Transportation, other than "interstate systems" and
"primary system."
   SERVICE STATION. Any establishment which is maintained and operated for the
purpose of making retail sales of fuels, lubricants, air, water, and other
items for the operation and routine maintenance of motor vehicles, and/or for
making mechanical repairs, servicing and/or washing of motor vehicles, and
which is used to store not more than five motor vehicles that are not capable
of being driven under their own power and are not being restored to operable
conditions, regardless of the length of time that individual motor vehicles are
stored or kept at the property.
   UNZONED AREA. An area where no zoning is in effect.
   VECTORS. Any organism that carries disease-causing microorganisms from one
host to another (e.g., rats, mosquitoes, and the like).
   VISIBLE. Capable of being seen without visual aid by a person of normal
acuity.
(Ord. passed 1-8-1990; Ord. passed 6-6-2014)
§ 91.19 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   This subchapter shall be enforced by the County Manager, or his or her
designee.
(Ord. passed 1-8-1990; Ord. passed 6-6-2014)
§ 91.20 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Preexisting. The following criteria shall be applicable to preexisting
junkyards which are registered within 180 days of the effective date of this
subchapter. No portion of any junkyard shall be operated, maintained, or
established, except those junkyards meeting any of the following conditions:
      (1)   Those which are screened by natural land features or vegetation,
berms, plantings, opaque fences, or other appropriate means which sufficiently
preserves the policy and intent of this subchapter so as not to be visible from
the main-traveled way of any primary or secondary road at any season of the
year;
      (2)   Those which are further that 1,000 feet from the main-traveled way
of a primary or secondary road at any season of the year; and/or
      (3)   Those which are either not visible from adjoining properties
because of screening with natural land features or vegetation, berms,
plantings, opaque fences, or other appropriate means and honor minimum front,
rear, and side yard setbacks established in §
91.22 or are screened and/or fenced in accordance with §
91.22.
   (B)   New. The following criteria shall be applicable to new junkyards. All
junkyards which are established from and after the effective date this
subchapter, or that have been issued a current valid permit to establish,
operate, or maintain a junkyard, as provided in §
91.26, shall meet the following standards:
      (1)   Be situated on a continuous parcel of at least five acres excluding
rights-of-way that is undivided by road right-of-way or public dedication;
      (2)   Have a minimum front line of 100 feet on a public right-of way with
a driveway entrance that has a centerline not closer than 30 feet to side
property lines;
      (3)   Have a minimum setback to the fence from front, side, and rear
property lines, excluding right-of-way of at least 100 feet;
      (4)   Be screened as herein provided, or not visible from the main-
traveled way of a primary or secondary road at any season of the year;
      (5)   Not be located closer than 300 feet to either a preexisting church,
school, day-care center, nursing home, skilled health care facility, residence,
hospital, public buildings, or public recreational facilities. On-site
residence of the property owner or his or her agent may be permitted by written
waiver of the Ordinance Administrator; and
      (6)   Fenced, screened, and maintained as provided for in §
91.22.
   (C)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be subject only to monetary
fines and injunctive relief as provided in §
91.99 herein. A violation of this section shall not be punishable as a criminal
offense pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123(b1).
(Ord. passed 1-8-1990; Ord. passed 6-6-2014; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 91.21 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Bona fide service stations or garages, as defined by this subchapter,
are exempted.
   (B)   This subchapter shall in no way regulate, restrict, prohibit, or
otherwise deter a bona fide farm and its related uses.
   (C)   Recycling centers using enclosed structures or solid waste containers,
bins, truck trailers, and rolling stock and equipment are exempted from this
subchapter. Materials collected or equipment used at recycling centers and kept
in outdoor storage containers, bins, vans trucks, and rolling stock or simply
outdoors must be screened and fenced in accordance with this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 1-8-1990; Ord. passed 6-6-2014; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 91.22 FENCING AND SCREENING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Generally. All new junkyards established in accordance with this
subchapter and all preexisting junkyards may be operated subject to the fencing
and screening conditions.
   (B)   Preexisting. Junkyards in existence on the effective date of this
subchapter, including any junkyard along any road or highway which may be
hereafter designated as a primary or secondary road, may comply with this
subchapter by registering and meeting the requirements for preexisting
junkyards as set forth in §
91.20(A)(1) and (A)(2), or meeting one of the following conditions:
      (1)   Remove junk and equipment that may be located within 50 feet of the
property lines to an area further than 50 feet from the property lines. Install
an all-season vegetation screening between junk materials and property lines.
Thereby, the owner has agreed to honor setbacks of 50 feet and maintain an all-
season vegetation screening; or
      (2)   Screen and fence the junkyard in accordance with the screening and
fencing provisions of division (C) below for new junkyards.
   (C)   New. Junkyards established after the effective date of this subchapter
may comply with this subchapter by registering, meeting the requirements of §
91.20(B), and meeting the fencing and screening requirements of this section.
      (1)   The junkyard shall be entirely surrounded by an opaque fence at
least six feet in height or by either a woven or welded wire (14-gauge minimum)
or chain link fence a minimum of six feet in height and with vegetation that
provides a continuous all-seasons opaque screen (six feet in height). The fence
and vegetation shall surround the minimum area necessary for the junkyard to
not be visible from a point at the same elevation as the junkyard and also
maintained at its present size. Vegetation shall be planted on the outbound
side of the fence, contiguous to, and not more than five feet from the fence.
Vegetation that serves as screening shall be of a type that can reach a minimum
height of six feet within five years from the date planted and shall be planted
at intervals evenly spaced and in close proximity to each other so that a
continuous, unbroken hedgerow (without gaps or open spaces) will exist to a
height of at least six feet along the length of the fence surrounding the
junkyard or automobile graveyard. The hedgerow shall be maintained as a
continuous, unbroken hedgerow for the period the property is used as a
junkyard. Each owner, operator, or maintainer of a junkyard shall utilize good
husbandry techniques, for example, pruning, mulching, and proper fertilization,
so that the vegetation can reach a height of six feet within five years of the
date planted and will have a maximum density and foliage. Dead or diseased
vegetation shall be replaced at the next appropriate planting time.
      (2)   All operations, equipment, junk, and/or inoperable motor vehicles
shall be kept within the confines of the fence at all times unless in motion by
transport to or from the site.
   (D)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be subject only to monetary
fines and injunctive relief as provided in §
91.99 herein. A violation of this section shall not be punishable as a criminal
offense pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123(b1).
(Ord. passed 1-8-1990; Ord. passed 6-6-2014; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 91.23 MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   All junkyards shall be maintained to protect the public from health
nuisances and safety hazards.
   (B)   The County Health Department may inspect each junkyard to determine
that no vectors are present. Should vectors be identified, the owner/operator/
maintainer shall submit satisfactory evidence to the Health Department and
Planning Department that vectors have been eliminated.
   (C)   Failure to comply with this section may result in revocation of
permit. Violation of this section shall be subject only to monetary fines and
injunctive relief as provided in §
91.99 herein. A violation of this section shall not be punishable as a criminal
offense pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123(b1).
(Ord. passed 1-8-1990; Ord. passed 6-6-2014; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 91.24 REGISTRATION OF PREEXISTING JUNKYARDS.
   (A)   All owners, operators, or maintainers of automobile graveyards or
junkyards existing at the effective date of this subchapter shall register same
with the county within a period of 180 days beginning with the effective date
of this subchapter. All existing automobile graveyards or junkyards that have
not been registered within 180 days shall be in violation of the provisions of
this subchapter.
   (B)   Registration shall be accomplished by acquiring a permit and paying a
permit fee of $20. The Ordinance Administrator shall provide the permit form. A
junkyard plan prepared by the owner or operator shall be submitted as part of
the junkyard registration. The plan shall indicate setbacks, location of public
rights-of-way, all proposed structures, all structures within 300 feet of
junkyard, driveways, entrances, fencing, screening, types of fencing, types of
screening, dimensions of junkyard, gross acreage, owner(s)' name(s), and
address(es). Submission of information shall establish preexisting conditions.
All permit requirements of §
91.26 shall be met. The plan may be drawn at either one inch = 50 feet, one
inch = 100 feet, one inch = 200 feet, one inch = 400 feet scale or freehand
with corners identified by the owner on the junkyard site and referenced on the
plan. Three copies shall be submitted, one of which shall be on reproducible
material.
   (C)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be subject only to monetary
fines and injunctive relief as provided in §
91.99 herein. A violation of this section shall not be punishable as a criminal
offense pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123(b1).
(Ord. passed 1-8-1990; Ord. passed 6-6-2014; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 91.25 NONCONFORMING EXISTING JUNKYARDS.
   All existing junkyards at the effective date of this subchapter, registered
in accordance with the §
91.24, shall be granted a compliance period of 24 months from the effective
date of registration to conform to these provisions. Thereafter same shall be
in violation of this subchapter. Any violation of this section shall be subject
only to monetary fines and injunctive relief as provided in §
91.99 herein. A violation of this section shall not be punishable as a criminal
offense pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123(b1).
(Ord. passed 1-8-1990; Ord. passed 6-6-2014; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 91.26 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR JUNKYARDS.
   (A)   No person or entity shall establish, operate, or maintain a junkyard
without obtaining a permit. The permit shall only be issued upon the person
seeking the permit submitting a statement, under oath, that the existing or
proposed junkyard does not violate any of the provisions of this subchapter.
The permit shall be valid until revoked for the nonconformance with this
subchapter. Application for the permit shall be made to the administrator of
the ordinance, on the forms as the Ordinance Administrator shall prescribe. A
junkyard plan prepared by the applicant shall be submitted as part of the
junkyard permit.
   (B)   The plan shall indicate setbacks, location of public rights-of-way,
all proposed structures, all structures within 300 feet of junkyard, driveways,
entrances, fencing, screening, types of fencing, types of screening, dimensions
of junkyard, gross acreage, owner(s)' name(s), and address(es). The plan shall
be on 18-inch by 24-inch sheets at either one inch = 50 feet, one inch = 100
feet, one inch = 200 feet, or one inch = 400 feet scale. Three copies shall be
submitted, one of which shall be on reproducible material.
   (C)   The fees for the junkyard permits issued under this section shall not
exceed a $20 initial fee.
   (D)   Any new expansion of a junkyard shall require a permit and shall be
permitted in accordance with this section as a new establishment.
   (E)   A rejected permit may be resubmitted within ten days within the date
of rejection without incurring an additional permit fee.
   (F)   Penalty. If a person or entity fails to obtain a permit as required
under this section, then said person or entity shall be subject only to
monetary fines and injunctive relief as provided in §
91.99 herein. A violation of this section shall not be punishable as a criminal
offense pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123(b1).
(Ord. passed 1-8-1990; Ord. passed 6-6-2014; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 91.27 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Ordinance Administrator shall enforce this subchapter. He or she
may call upon other agencies as necessary to assist in enforcement of this
subchapter.
   (B)   In addition, whenever the Administrator receives a complaint alleging
a violation, he or she shall investigate the complaint, take whatever action is
warranted, and inform the complainant in writing what actions have been or will
be taken.
   (C)   The owner, tenant, or occupant of any building or land or part thereof
and agent or other person who participates in, assists, directs, creates, or
maintains any situation that is contrary to the requirements of this subchapter
may be held responsible for the violation and suffer the penalties and be
subject to the remedies herein provided.
   (D)   The following procedure shall apply upon discovery of a violation
under this subchapter.
      (1)   If the Administrator finds that any provision of this subchapter is
being violated, he or she shall send a warning citation to the person
responsible for the violation, indicating the nature of the violation and
ordering the action necessary to correct it.
      (2)   A warning citation shall be issued by the Ordinance Administrator
giving the violator ten days to correct the violation. The violator may submit
to the Ordinance Administrator a written request for extension of the order's
specified time limit for correction of the violation. On determining that the
request contains enough information to show that the violation cannot be
corrected within the specified time limit for reasons beyond the control of the
person requesting the extension, the Ordinance Administrator may extend the
time limit as reasonably necessary to allow timely correction of the violation.
      (3)   The warning citation shall establish the facts and state what
action the Administrator intends to take if the violation is not corrected.
Furthermore, the violator shall be informed of the method of appeal.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, in cases when delay would seriously
threaten the effective enforcement of this subchapter or pose a danger to the
public health, safety, or welfare, the Administrator may seek enforcement
without prior written notice by invoking any of the penalties or remedies
authorized in this section.
(Ord. passed 1-8-1990; Ord. passed 10-21-2002; Ord. passed 6-6-2014; Ord.
passed 3-21-2022)
§ 91.28 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall become effective 2-1-1990.
(Ord. passed 1-8-1990; Ord. passed 6-6-2014)
ABANDONED STRUCTURES
§ 91.35 PURPOSE; INTENT.
   It is hereby found that there exists within the county abandoned structures
which the Board of Commissioners find to be hazardous to the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the county due to the attraction of insects or
rodents, conditions creating a fire hazard, dangerous conditions constituting a
threat to children, or frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the
absence of sanitary facilities. Therefore, pursuant to the authority granted by
G.S. § 160A-441, it is the intent of this subchapter to provide for the repair,
closing or demolition of any abandoned structures in accordance with the same
provisions and procedures as are set forth by law for the repair, closing or
demolition of dwellings unfit for human habitation.
Statutory reference:
Minimum housing standards; authority, see G.S. § 160A-441
§ 91.36 DUTIES OF COUNTY MANAGER OR DESIGNEE.
   The County Manager or the County Manager's designee is hereby designated as
the county officer to enforce the provisions of this subchapter. It shall be
the duty of the County Manager or designee:
   (A)   To locate abandoned structures within the county and determine which
structures are in violation of this subchapter;
   (B)   To take action pursuant to this subchapter as may be necessary to
provide for the repair, closing or demolition of structures;
   (C)   To keep an accurate record of all enforcement proceedings begun
pursuant to the provisions of this subchapter; and
   (D)   To perform other duties as may be prescribed herein or assigned to the
officer by the Board of County Commissioners.
§ 91.37 POWERS OF COUNTY MANAGER OR DESIGNEE.
   The County Manager or designee is authorized to exercise powers as may be
necessary to carry out the intent and the provisions of this subchapter
including the following powers in addition to others herein granted:
   (A)   To investigate the condition of buildings within the county in order
to determine which structures are abandoned and in violation of this
subchapter;
   (B)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making inspections;
   (C)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence; and
   (D)   To designate other officers, agents and employees of the county as the
officer deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this subchapter.
§ 91.38 STANDARDS FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   All residential and commercial structures within the county shall be
deemed in violation of this subchapter whenever the structure constitutes a
hazard to the health, safety or welfare of the citizens as a result of:
      (1)   The attraction of insects or rodents;
      (2)   Conditions creating a fire hazard;
      (3)   Dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children; and
      (4)   Frequent use by vagrants as living quarters in the absence of
sanitary facilities.
   (B)   In making the preliminary determination of whether or not an abandoned
structure is in violation of this subchapter, the County Manager or designee
may, by way of illustration and not limitation, consider the presence or
absence of the following conditions:
      (1)   Holes or cracks in the structure's floors, walls, ceilings or roof
which might attract or admit rodents or insects, or become breeding places for
rodents and insects;
      (2)   The collection of garbage or rubbish in or near the structure which
might attract rodents and insects, or become breeding places for rodents and
insects;
      (3)   Violations of the current editions of the State Building Code, the
National Electric Code, the State Plumbing Code or the State Fire Prevention
Code, as adopted, which constitute a fire hazard in the structure;
      (4)   The collection of garbage, rubbish or combustible material which
constitutes a fire hazard in the structure;
      (5)   The use of the structure or nearby grounds or facilities by
children as a play area;
      (6)   Violations of the State Building Code which might result in danger
to children using the structure or nearby grounds or facilities as a play area;
and
      (7)   Repeated use of the structure by transients and vagrants, in the
absence of sanitary facilities, for living, sleeping, cooking or eating.
   (C)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be subject to monetary fines
and injunctive relief as provided in § 11.2 of the Lincoln County Unified
Development Ordinance. A violation of this section shall not be punishable as a
criminal offense pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123(b1).
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 91.39 PROCEDURE FOR ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Preliminary investigation; notice hearing. Whenever a petition is
filed with the County Manager or designee by at least five residents of the
county, charging that any structure exists in violation of this subchapter, or
whenever it appears to the County Manager or designee, upon inspection, that
any structure exists in violation hereof, the officer shall, if the officer's
preliminary investigation discloses a basis for the charges, issue a cause to
be served upon the owner of the structure, and any other parties in interest in
the structure, a complaint stating the charges and containing a notice that a
hearing will be held before the County Manager or designee at a place therein
fixed, not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the serving of the
complaint. The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to file an
answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. Notice of the hearing
shall also be given to at least one of the persons signing a petition relating
to the structure. Any person desiring to do so may attend the hearing and give
evidence relevant to the matter being heard. The rules of evidence prevailing
in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the
County Manager or designee.
   (B)   Procedure after hearing.
      (1)   After the notice and hearing, the County Manager or designee shall
state in writing the officer's determination whether the structure violates
this subchapter.
      (2)   If the County Manager or designee determines that the dwelling is
in violation, the officer shall state in writing the officer’s findings of fact
to support the determination, and shall issue and cause to be served upon the
owner, and any other parties in interest thereof, an order directing and
requiring the owner to either repair, alter and improve the structure or else
remove or demolish the same within a specified period of time not to exceed 90
days.
   (C)   Failure to comply with order.
      (1)   In personam remedy. If the owner of any structure shall fail to
comply with an order of the County Manager or designee within the time
specified therein, the County Manager or designee may submit to the Board of
Commissioners at its next regular meeting a resolution directing the County
Attorney to petition the Superior Court for an order directing the owner, and
any other parties in interest, to comply with the order of the County Manager
or designee, as authorized by G.S. § 160D-1208(e).
      (2)   In rem remedy. After failure of an owner, and any other parties in
interest, of a structure to comply with an order of the County Manager or
designee within the time specified therein, if injunctive relief has not been
sought or has not been granted as provided in division (C)(1) above, the County
Manager or designee shall submit to the Board of Commissioners a resolution
ordering the County Manager or designee to cause the structure to be removed or
demolished, as provided in the original order of the County Manager or
designee, and pending the removal or demolition, to placard the dwelling as
provided by G.S. § 160D-1203.
      (3)   Enforcement and penalties. Violation of this section shall be
subject to monetary fines and injunctive relief as provided in § 11.2 of the
Lincoln County Unified Development Ordinance. A violation of this section shall
not be punishable as a criminal offense pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123(b1).
      (4)   Petition to Superior Court by owner. Any person aggrieved by an
order issued by the County Manager or designee shall have the right, within 30
days after issuance of the order to petition the Superior Court for a temporary
injunction restraining the County Manager or designee, pending a final
disposition of the cause, as provided by G.S. § 160D-1208(d).
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 91.40 METHODS OF SERVICE OF COMPLAINTS AND ORDERS.
   Complaints or orders issued by the County Manager shall be served upon
persons either personally or by first class mail, but if the whereabouts of the
persons are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the County Manager or
designee, in the exercise of reasonable diligence, the County Manager or
designee shall make an affidavit to that effect, and the serving of the
complaint or order upon the person may be made by publication in a newspaper
having general circulation in the county at least once, no later than the time
at which personal service is required under § 91.39. Where service is made by
publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order.
§ 91.41 IN REM ACTION BY COUNTY MANAGER OR DESIGNEE; PLACARDING.
   (A)   After failure of an owner of a structure to comply with an order of
the County Manager or designee issued pursuant to the provisions of this
subchapter, and upon adoption by the Board of Commissioners of a resolution
authorizing and directing the officer to do so, as provided by G.S. § 160D-1203
(5) and §
91.39 of this code, the County Manager or designee shall proceed to cause the
structure either to be repaired or else removed or demolished, as directed by
the resolution of the Board of County Commissioners and shall cause to be
posted on the main entrance of the structure a placard prohibiting the use or
occupation of the structure. Use or occupation of a building so posted shall
constitute a misdemeanor.
   (B)   Each resolution shall be recorded in the office of the Register of
Deeds of the county and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in
the grantor index, as provided by G.S. § 160D-1203(5).
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 91.42 COSTS OF LIEN ON PREMISES.
   (A)   As provided by G.S. § 160D-1203(7), the amount of the cost of any
removal or demolition caused to be made or done by the inspector pursuant to
this subchapter shall be a lien against the real property upon which the cost
was incurred.
   (B)   The lien shall be filed, have the same priority and be enforced and
the costs collected as provided by G.S. § 160A, Article 10 (§ 160A-216 et
seq.).
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 91.43 ALTERNATE REMEDIES.
   This subchapter shall not be construed to impair or limit in any way the
power of the county to define and declare nuisances and to cause their
abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to enforce this subchapter by
criminal process, and the enforcement of any remedy provided herein shall not
prevent the enforcement of any other remedies provided herein or in other
ordinances or laws.
§ 91.44 DEMOLITION PERMIT AND BOND.
   A demolition permit shall be required for the removal of any structure. Any
application for demolition of a structure 2,000 square feet or greater in size
shall be accompanied by a demolition plan and either the signature of the
property owner or of the County Manager. Such demolition plan shall be binding
upon subsequent property owners and shall require the following:
   (A)   Identification of all above and below ground structures on the site
including any wells or septic tanks and the applicant’s plan for their future
use or closure;
   (B)   Any plans by the applicant for on-site burning and/or burial of any
materials;
   (C)   Removal of all mowing obstructions, construction debris and materials
and removal of all structural foundations unless the applicant demonstrates
that the foundation is to be reused in the redevelopment of the property with
such redevelopment beginning within six months of the issuance of the
demolition permit;
   (D)   Removal of such materials within one month of the removal of the
structure(s);
   (E)   Upon demolition, sewer line must be satisfactorily capped off by the
property owner and/or contractor and inspected by the County of Lincoln Public
Works Department or Lincoln County Environmental Health;
   (F)   Paved parking areas may be retained on site, although the property
owner is required to maintain such areas so that they do not detract from the
overall appearance of the property;
   (G)   Upon demolition, the lot where the demolition has occurred shall be
sodded or hydro-seeded with a silt fence installed to prevent and eliminate
erosion. This silt fence must be maintained in place until the lot has a
vegetative cover of at least 70%. Any resulting holes (e.g. from basement
levels) must be filled and returned to normal grade. The requirement for hydro-
seeding or sodding may be waived at the discretion of the County Manager’s
satisfaction if the applicant demonstrates to the County Manager’s satisfaction
that redevelopment of the property will begin within six months of the issuance
of the demolition permit;
   (H)   Deadline for completion of the demolition;
   (I)   A description of the applicant's plans for ongoing post-demolition
maintenance of the lot;
   (J)   Proof of applicant’s having obtained all necessary permits from the
North Carolina Department of Environment and Natural Resources and/or the North
Carolina Department of Health and Human Services or Lincoln County Natural
Resources;
   (K)   All applications for demolition permits shall be accompanied by
payment of a secure bond in the form of cash, certified check, cashier’s check
or surety bond, based on the size of the structure(s) to be demolished as noted
below. Any company that writes the surety bond must be licensed by the State of
North Carolina and have been rated A or higher by A. M. Best Company. Any bond
in the form of cash or certified/cashier’s check will be refunded within 30
days upon satisfactory completion and inspection of the subject property by the
Zoning Administrator.
 
Secure Bond Amount
Structures between 2,000 and 2,500 square feet      $500
Structures greater than 2,500 and 3,000 square feet $1,000
Structures greater than 3,000 square feet           $4 per square foot
 
   (L)   The maximum secure bond amount required for any demolition, regardless
of the size of the structure, shall not exceed $1,000,000.
   (M)   Structures on sites owned by local, state and federal governmental
entities are exempt from this provision.
   (N)   Any demolition work to be performed as part of a new construction /
redevelopment project and included as a part of the scope of the building
permit for the new construction shall not be required to provide a secure bond
separate and apart from the new building permit.
   (O)   Failure on the part of the property owner or his or her contractor to
completely demolish, remove and clear the premises as stipulated in the
demolition plan, after 30 days notice by the County Manager, shall be cause for
forfeiture of the bond.
   (P)   Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall subject
the violator to penalties, enforcement and abatement as provided in the Lincoln
County Unified Development Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
PROTECTION OF PRIVATE PROPERTY
§ 91.50 TRESPASS WHILE HUNTING, FISHING, TRAPPING, LOITERING OR OPERATING AN
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Offense. A person commits the offense of trespass if, without written
authorization, the person enters or remains on the property of another,
including the land, water, ponds, or legally established waterfowl blind of
another, for the purpose of hunting, fishing, trapping, loitering or operating
an all-terrain vehicle. The person must have proof of written authorization in
their possession while on the property, which may be provided to any law
enforcement officer or property owner.
   (B)   Classification. A violation of this section shall be considered a
Class 3 misdemeanor and shall require the payment of a fine in the amount of
$200.
   (C)   Continuing violation. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense under this section.
(Ord. passed 12-19-2022)
§ 91.51 PROOF OF COMPLIANCE.
   A person may not be found responsible or guilty of a violation of §
91.50 if, when tried for that violation, the person produces proof of
compliance through any of the following:
   (A)   No new alleged violations of §
91.50 within 30 days of the date of the initial alleged violation;
   (B)   The person provides proof of a good-faith effort to seek assistance to
address any underlying factors related to unemployment, homelessness, mental
health, or substance abuse that might relate to the person’s ability to comply
with §
91.50.
(Ord. passed 12-19-2022)
§ 91.52 ENFORCEMENT.
   This subchapter shall be enforced by the County Sheriff’s office, or any
other law enforcement offices with general subject matter jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 12-19-2022)
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Subject to the provisions of §
91.03, violations of §§
91.01 through
91.04 may be enforced by any one or more of the remedies authorized by G.S. §
153A-123, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The Sheriff's Department may issue a citation which subjects the
offender to a civil penalty of the greater of $500 or the maximum allowed by
state law to be recovered by the county in a civil action in the nature of debt
if the offender does not pay the penalty within 20 days after being cited for a
violation;
      (2)   A civil action seeking an injunction and order of abatement may be
directed toward any person creating or allowing the creation of any unlawful
noise, including the owner or person otherwise having actual or legal control
of the premises from which it emanates.
   (B)   Penalties and remedies for violations of §§
91.15 through
91.27 shall be as follows.
      (1)   Violations of the provisions of §§
91.15 through
91.27 or failure to comply with any of their requirements, including violations
of any conditions and safeguards established, shall be enforced as set forth
therein.
      (2)   Any act constituting a violation of the provisions of §§
91.15 through
91.27 or a failure to comply with any of their requirements shall also subject
the offender to a civil penalty. Each day of violation shall be considered a
separate offense, provided that the violation is not corrected within 20 days
after notice of the violation is given. Subsequent citations for the same
violation may be issued by the Ordinance Administrator unless the violator has
appealed the actions of the Ordinance Administrator through the Board of
Adjustment.
         (a)   The following penalties are hereby established:
 
Warning citation                         Correct violation within 10 days
First citation                           $25 (correct violation within 10 days)
Second and subsequent citations for same $50 per day
offense
 
         (b)   If the offender fails to pay the civil penalties within five
days after being cited, the penalties may be recovered by the county in a civil
action in the nature of a debt.
      (3)   This subchapter may also be enforced by any appropriate equitable
action. The remedy may include court order of abatement as part of a judgement
in the cause. The abatement order may include removal of junk from illegal
junkyards and other actions required to make the property comply with the
provisions of this subchapter at the owner's expense.
      (4)   Any one, all, or any combination of the foregoing penalties and
remedies may be used to enforce §§
91.15 through
91.27. In addition to the foregoing enforcement provisions, §§
91.15 through
91.27 may be enforced by any remedy provided in G.S. § 153A-123, including, but
not limited to, all appropriate equitable remedies provided in G.S. § 153A-123
(d) and particularly the remedy of injunction and order of abatement as allowed
in G.S. § 153A-123(e). Sections
91.15 through
91.27 specifically provide that each day's continuing violation may be a
separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 1-8-1990; Ord. passed 10-21-2002; Ord. passed 12-
4-2006; Ord. passed 6-6-2014; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
CHAPTER 92: ANIMALS
Section
Animal Services
   
92.01   Title
   
92.02   Purpose
   
92.03   Definitions
   
92.04   Establishment, jurisdiction and authority
   
92.05   Program of animal services
   
92.06   Animal cruelty
   
92.07   Tethering
   
92.08   Leash law
   
92.09   Nuisance
   
92.10   Rabies control
   
92.11   Dangerous Dog Ordinance
      
92.11.1   Title
      
92.11.2   Determination of dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs
      
92.11.3   Appeal procedure for dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs
      
92.11.4   Confinement and restraint requirements
      
92.11.5   Registration and transfer of ownership
      
92.11.6   Dangerous dogs from other jurisdictions
      
92.11.7   Declassification
      
92.11.8   Private action
      
92.11.9   Penalties
   
92.12   Exotic Animals Ordinance
      
92.12.1   Title
      
92.12.2   Purpose and statutory authorization
      
92.12.3   Definitions
      
92.12.4   Exemptions and additional requirements
      
92.12.5   Unlawful possession
      
92.12.6   Pre-existing exotic animals
      
92.12.7   Additional prohibitions
      
92.12.8   Impoundment and/or disposition of inherently dangerous exotic animals
   
92.13   Disposition of deceased animals
   
92.14   Impoundment of animals
   
92.15   Disposition of animals
   
92.16   Record keeping
   
92.17   Relation to other laws
   
92.18   Animal Services Advisory Board
   
92.19   Abandonment of animals
   
92.20   Inspections, interference and concealment
   
92.21   Protective measures for the containment of animals
   
92.22   Harboring stray animals
   
92.23   Seizure, forfeiture, and disposition of animals
 
   
92.99   Fees and penalties
Cross-reference:
   Amusements, see
Ch. 110
   County Policies, see
Ch. 30
   Health and Safety; Nuisances, see
Ch. 91
   Solid Waste and Recycling, see
Ch. 52
   Water, see
Ch. 50
ANIMAL SERVICES
§ 92.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Lincoln County Animal
Ordinance."
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021; Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.02 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this animal chapter is to protect public health and safety,
help to prevent public animal nuisances, and promote the welfare of animals in
Lincoln County.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 92.03 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
   ABANDON. Forsake, desert, or absolutely give up an animal previously under
the custody or possession of a person without having secured another owner or
custodian, or by failing to provide one or more of the elements of adequate
care for a period of 24 or more hours consecutively.
   ADEQUATE COLD WEATHER SHELTER. A shelter that when temperature is below 32°F
at any time during a 24-hour period will provide a secondary source of heat
including but not limited to cedar shavings or straw.
   ADEQUATE ENVIRONMENT. The provision of a safe and sanitary environment for
an animal, free of debris, hazards, waste and filth.
   ADEQUATE FOOD. Provisions at suitable intervals, not to exceed 24 hours, of
a sufficient quantity of wholesome foodstuff suitable for the species and age
to maintain a reasonable level of nutrition for the animal.
   ADEQUATE HOT WEATHER SHELTER. A shelter that shall be located, either in
appropriate secondary shade or have shade provided for the animal by artificial
means when temperature is in excess of 80°F at any time during a 24-hour
period.
   ADEQUATE SHELTER. Means: 1) an enclosure having four solid walls with an
opening large enough to allow access to the animal, with a roof; 2) an igloo-
shaped enclosure; or 3) another type of equivalent shelter designed
specifically for a dog and approved by an Animal Services Officer. The
enclosure must have a solid floor, be structurally sound and maintained in good
repair, be constructed in such a manner that it is water and wind resistant,
and have sufficient room for the animal to move about freely and lie down
comfortably. Adequate shelter is to include the provision of cold weather
shelter or hot weather shelter depending on conditions.
   ADEQUATE STANDARDS OF CARE. The provision of adequate food, water, shelter,
environment and vet care as defined in this section.
   ADEQUATE VETERINARY CARE.  The provision of vet care for an animal within 72
hours, or a time period determined appropriate by an Animal Services Officer
when determined by an Animal Services Officer to be necessary.
   ADEQUATE WATER. Constant access to a supply of clean, fresh, unfrozen, and
potable water provided in a sanitary manner.
   ANIMAL SERVICES OFFICER. Animal Services Officers constitute Animal Control
Officers as defined by N.C.G.S. §§ 67-30 et seq.
   AT LARGE. A dog shall be deemed to be at large when off the curtilage of the
owner's residence and not under restraint.
   COUNTY. Lincoln County.
   CURTILAGE. An area of land attached to a house and forming one enclosure
with it. Includes the area immediately surrounding a dwelling.
   DOMESTICATED ANIMALS. A species of animals that are indigenous to Lincoln
County and normally, customarily share human habitation in Lincoln County and
are normally dependent on humans for food and shelter in Lincoln County, such
as dogs and cats.
   FERAL CAT. A domesticated feline that is unsocialized and unclaimed but
lives in the community.
   INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT. A written contract between local government agencies
such as a city, a county, a school board or a constitutional office as provided
in N.C.G.S. § 160A-460.
   LIVESTOCK. Equine animals, bovine animals, sheep, goats, llamas and swine,
all other animals considered livestock by the USDA.
   OWNER. Shall mean any of the following:
      (1)   Any person who has legal title to any animal;
      (2)   Is responsible for an animal's care, actions, and behavior; or
      (3)   Takes control of any animal either inside the owner's house or
becomes responsible for any animal's care for more than a period of 96 hours.
   RESTRAINT. A dog is under restraint if it is confined within the curtilage
of its owner's residence, is secured by a leash and under control of a
responsible person, or is confined within a vehicle in a manner that prevents
escape.
   STRAY. Any domestic, livestock or exotic animal not under restraint and
found off the property of its owner, or is wandering at large, and does not
have an owner present.
   TETHER(ING). To restrain a dog outdoors by means of a rope, chain, wire or
other type of line for holding a dog, one end of which is fastened to the dog
and the opposite end of which is connected to a stationary object or to a cable
or trolley system. This definition does not include walking a dog with a
handheld leash.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021; Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.04 ESTABLISHMENT, JURISDICTION AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Animal Services. This chapter creates an Animal Services Office, under
the supervision and direction of the County Manager, or his/her designee, which
shall be composed of any number of employees as determined by the Board of
Commissioners, who shall provide compensation for these employees. The office
shall be headed by the Director of Animal Services, who shall be appointed,
supervised, and evaluated by the County Manager or his/her designee.
      (1)   Animal shelter. The animal shelter division of the Animal Services
Office is established pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 53A-442. The animal shelters shall
be responsible for animal shelter operations, and subject to all rules and
regulations as given by state law and the North Carolina Department of
Agriculture and Consumer Services.
      (2)   Field Services. The Field Services Division of the Animal Services
Office is established under this chapter to enforce the provisions of the
Lincoln County Animal Ordinance, state laws, and municipal regulations (to the
extent provided by an interlocal agreement).
   (B)   Jurisdiction. This chapter shall be applicable within the legal limits
of Lincoln County, North Carolina. However, the Lincoln County Animal Ordinance
shall not apply within the corporate limits or jurisdiction of any municipality
located in Lincoln County unless Lincoln County enters into an interlocal
agreement with said municipality.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021; Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.05 PROGRAM OF ANIMAL SERVICES.
   (A)   Director of Animal Services. The Director of Animal Services shall
serve as the chief administrator of the Lincoln County Animal Ordinance and the
program of Animal Services, which includes operation of the Animal Shelter and
Field Services.
   (B)   Animal Services Officers. Animal Services Officers are appointed
through authority of N.C.G.S. § 67-30. The duties and powers of Animal Services
Officers include enforcement of the Lincoln County Animal Ordinance, state
laws, and municipal regulations (to the extent provided by an interlocal
agreement).
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021; Ord. passed 3-21-2022; Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.06 ANIMAL CRUELTY.
   (A)   Prohibited acts. It shall be considered animal cruelty, unlawful and a
violation of this chapter if a person will fully and negligently does any of
the following:
      (1)   Fails to provide adequate food and/or water for any animal he owns,
possesses, or harbors; or
      (2)   Overworks or overdrives any animal causing physical pain, suffering
or death; or
      (3)   Beats, tortures, injures, torments, poisons or mutilates any animal
causing physical pain, suffering or death; or
      (4)   Fails to provide adequate medical attention for any sick, diseased
or injured animal he or she owns, possesses, or harbors; or
      (5)   Keeps any animal under unsanitary or inhumane conditions which are
detrimental to the animal's health and general welfare or fails to maintain a
condition of good order and cleanliness which reduces the probability of
transmission of disease; or
      (6)   Teases, molests, or in any way bothers or harasses any animal; or
      (7)   Promotes, stages, holds, manages, conducts, carries on or attends
any game, exhibition, contest, fight or combat between one or more animals or
between animals and humans; or
      (8)   Fails to provide an adequate shelter for an animal he owns,
possesses, harbors, or encloses, wherein the animal can be protected from
extremes of weather (heat, cold, rain, and the like) and allowed to remain dry
and comfortable during inclement weather; or
      (9)   Conveys any type of animal in a wagon, a trailer pulled by a motor
vehicle/truck, or in the bed of a truck without having such animal reasonably
secured so as to prevent the animal from leaping or being thrown from the
vehicle or in such a way as to cause pain, suffering, unreasonable discomfort
or death to the animal; or
      (10)   Places or confines an animal or allows an animal to be placed or
confined in a motor vehicle under such conditions or for such a period of time
as to endanger the health or well-being of such animal due to temperature, lack
of food or water, or such other conditions as may reasonably be expected to
cause suffering, disability or death:
         (a)   After making a reasonable effort to find the driver of a vehicle
in which an animal is confined, an Animal Services Officer, whether in the
presence of a law enforcement officer or not, may use the least intrusive means
to break and enter the vehicle if necessary to remove the animal where probable
cause exists to believe that the animal is in the vehicle in violation of this
division.
         (b)   The Animal Services Officer who is removing the animal shall
then impound it and leave in a prominent place on the motor vehicle a written
notice of the animal's impoundment, a brief description of the animal, and
where and when the animal may be reclaimed. In addition, the officer may also
use any other enforcement method authorized herein.
         (c)   So long as an animal is within sight of an Animal Services
Officer or a law enforcement officer, there shall be no requirement that any
warrant be obtained before removing the animal so long as such removal is
consistent with the United States Constitution; or
      (11)   Fails to provide sufficient shade, when sunlight is likely to
cause overheating and discomfort, to allow all animals kept outdoors to protect
themselves from the direct rays of the sun (not applicable to livestock); or
      (12)   Keeps animals outdoors without access to shelter to allow them to
remain dry and comfortable during inclement weather (not applicable to
livestock); or
      (13)   Keeps dogs in an outdoor kennel used for the primary purpose of
restraining dogs, where there is less than 50 square feet of kennel space per
dog. Outdoor kennels shall be kept in a state of repair to prevent injury to
the dog(s). Carriers, crates or other similar devices used for training or
temporary housing shall only be utilized indoors. This requirement shall not
apply to the housing of dogs whose primary purpose is hunting activities.
   (B)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in N.C.G.S. § 14-4. In addition to criminal enforcement
of this section, any person found to be in violation of this section shall be
subject to civil penalties as defined in §
92.99. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021; Ord. passed 3-21-2022; Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.07 TETHERING.
   (A)   Tethering of dogs shall be permitted when:
      (1)   The tether is a minimum of 12 feet;
      (2)   If attached to a pulley or trolley system the tether is at least 15
feet long and no more than seven feet above the ground;
      (3)   The tether is attached to a properly fitting collar or harness (not
a choke, prong or pinch collar);
      (4)   The tether has a swivel on at least one end;
      (5)   The tether is an appropriate size and weight for the dog; and
      (6)   Only one dog is attached to a single tether.
   (B)   Tethering of dogs shall be prohibited if:
      (1)   Any of the above conditions are violated;
      (2)   The tether allows the dog to cross the property line or onto public
property;
      (3)   The dog is tethered in a manner that is likely to cause injury,
strangulation, or entanglement thereto;
      (4)   The dog is sick/injured, pregnant or nursing, or under six months;
or
      (5)   Any other condition detrimental to the dog exists as determined by
the Animal Services Officer.
   (C)   No dog may be tethered in a location where the dog will be within five
feet of the property line when tethered.
   (D)   Exceptions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, exceptions may apply at the
discretion of the Animal Services Officer for tethering that is non-permanent
and being used as a part of a legal activity with direct supervision from an
owner.
   (E)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. In addition to criminal enforcement of
this section, any person found to be in violation of this section shall be
subject to civil penalties as defined in § 92.99. Each day a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021; Ord. passed 3-21-2022; Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.08 LEASH LAW.
   (A)   Prior jurisdiction. Dogs at large shall not be permitted at any time
in the following subdivisionswithin Lincoln County, which were adopted under
previous ordinances: Anderson Woods, Arden Oaks, Brookwood Acres, Cherry Lane,
Cherry Pt., City of Lincolnton, Clearbrook, Country Club Apartments, Country
Valley, Eastwood, Goodsons Place, Grandview Farms, Green Acres, Hidden Valley,
Hill Crest, Hoffman Acres, Hunter's Bluff, Knottingham Forest, Lake Hill
Trailer Park, Lincoln Park, Meadowbrook, North Hill Deerwood Trails, Sherrill
Ridge, Sifford Acres, Stoney Creek Acres, West Bay, Westport Peninsula,
Westport Subdivision, Westward Trail, Whispering Pines, Windsor Forest, and
Worthington Park.
   (B)   New jurisdiction. Any additional subdivision desiring to subject
itself and its properties to the leash law provisions shall meet the following
criteria and be acted upon as follows:
      (1)   It must be a subdivision platted and recorded with the Lincoln
County Register of Deeds or an approved mobile home park registered with
Lincoln County; and
      (2)   A majority of the property owners residing in the subdivision,
condominium or mobile home park must sign a petition agreeing to the leash
restrictions.
   (C)   Subdivisions meeting new criteria. Following the receipt of a petition
as provided in division (B) above, the Board of Commissioners shall review the
petition and, if the criteria are met, a public hearing shall be scheduled.
Following the public hearing, action shall be taken on the petition which
includes either the approval or denial of said petition. If approved, the
subdivision shall be listed in this chapter.
   (D)   Subdivisions desiring to opt out of leash law provisions. Any
subdivision subject to the leash laws herein which desires to opt out of the
leash law must meet the following criteria:
      (1)   75% of property owners within the subdivision must sign a petition
agreeing to remove the leash law restrictions.
      (2)   Following receipt of a petition, the Board of Commissioners shall
review the petition of the subdivision or mobile home park, and if the criteria
are met, a public hearing shall be scheduled.
      (3)   Following the public hearing, action shall be taken on the petition
which includes either the approval or denial of said petition.
      (4)   If approved, the subdivision shall be removed from listing in this
chapter.
   (E)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. In addition to criminal enforcement of
this section, any person found to be in violation of this section shall be
subject to civil penalties as defined in §
92.99. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021; Ord. passed 3-21-2022; Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.09 NUISANCE.
   (A)   Nuisance acts. It shall be unlawful for an owner to permit an animal
or animals to create a public nuisance, or to maintain a public nuisance
created by an animal or animals. Nuisance means any act of an animal that
disturbs rights and privileges common to the public or enjoyment of private
property. A nuisance act includes but is not limited to:
      (1)   Continuously or frequently roams or is found on the property of
another person;
      (2)   Turns over garbage containers or removes garbage from a container;
      (3)   Damages gardens, foliage or other real personal property of another
person;
      (4)   Defecates or urinates on private property without the permission of
the owner;
      (5)   Walks on or sleeps on automobiles of another person;
      (6)   Is maintained in an unsanitary condition so as to be offensive to
sight or smell;
      (7)   Is not confined to a building or secure enclosure while in estrus;
      (8)   Is diseased or dangerous to the health of the public;
      (9)   Chases, snaps at, attacks, or otherwise molests pedestrians,
cyclists, motor vehicle passengers, farm stock, or domestic animals;
      (10)   Is housed or restrained less than five feet from a property line,
public street, road or sidewalk, and in the discretion of the Animal Control
Officer, poses a threat to the general safety, health and welfare of the
general public; or
      (11)   Habitually loiters on school grounds or county recreation
property.
   (B)   Nuisance complaints. Any person wishing to file an animal nuisance
complaint must contact Animal Services by phone or fill out a nuisance/
complaint form and may not do so anonymously. Further, the Animal Services
Director or his or her designee shall have the option of requesting the
complaining party to sign a sworn statement of the alleged offense and to
require the cooperation of the complaining party in court appearances arising
from the complaint.
      (1)   Nothing contained herein shall obligate Lincoln County, or its
Animal Services Director, to pursue civil or criminal proceedings hereunder;
and
      (2)   Nothing shall prevent a private citizen from pursuing a civil
action for nuisance pursuant to common law or this chapter.
      (3)   Complaints related to noise, even if said noise is caused by an
animal, are not investigated by Lincoln County Animal Services under this
Lincoln County Animal Ordinance. All noise complaints shall be subject to the
Lincoln County Noise Ordinance.
   (C)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. In addition to criminal enforcement of
this section, any person found to be in violation of this section shall be
subject to civil penalties as defined in §
92.99. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021; Ord. passed 3-21-2022; Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.10 RABIES CONTROL.
   The Animal Services Director or designee shall enforce and carry out all
rabies control laws of the state and this chapter, and shall work with the
Lincoln County Health Director to investigate and help control rabies cases in
accordance with N.C.G.S. Chapter 130A.
   (A)   Rabies requirements. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this
chapter for any owner, or other person to fail to comply with the following
laws of North Carolina relating to the control of rabies:
      (1)   Vaccination of animals above 16 weeks of age for rabies, pursuant
to N.C.G.S. § 130A-185;
      (2)   Displaying rabies tags, pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 130A-190;
         (a)   Cats and ferrets exempt;
      (3)   Confinement of biting animals, pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 130A-196;
      (4)   Post exposure management, pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 130A-197; and
      (5)   Confinement of animals suspected of rabies, pursuant to N.C.G.S. §
130A-198.
   (B)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. In addition to criminal enforcement of
this section, any person found to be in violation of this section shall be
subject to civil penalties as defined in §
92.99. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021; Ord. passed 3-21-2022; Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.11 DANGEROUS DOG ORDINANCE.
§ 92.11.1 TITLE.
   This subchapter (§§
92.11.1 through
92.11.9) of the Lincoln County Animal Ordinance shall be considered the Lincoln
County Dangerous Dog Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.11.2 DETERMINATION OF DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.
   The Animal Services Director or their designee shall determine whether a dog
is to be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous based on this dangerous
dog subchapter. Once the dog is deemed dangerous or potentially dangerous, the
Animal Services Director or designee may impound the dog immediately and notify
the owner of the dog in writing, including the reason for the determination.
   (A)   Dangerous dog. A dangerous dog will be classified as either a level 1
or level 2 dangerous dog based on the following requirements.
      (1)   Level 1. The dog will be classified as level 1 if the dog:
         (a)   Killed a person who was not attempting to harm, rob or seriously
injure the dog's owner or family;
         (b)   Severely injures a child under the age of 12;
         (c)   When not on the owner's real property, inflicted severe injury
to a person;
         (d)   Was previously declared a level 2 dangerous dog and while out of
the secure enclosure bit a person;
         (e)   Was previously declared a level 2 dangerous dog and while out of
the secure enclosure and not on the owner's real property bit another domestic
animal;
         (f)   Was previously declared a potentially dangerous dog and
inflicted severe injury to a person; or
         (g)   Was previously declared a potentially dangerous dog and when not
on the owner's real property killed or inflicted severe injury to a domestic
animal.
      (2)   Result if deemed level 1. The Animal Services Director or designee
shall immediately seize and impound the dog, and order and cause the level 1
dangerous dog to be humanely destroyed at the expense of the owner. No level 1
dangerous dog shall be destroyed until after the appeal period has expired.
      (3)   Level 2. The dog may be classified as level 2 if the dog:
         (a)   When on the owner's real property inflicted severe injury to a
person and the person was not attempting to harm, rob or seriously injure the
dog's owner or family;
         (b)   Was owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of
dog fighting, or trained for dog fighting, in violation of G.S. § 14-362.2;
         (c)   Was previously declared a potentially dangerous dog and when not
on the owner's real property bit another domestic animal, livestock or other
chicken/fowl, but did not cause a severe injury; or
         (d)   Was previously declared a potentially dangerous dog and bit a
person but did not cause a severe injury.
      (4)   Result if deemed level 2. A level 2 dangerous dog may be redeemed
by the owner, provided the owner first complies with those regulations and
confines the level 2 dangerous dog as required in §
92.11.4. If the owner fails to redeem the level 2 dangerous dog, or fails to
provide notice that it will redeem the dog following installation of
confinement structures, the level 2 dangerous dog shall be humanely destroyed
at the expense of the owner. No level 2 dangerous dog shall be destroyed until
after the appeal period has expired.
   (B)   Potentially dangerous dog. A dog may be classified as a potentially
dangerous if the dog:
      (1)   When not on the owner's real property killed or inflicted severe
injury upon a domestic animal, livestock or other chicken/fowl: or
      (2)   When not on the owner's real property approached a person in a
vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack; or
      (3)   Inflicted an unprovoked bite to a human.
      (4)   Result if deemed potentially dangerous. A potentially dangerous dog
may be redeemed by the owner, provided the owner first agrees to keep the dog
under restraint and complies with §
92.11.3.
   (C)   Exceptions. This chapter does not apply to the following:
      (1)   A law enforcement dog being used by a law enforcement officer to
carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties or professional
responsibilities; or a security dog used by a professional security guard
registered with the North Carolina Protective Services Board to carry out the
security guard's official duties or professional responsibilities.
      (2)   A dog where the injury or damage inflicted by the dog was sustained
by a domestic animal while the dog was working as a herding dog, or predator
control dog on the property of or under the control of its owner, and the
damage or injury was to a specific type of domestic animal appropriate to the
work of the dog; or
      (3)   A dog where the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a
person who, at the time of the injury was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting
the dog; had tormented, abused or assaulted the dog; or was committing or
attempting to commit a crime.
(Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.11.3 APPEAL PROCEDURE FOR DANGEROUS AND POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS.
   (A)   Right to appeal. The owner of a dog which has been declared dangerous
or potentially dangerous pursuant to §
92.11.2 has the right to appeal the determination by filing a written appeal,
stating the grounds for the appeal, with the Animal Services Director within
three business days of receipt of the dangerous or potentially dangerous dog
determination letter. If the owner fails to file the written appeal, the dog
will be disposed of according to this subchapter.
      (1)   Any appeal of the Director's decision filed hereunder shall be
heard by the Dangerous Dog Appellate Board, as established herein. The
Dangerous Dog Appellate Board shall hold a hearing within ten business days of
the filing of the written appeal. The appellant will be notified of the Board's
decision in writing within ten business days following the final decision of
the Appellate Board.
      (2)   Following the decision of the Dangerous Dog Appellate Board, the
appellant (or the county) shall have a right to appeal that decision of the
Appellate Board. Any appeal shall be filed with the Lincoln County Superior
Court by filing a notice of appeal and petition for review within 30 days of
receipt of the final decision of the Appellate Board. This appeal must be
served on all parties relevant to the appeal, including but not limited to: the
Animal Services Director and the County Attorney.
   (B)   Dangerous Dog Appellate Board.
      (1)   The Dangerous Dog Appellate Board has been established by the Board
of Commissioners, as follows:
         (a)   The Board shall be composed of five regular members and two
alternates, and at least one of the regular members shall be a sworn law
enforcement officer.
         (b)   Members and alternates must be residents of Lincoln County and
appointed by the Board of Commissioners for a period of three years, and each
member may serve two terms.
         (c)   A quorum of at least three members (any combination of regular
members and alternates) must be present at an Appellate Board hearing in order
for the Appellate Board to conduct business.
         (d)   Conflict of interest. The members of the Dangerous Dog Appellate
Board shall be expected to disclose any prior personal involvement they have
had with the case or other conflicts of interest, and upon a motion of the
Board, the member making the disclosure may be recused.
      (2)   Procedural requirements.
         (a)   All testimony offered at the Appellate Board hearing shall be
given under oath and recorded by audio recording. The hearing shall be open to
the public, and the person requesting the appeal may be represented by an
attorney.
         (b)   The Animal Services Director or designee shall have the burden
of demonstrating that this chapter has been violated. The person requesting the
appeal will be given an opportunity to prove this chapter has not been
violated. The Animal Services Director or designee will be given a final
opportunity to clarify any conflicts, ambiguities or inconsistencies created by
or arising from the statements or evidence.
         (c)   The Dangerous Dog Appellate Board may ask questions at any time
during the appeal hearing and may request additional evidence from either
party, including continuing the hearing in the interest of fairness.
         (d)   Decision. The Dangerous Dog Appellate Board may rule on the
appeal in any of the following ways: (1) uphold the decision of the Animal
Services Director in total; (2) reverse the decision of the Animal Services
Director in total; or (3) uphold or reverse the decision of the Animal Services
Director with additional criteria added or removed.
   (C)   Application of decision. Any decision rendered by the Dangerous Dog
Appellate Board applies only to the violation(s) appealed and does not prevent
the Animal Services Department from enforcing a subsequent violation of the
same provision or any other provision of this chapter. If the Dangerous Dog
Appellate Board upholds or affirms the decision of the Animal Services Director
or designee, the owner is responsible for all applicable boarding fees,
redemption fees and civil penalties.
   (D)   Failure to appeal. If the owner of the dog does not file a written
appeal with the Dangerous Dog Appellate Board as provided herein or if the
owner of the dog does not comply with the confinement requirements as specified
herein, then the dog becomes the property of the county for disposition.
(Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.11.4 CONFINEMENT AND RESTRAINT REQUIREMENTS
   (A)   Level 2 dangerous dog requirements. The owner of a level 2 dangerous
dog that is required to be confined pursuant to §
92.11.2 may redeem the dog upon complying with the following:
      (1)   The owner must file a written notice of intent to comply with the
enclosure requirements outlined below with the Animal Services Director within
three business days of receipt of the determination letter. If the owner fails
to file a written notice, the dog shall become the property of the county and
shall be disposed of in accordance with this chapter.
      (2)   Before redemption, a level 2 dangerous dog must be fitted with
microchip identification, at the owner's expense.
      (3)   The owner must pay all outstanding fines and fees owed to the
Animal Services Department.
      (4)   From the initial notice from the Animal Services Department, the
owner has 21 calendar days to erect the secure enclosure. If the owner appeals,
the owner has 21 days to erect the secure enclosure from the date of the final
decision.
      (5)   Secure enclosure requirements. The secure enclosure must conform to
all of the following:
         (a)   The structure must be a minimum size of 90 square feet and six
feet tall, with a concrete pad at least two inches thick. If more than one dog
is to be kept in the enclosure, the floor area must provide at least 90 square
feet for each dog. The walls and roof of the structure must be constructed of
welded chain link, of a minimum thickness of 9-gauge, or equivalent gauge
welded wire, supported by galvanized steel poles at least two and one-half
inches in diameter. The vertical support poles must be sunk in concrete-filled
holes at least 18 inches deep and at least eight inches in diameter. The chain
link fencing must be anchored to the concrete pad with galvanized steel anchors
at intervals of no more than 12 inches along the perimeter of the pad. The
entire structure must be freestanding and not attached or anchored to any
existing fence, building, or structure. The structure must be secured by a pad
lock.
         (b)   A warning sign of at least 120 square inches must be visible
from each side of the structure and visible to any adjoining property.
         (c)   The secure enclosure must be inspected and approved by the
Animal Services Director or designee.
         (d)   The owner of the dog is responsible for ensuring that the
enclosure is maintained in such a condition to continually meet the
requirements of this chapter. Failure to maintain or repair the enclosure shall
subject the owner to penalties under this chapter.
         (e)   Prior to inspection of the enclosure by the Animal Services
Director or designee, the dog shall not be returned to the owner's property
until the shelter and warning signs have been approved. While the structure is
being erected, the dog must be boarded at the county animal shelter at the
owner's expense.
         (f)   Insurance requirement. At the owner's expense, the owner of a
level 2 dangerous dog shall procure and maintain and provide proof of liability
insurance in the amount of at least $100,000.
         (g)   Additional requirements. The Animal Services Director may make
additional confinement requirements as deemed necessary, and based on the
circumstances surrounding each specific case.
      (6)   Maintenance requirements of a level 2 dangerous dog. The owner of a
level 2 dangerous dog that is required to be confined must comply with the
following requirements:
         (a)   A dangerous dog shall not be permitted out of the enclosure
unless the dog is under physical restraint by a competent person who by means
of a leash no longer than six feet has the dog firmly under control at all
times. Voice command and electronic collars are not recognized as adequate
restraints. A dangerous dog must be muzzled when not on the owner's real
property.
         (b)   If the owner can provide detailed written instructions from a
licensed veterinarian that the dog must remain out of the secure enclosure for
a specified amount of time due to sickness or injury, then the dog shall
immediately be housed at a veterinarian clinic until it is medically cleared,
at which time the dog shall immediately be returned to the secure enclosure.
Written instructions from a licensed veterinarian must be updated at least
every 30 days by a licensed veterinarian and provided to the Animal Services
Division by the owner.
   (B)   Potentially dangerous dog confinement and maintenance requirements.
The owner of any potentially dangerous dog may redeem their dog upon complying
with the following:
      (1)   At the owner's expense and before redemption, a potentially
dangerous dog must be fitted with microchip identification.
      (2)   The owner must pay all outstanding fines and fees due to the Animal
Services Department.
      (3)   The owner must keep the dog under restraint at all times. Restraint
under this section includes:
         (a)   Controlled by means of a chain or other approved tether no
longer than 20 feet or a leash no longer than six feet. Voice command and
electronic collars are not recognized as adequate restraints.
         (b)   Within a vehicle being driven or parked, and secured in such
manner as to prevent the animal from escaping or causing injury to persons
approaching or passing the vehicle. An animal is not under restraint if it is
in the back of an open-bed pickup.
         (c)   Within a fenced enclosure adequate to secure the dog so as to
prevent it from escaping from the owner's real property.
         (d)   Not permitting the dog to go beyond the owner's real property
unless the dog is leashed and muzzled.
         (e)   Comply with any additional requirements as deemed necessary by
the Director of Animal Services or designee.
   (C)   Indoor confinement. It shall be at the sole discretion of the Animal
Services Director to determine if the dog, based on the specifics of its
designation, is eligible for indoor confinement. Any proposed indoor
confinement shall be submitted and viewed by the Animal Services Director, or
their designee, and approved prior to being used for that purpose. However, no
indoor confinement shall be permitted in a residential structure where a child
under the age of 12 years old resides, or where an adult that is considered
vulnerable or incompetent resides.
   (D)   Penalties. In addition to criminal penalties provided by state law and
civil penalties set forth in §
92.99, any person who violates the requirements set forth in this section shall
be subject to the following sanctions and remedies:
      (1)   If a dangerous dog is found at large, it shall be seized and
impounded. An Animal Services Officer is authorized to go upon private property
to seize the dangerous dog.
      (2)   The Animal Services Department shall have the right to inspect the
enclosure at any time. If an inspection of the enclosure reveals that the owner
has not complied with the requirements for confining and/or restraining the
dog, an Animal Services Officer may issue a civil penalty in conformity with
this chapter and may impound the dog.
      (3)   Subsequent violations. Upon a second violation of this section, the
dog will be impounded immediately and will become the property of the county
and will be disposed of in accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.11.5 REGISTRATION AND TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   Registration. A current registration shall be maintained by the Animal
Services Department for every dog determined to be dangerous or potentially
dangerous. The owner of the dog is responsible for ensuring that the dog is
registered. Registrations must include the name and address of the owner,
identifying information concerning the dog, a copy of the certificate of
insurance, verification of current rabies vaccination, and any other
information the Animal Services Department deems necessary. The owner shall
register the dog annually with the Animal Services Department during the month
of January. If the dog dies, the owner is responsible for notifying Animal
Services immediately. If ownership is transferred, division (B) below applies.
   (B)   Transfer of ownership. If the owner of a potentially dangerous or
dangerous dog transfers ownership or possession of the dog to another person,
the owner must, ten days prior to the transfer, provide written notice to the
Animal Services Director or designee stating the intent to transfer the dog and
the name, telephone number, and address of the new owner or possessor of the
dog. The new owner must assume all responsibilities regarding the dangerous or
potentially dangerous dog. The Animal Services Director or designee must
inspect the new, proposed location to ensure compliance with the written order
prior to the dog's relocation. If the location does not fall under the
jurisdiction of this chapter, the Animal Services Director or designee shall
contact the appropriate animal control or law enforcement agency of the owner's
intent to relocate the dog in question to a location within such agency's
jurisdiction and shall provide copies of all records pertaining to the dog to
the agency prior to the dog's relocation. Any owner of a dog that has been
deemed level 1 dangerous dog shall not be eligible to transfer ownership as
delineated herein.
(Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.11.6 DANGEROUS DOGS FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS.
   (A)   An owner bringing into the county a dog that has been classified as
dangerous or potentially dangerous shall notify Animal Services prior to
transferring the dog into the county. Once an owner notifies Animal Services of
a dog's classification as dangerous or potentially dangerous from another
jurisdiction, the Animal Services Director or designee shall contact that
jurisdiction to obtain all necessary information to classify the dog according
to this chapter. Dogs from other jurisdictions must comply with all Lincoln
County laws after their classification. The Animal Services Director shall have
the discretion to disallow the transfer of any dangerous dog from another
jurisdiction.
   (B)   An owner may appeal the determination of the Animal Services Director
according to §
92.11.3.
   (C)   Penalty. If an owner of a dog that has been classified as dangerous or
potentially dangerous fails to notify Animal Services of its intent to transfer
the dog into Lincoln County, then that owner shall be subject to a penalty of
$500 per animal.
(Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.11.7 DECLASSIFICATION.
   Any declaration that an animal is potentially dangerous, or dangerous level
2 may be petitioned for declassification as provided in this section.
   (A)   An owner of an animal that has been declared dangerous or potentially
dangerous under this or a previous version of this chapter may request annually
that the Animal Services Director or designee submits the declaration in front
of the Dangerous Dog Appellate Board for review of the declaration. The request
shall be made in writing on an application provided by Animal Services and
shall be accompanied by an overall assessment of the animal completed by a
competent person accredited by the Certification Council for Professional Dog
Trainers or another recognized and approved body. The assessment shall have an
emphasis on the behavior underlying the declaration and the owner's ability to
manage the animal. The Dangerous Dog Appellate Board shall consider revocation
of the declaration only if no violations of this chapter or, if applicable,
G.S. §§ 67-4.1 et seq., have occurred within the 18 months preceding the date
of application for review. The Dangerous Dog Appellate Board shall further
consider the following matters when reviewing the declaration:
      (1)   The outcomes of the assessment described in this division;
      (2)   The nature of the original attack(s) and the reasons for the
original declaration;
      (3)   The manner in which the animal has been cared for and managed since
the declaration was imposed; and
      (4)   Evidence of whether the animal's behavior has changed since the
declaration due to the animal's age, environment, training, or other factors.
   (B)   The Dangerous Dog Appellate Board may revoke the declaration or revise
the level of danger after considering the application, the assessment, and the
matters described above. The Dangerous Dog Appellate Board shall issue written
findings to the owner stating the reason(s) for his or her decision and, if the
Dangerous Dog Appellate Board has denied the revocation, the date upon which
the owner may request further review of the declaration by the Dangerous Dog
Appellate Board. The Dangerous Dog Appellate Board has complete discretion in
making the decision and any final decision is not subject to appeal.
   (C)   Any animal that has been deemed potentially dangerous that becomes
property of Lincoln County may be declassified by the Dangerous Dog Appellate
Board upon request for additional review by the Animal Services Director, or
their designee.
(Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.11.8 PRIVATE ACTION.
   Nothing in this subchapter shall prevent a private citizen from bringing an
action against the owner of a dog which has caused injury to the private
citizen or his or her property for damages or any other loss resulting from the
dog's conduct being dangerous.
(Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.11.9 PENALTIES.
   Any person who violates a provision of this subchapter shall be subject to
the civil penalties listed in §
92.99.
(Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.12 EXOTIC ANIMALS ORDINANCE.
§ 92.12.1 TITLE.
   This subchapter (§§ 92.12.1 - 92.12.8) of the Lincoln County Animal
Ordinance shall be considered the Lincoln County Exotic Animals Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 1-5-2026)
§ 92.12.2 PURPOSE AND STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   The purpose of the Lincoln County Exotic Animals Ordinance is to protect the
general public from the inherent risk posed by dangerous exotic animals. These
risks included, but are not limited to, public health risks associated with the
spread of disease and safety risks of the general public that may arise from
the allowance of inherently dangerous animals for private ownership. Pursuant
to G.S. § 153A-121, the county is authorized to regulate, restrict or prohibit
the possession or harboring of animals which are dangerous to persons or
property.
(Ord. passed 1-5-2026)
§ 92.12.3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Lincoln County Exotic Animals Ordinance, the
following terms, words and their derivations shall have the meaning as defined
herein, unless the context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended.
   CROCODILIAN. Any species of the Order Crocodilia, such as crocodiles,
alligators, caimans, and gavials.
   EXOTIC ANIMAL. Any (1) crocodilian, (2) inherently dangerous arachnid, (3)
inherently dangerous exotic mammal, (4) large constricting snake, (5) venomous
reptile, (6) animal that would ordinarily be confined to a zoo, or (7) any
mammal designated by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC), the Department of
Agriculture or any other national or state public health protection agencies as
embargoed and prohibited. EXOTIC ANIMAL shall not include any animal that is
specifically excluded in § 92.12.4.
   INHERENTLY DANGEROUS ARACHNID. All members of Class Arachnida which, due to
their inherent nature, may be considered dangerous to humans, including only
arachnids in:
      (1)   Order Araneae (only spiders which are venomous and their venom is
considered medically significant, and not including tarantulas); and
      (2)   Order Scorpionida (all scorpions which are venomous and their venom
is considered medically significant).
   INHERENTLY DANGEROUS EXOTIC MAMMAL. Any member of the Canidae, Felidae,
Ursidae, or Elephantidae families or any member of the order Primates,
excluding humans, including hybrids thereof, which, due to their inherent
nature, may be considered dangerous to humans, are exotic animals, and include,
but are not limited to, any or all of the following orders and families,
whether bred in the wild or in captivity, and any or all hybrids thereof (all
animals listed in parenthesis are intended as examples and shall not be
construed as an exhaustive list or limit the generality of each group of
animals unless otherwise specified):
      (1)   Order Artiodactyla (such as hippopotami and giraffes);
      (2)   Order Carnivora, which includes:
         (a)   Family Felidae (such as lions, tigers, panthers, leopards,
jaguars, ocelots, and servals);
         (b)   Family Canidae (such as such as wolves and jackals);
         (c)   Family Ursidae (all bears);
         (d)   Family Mustelidae (such as weasels, martins and minks);
         (e)   Family Procyonidae (such as coatis);
         (f)   Family Hyaenidae (all hyenas); and
         (g)   Family Viverridae (such as civets, genets and mongooses).
      (3)   Order Edentatia (such as anteaters, armadillos, and sloths);
      (4)   Order Marsupialia (such as kangaroos and wallabies);
      (5)   Order Perissodactyla (such as rhinoceroses and tapirs, but not
horses, donkeys, or mules);
      (6)   Order Primates (such as lemurs, monkeys, chimpanzees, baboons,
gorillas, and all other nonhuman primates);
      (7)   Order Proboscidae (all elephants); and
      (8)   Order Rodentia (including capybara).
   LARGE CONSTRICTING SNAKE. Reticulated python, Python reticulatus; Burmese
python, Python molurus; African rock python, Python sebae; amethystine python,
Morelia amethistina; and green anaconda, Eunectes murinus; or any of their
subspecies or hybrids.
   OWNER. This term shall have the same meaning as set forth in § 92.03. For
the purposes of this Exotic Animals Ordinance, OWNER shall also include one who
allows an exotic animal to remain in, be lodged, fed, given shelter or refuge
within the OWNER'S home, store, yard, enclosure, accessory structure, abandoned
vehicle or building, place of business or any other premises in which the
person or entity resides has control of.
   VENOMOUS REPTILE. All members of the class Reptilia including their
taxonomic successors, subspecies, or any hybrid thereof, regardless of surgical
alteration, determined to have the potential to cause serious human injury due
to the toxic effects of their venom or poison, and includes all venomous
reptiles of the class Reptilia belonging to the families:
      (1)   Family Elapidae (all species, including but not limited to coral
snakes, cobras and mambas);
      (2)   Family Crotalidae (all species, including but not limited to pit
vipers);
      (3)   Family Viperidae (all species, including but not limited to
cottonmouths);
      (4)   Family Hydrophiidae (all species, including but not limited to sea
snakes);
      (5)   Family Colubridae, but only those belonging to the following:
         (a)   The genus Rhabdophis (including but not limited to keelback
snakes);
         (b)   The genus Balanophis (including but not limited to Sri Lanka
blossom krait);
         (c)   The genus Macropisthodon;
         (d)   The genus Boiga (including but not limited to cat-eyed snakes);
         (e)   The genus Dispholidus (including but not limited to boomslang);
         (f)   The genus Thelotornis (including but not limited to twig snake);
and
         (g)   The genus Thrasops;
      (6)   Atractaspididae (all species, including but not limited to mole
vipers); and
      (7)   Family Nactricidae (only keelback snakes).
(Ord. passed 1-5-2026)
§ 92.12.4 EXEMPTIONS AND ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The prohibition set forth in § 92.12.5 shall not apply to:
      (1)   Veterinary clinics in possession of any inherently dangerous exotic
animal for the treatment or rehabilitation of the animal;
      (2)   Any institution operated under licensure and regulation of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA);
      (3)   Any institution accredited by the American Zoo and Aquarium
Association (AZA) or Zoological Association of America (ZAA);
      (4)   Any animal control authority or law enforcement officers acting
under the authority of this Exotic Animals Ordinance;
      (5)   Persons temporarily transporting any inherently dangerous exotic
animal(s) through Lincoln County, providing that such transport shall not be
longer than 24 hours, and the animal(s) is at all times maintained within a
confinement sufficient to prevent its escape;
      (6)   Any licensed or accredited research medical institution or
education institution;
      (7)   Any person owning or harboring an animal that is indigenous to
North Carolina or Lincoln County and said animals are regulated and subject to
the requirements for captivity permits under the rules of the North Carolina
Wildlife Resources Commission as contained in 15A N.C.A.C. 10H, or any
successor rules and regulations thereto;
      (8)   Any person owning or harboring an animal that is regulated as a
restricted species and subject to the requirements for restricted species
permits under the rules of the North Carolina Wildlife Resources Commission as
contained in 15A N.C.A.C. 10B and 15A N.C.A.C. 10C, or any successor rules and
regulations thereto; and
      (9)   Any person owning or harboring an inherently dangerous exotic
animal that is eligible for permitting under § 92.12.5.
   (B)   Exempted animals. The following animals shall not be considered an
inherently dangerous exotic animal for the purpose of this Exotic Animals
Ordinance and shall be excluded from the definition set forth in § 92.12.3. Any
animals listed in parenthesis are not an exhaustive list and shall serve as
only examples.
      (1)   The species Homo sapiens (humans);
      (2)   All domestic dogs, but not hybrids with wolves, coyotes, or
jackals;
      (3)   All domestic cats, but not hybrids with ocelots or margays;
      (4)   The species Equus caballas (domestic horses);
      (5)   The species Equus asinus (asses, donkeys);
      (6)   The following members of the sub-family Bovine: the species Bos
taurus (cattle), the genus Bison (American buffalo), and the genus Bubalus
(water buffalo);
      (7)   The species Ovis ammon aries (sheep);
      (8)   The species Capra hircus (goats);
      (9)   The subspecies Sus scrofa domestica (swine);
      (10)   Domesticated races of the species Gallus gallus or Meleagris
gallopavo (poultry);
      (11)   Domesticated races of the species Mesocricetus auratus (golden
hamsters);
      (12)   Domesticated races of the subspecies Cavia aperea porcellus
(guinea pigs);
      (13)   Domesticated races of rats and mice (white or albino, trained,
laboratory reared);
      (14)   Domesticated races of the species Chinchillas lanigera
(chinchillas);
      (15)   Domesticated races of the species Oryctolagus cuniculus (rabbits);
      (16)   Domesticated species of the family Camelid (including camels,
llamas, and alpacas);
      (17)   All captive-bred members of the species of the families
Psittacidae (parrots, parakeets), Anatidae (ducks), Fringillidae (finches),
Columbidae (doves and pigeons), and Ratite (flightless birds, including
ostriches, emus, and rheas);
      (18)   All captive-bred members of the species Serinus canaria of the
class Aves (canaries);
      (19)   Domesticated races of the species Carassius auratus (goldfish);
      (20)   Captive-bred members of the superorder Teleostei of the class
Osteichthyes (common freshwater and salt-water aquarium fish);
      (21)   Captive-bred, non-venomous or non-poisonous members of the
suborder Serpentes (snakes);
      (22)   Captive-bred members of the suborder Cryptodira (turtles);
      (23)   All species of the class Insecta (insects) not considered life-
threatening to humans, specifically including, but not limited to, Apis
mellifera (common honeybee);
      (24)   All species of the class Arachnida (spiders, scorpions, and
related) not considered life-threatening to humans;
      (25)   Domesticated races of the family Mustelidae (ferrets);
      (26)   Domesticated races of the family Marsupialia (sugar gliders); and
      (27)   Any other animal determined by Animal Services Director to be
exempted from this Exotic Animals Ordinance. The Director may not exempt an
animal from this Exotic Animals Ordinance that is specifically prohibited
within the terms of this Exotic Animals Ordinance. Any animal exempted
hereunder shall a lso be approved by the County Manager.
   (C)   Reporting and annual permit required. Any animal that is permitted to
be present in Lincoln County under divisions (A)(1) through (A)(9) above shall
still be required to:
      (1)   Annual exempt permit. Any owner or possessor of an exotic animal
that is owning or possessing within Lincoln County, for more than 48 hours,
shall be required to obtain an exempt permit from Lincoln County Animal
Services. To obtain and renew an exempt permit, the owner or possessor shall
provide the following information:
         (a)   Name, address and telephone number of the owner(s);
         (b)   The identifying information for each animal that is located on
the owner or possessor's property for which the permit is being issued for
shall include:
            1.   Type of animal (scientific and common name);
            2.   Age of animal;
            3.   Sex of animal; and
            4.   A picture of each animal being permitted;
         (c)   Name and telephone number for veterinarian of animal(s), and a
letter from said veterinarian addressing if the animal is in good health and is
suitable or eligible for vaccinations; and
         (d)   Property address for where the animal(s) will be housed.
      (2)   A written contingency plan which provides:
         (a)   The responsible party for taking ownership of the animal(s) in
the case that the owner or possessor dies or becomes incapable of caring for
the animal(s), and contact information for that individual;
         (b)   Detailed plan of evacuation during a natural disaster;
         (c)   Detailed plan of transport procedures within or outside the
boundaries of Lincoln County; and
         (d)   Detailed plan for the capture of the grandfathered animal(s) in
the case of an escape. This plan must include the immediate notification of
Lincoln County Animal Services and Lincoln County 911. This plan shall also
include assurances that all necessary equipment intended to be used is
available.
      (3)   A copy of any license or allowance provided by the USDA, AZA, or
N.C. Wildlife Resources Commission for the Exotic Animal which allows for the
animals' exemption under division (A).
   (D)   Additional insurance requirement. Any ownership that is exempted under
division (A) above which allows for the public to enter on to their property
for viewing of exotic animals shall obtain insurance for the property upon
where the exotic animals are located and/or viewed in the amount of $1,000,000,
with Lincoln County named as an additional insured. Proof of said insurance
shall be provided to Lincoln County Animal Services annually, or upon renewal.
(Ord. passed 1-5-2026)
§ 92.12.5 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION.
   Except as otherwise permitted in this Exotic Animals Ordinance, it shall be
unlawful for a person to import into, possess, keep, purchase, have custody or
control of, reproduce or sell within Lincoln County, by any means, an exotic
animal unless otherwise permitted herein. A violation of this section shall be
considered a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to civil penalties in an amount of
$500 per exotic animal for each violation. Each day that the exotic animal
remains in Lincoln County shall be considered an additional offense.
(Ord. passed 1-5-2026)
§ 92.12.6 PRE-EXISTING EXOTIC ANIMALS.
   Any exotic animal that is owned or harbored in Lincoln County on February 4,
2026 and has, or would have been issued, a current permit issued by Lincoln
County Animal Services pursuant to the previous version of § 92.12, shall be
entitled to remain in Lincoln County subject to the following:
   (A)   Permitting for pre-existing exotic animals. An individual owning or
possessing a pre-existing exotic animal (referred to herein as a "grandfathered
animal") shall be required to submit within 90 days of the adoption of this
Exotic Animals Ordinance, an application for grandfathered permit from Lincoln
County Animal Services.
   (B)   Application for grandfathered permit. The application for a
grandfathered permit shall be provided by Lincoln County Animal Services and
shall contain, at a minimum, the following information and additional
requirements:
      (1)   Name, address and telephone number of the owner(s);
      (2)   The identifying information for each grandfathered animal that is
located on the owner's property for which the permit is being issued for shall
include:
         (a)   Type of animal (scientific and common name);
         (b)   Age of animal;
         (c)   Sex of animal; and
         (d)   A picture of each animal being permitted;
      (3)   Name and telephone number for veterinarian of the grandfathered
animal(s), and a letter from said veterinarian addressing if the grandfathered
animal is in good health and is suitable/eligible for vaccinations;
      (4)   Property address for where the grandfathered animal(s) will be
housed, if not at the primary residence of the owner; and
      (5)   A written contingency plan which provides:
         (a)   The responsible party for taking ownership of the grandfathered
animal(s) in the case that the owner dies or becomes incapable of caring for
the animal(s), and contact information for that individual;
         (b)   Detailed plan of evacuation during a natural disaster;
         (c)   Detailed plan of transport procedures within or outside the
boundaries of Lincoln County; and
         (d)   Detailed plan for the capture of the grandfathered animal(s) in
the case of an escape. This plan must include the immediate notification of
Lincoln County Animal Services and Lincoln County 911. This plan shall also
include assurances that all necessary equipment intended to be used is
available.
      (6)   Additional requirements for crocodilian, large constricting snake
and venomous reptiles. In addition to the requirements set forth herein, any
owner of a crocodilian, large constricting snake and venomous reptiles must
provide:
         (a)   A copy of the written safety protocol and escape recovery plan
as required by G.S. Ch. 14, Art. 55.
         (b)   Certification of compliance with state law. Each owner shall be
required to attest under penalty of perjury that they are in compliance with,
and will remain in compliance with, G.S. Ch. 14, Art. 55.
      (7)   Inspection prior to issuance. Prior to the issuance of a permit
hereunder, the Animal Services Director shall inspect the premises to confirm
that, to the best of their knowledge, all containments are sufficient to
properly contain the grandfathered animal and prevent escape and that all
requirements under G.S. Ch. 14, Art. 55 are met.
   (C)   Issuance of permit. Following receipt of a complete application and
certification as required hereunder, payment of the related fee, and a
successful inspection by Animal Services, the Animal Services Director shall
issue a permit under this section, unless grounds for denial exist, as follows:
      (1)   Permit for inherently dangerous exotic mammals and crocodilians. A
permit issued to the owner of an inherently dangerous exotic mammal or
crocodilian shall be specific to each animal and shall not be issued based on
the number of animals within their possession. Any future renewal shall be
limited to the specific mammal or crocodilian.
      (2)   Permit for large constricting snake, venomous reptiles, or
inherently dangerous arachnids. A permit issued to the owner of a large
constricting snake, venomous reptiles or arachnids shall be issued to the owner
based on the number of animals in their possession at the time of issuance.
This shall be the number permitted to remain under any future renewal.
   (D)   Annual renewal. Any permit issued hereunder shall be issued for a term
of one year. Within 30 days of the renewal date, the owner may apply for the
renewal of the permit which shall contain the same information, and all also
include information of any change in grandfathered animal(s), including death
of said animal.
   (E)   Initial and annual renewal fee. The fee required to be paid for the
allowance of any grandfathered animal hereunder shall be adopted in the Lincoln
County Fee Schedule. The Animal Services Director shall not have the authority
to waive or decrease the fee without express written consent of the County
Manager.
   (F)   Denial or revocation of permit. The Animal Services Director shall
have the authority to deny or revoke a permit issued hereunder for the
following reasons:
      (1)   Any disregard or direct violation of this Exotic Animals Ordinance;
      (2)   The owner has failed to pay fees and penalties required hereunder;
      (3)   The owner has failed to maintain permitting required hereunder and/
or has failed to maintain a federal or state license to own, possess, or harbor
the grandfathered animal;
      (4)   The owner has failed to have the grandfathered animal current on
vaccines (if applicable);
      (5)   The owner has substantially misrepresented or made false statements
to Lincoln County Animal Services in connection with keeping, owning,
harboring, or possessing the animal(s);
      (6)   The owner has failed or refused to allow Lincoln County Animal
Services to inspect the enclosure or confinement facility during any scheduled
or non-scheduled visit;
      (7)   The owner has failed or refused to confine or restrain the animal
(s) permitted; or
      (8)   The owner has failed or refused to give Animal Services immediate
notice of the escape of the animal(s) permitted.
      (9)   Automatic revocation upon death. Upon the death of an inherently
dangerous exotic mammal or crocodilian, the permit shall be automatically
revoked in regard to that specific grandfathered animal unless said permit is
based on the number of animals, and not a specific animal.
   (G)   Death of grandfathered inherently dangerous exotic mammal or
crocodilian. Upon the death of a crocodilian or inherently exotic dangerous
mammal, the owner shall not be permitted or eligible to obtain a new
crocodilian or inherently dangerous exotic mammal as a replacement. The owner
shall notify Lincoln County Animal Services immediately of the death of said
animal.
   (H)   Additional animals; breeding prohibited. The owner of any
grandfathered animal permitted to remain in Lincoln County under the provisions
of this Exotic Animals Ordinance shall be prohibited from acquiring any
additional exotic animals to be housed in Lincoln County subject to the terms
of the permit limits set forth in division (C) above. If any grandfathered
animal shall breed, then any animal born therefrom that is outside the limits
set forth in the permit shall be removed from Lincoln County within 30 days of
the nationally recognized weening period of the specific type of animal.
   (I)   Microchip of grandfathered animals. In addition to the permitting
requirement under this section, any grandfathered animal that is considered an
inherently dangerous exotic mammal shall be required to be microchipped within
90 days of the issuance of a grandfathered permit. Failure to do so shall
result in revocation of the permit.
   (J)   Annual inspections for grandfathered animals. On a yearly basis,
Animal Services staff shall schedule visits and routine inspections of all
properties that are permitted under this section. Animal Services staff shall
confirm that all requirements under G.S. Ch. 14, Art. 55 are met (if
applicable), and all other requirements under this Exotic Animals Ordinance
have been met. Failure to meet those requirements shall result in the issuance
of a citation and ten days to resolve the deficiency. Failure to resolve within
that timeframe may result in the revocation of said permit.
   (K)   Quarterly reporting required. On a quarterly schedule that shall be
established by the Animal Services Director, the owner shall provide a list of
all grandfathered animals remaining in the possession of the owner.
(Ord. passed 1-5-2026)
§ 92.12.7 ADDITIONAL PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Unlawful release. It shall be unlawful for the release or abandonment
of an exotic animal within Lincoln County intentionally or for the purpose of
meeting those requirements set forth in § 92.12.5.
   (B)   Prohibited in public. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity,
even those exempted from the prohibition under § 92.12.5, to carry or possess
outside of the confines of the property permitted, any exotic animal. This
shall include transporting or carrying any exotic animal on government owned
property and privately owned property where the public is permitted to enter
including, but not limited to shopping centers, restaurants, and the like.
   (C)   Exhibition prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity,
unless specifically permitted to do so by a federal or state issued permit, to
operate as an exhibitor or to further allow the public on to the property where
any exotic animal is located for viewing or interactions with said animals.
   (D)   Penalty. Violation of any prohibition in divisions (A) through (C)
above shall be punishable as a Class 3 misdemeanor, and a person may be charged
with a violation of more than one division herein. ln addition to criminal
enforcement of this section, any person found to be in violation of this
section shall be subject to a civil penalty in the amount of $500 for each
division. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 1-5-2026)
§ 92.12.8 IMPOUNDMENT AND/OR DISPOSITION OF INHERENTLY DANGEROUS EXOTIC
ANIMALS.
   The following provisions govern the impoundment and/or disposition of exotic
animals within Lincoln County in contravention of this Exotic Animals
Ordinance:
   (A)   Impoundment. The Animal Services Department may immediately take
custody of an exotic animal if the Animal Control Department determines in its
discretion that it has facilities sufficient to safely house the animal and
that the impoundment can be undertaken without injury to persons or property.
The owner shall be liable for the costs of capture, placement, and care for the
exotic animal from the time the attempt to capture begins or impoundment occurs
(whichever happens first) until the time the animal has been relocated to an
approved facility as set forth hereunder, or has been returned to the owner/
possessor (in the case of an exempt entity or person), or has been destroyed.
Recovery of said costs may be in the form of civil penalties.
      (1)   Bond or deposit. If an exotic animal is impounded as set forth
herein, the owner must, within 72 hours of impoundment, post a bond or cash
deposit with Lincoln County in an amount sufficient to guarantee payment of all
reasonable expenses incurred and expected to be incurred in capturing, caring
for, and providing shelter for the animal. Any bond shall be approved by the
Finance Director, or their designee, prior to acceptance.
         (a)   Reasonable expenses. Reasonable expenses shall include, but are
not limited to, the estimated cost of feeding, medical care and boarding for a
period of no less than 30 days, plus the cost associated with the relocation of
the animal as set forth hereunder.
         (b)   Relocation. The bond or deposit shall not prevent Animal
Services from relocating the animal at any time, provided that, upon such
relocation, the Animal Services Director shall recover under the bond or
deposit only the sums actually incurred in connection with the expenses.
         (c)   Extension. Animal Services may, in its discretion, keep the
animal under its impoundment for a period of not more than 60 days if the
possessor/owner has made a deposit or bond sufficient to cover said timeframe.
         (d)   Calculation of bond or deposit. In all cases, the amount of the
bond or deposit shall be determined by Animal Services and shall be based on
the current rate of feed, the estimated cost to provide medical care for, and
to house the animal. In addition, it should also include an expected cost to
relocate the animal and any costs incurred for capturing the animal, if
applicable.
      (2)   Compliance with bond or deposit. If an exotic animal is impounded
and the owner successfully complies with the provision of a bond or deposit (as
required herein), then the Director, or their designee, shall attempt to find
proper and safe housing for said animal outside of Lincoln County through
placement of the animal with an institution or location with the proper
accreditation or licensure to accept the animal into their care.
      (3)   Non-compliance with bond or deposit. If an exotic animal is
impounded and the owner does not comply with the provision of a bond or deposit
(as required herein), then the Director, or their designee, may, in their
discretion, attempt to find proper and safe housing for the animal outside of
Lincoln County, but is not required to do so.
      (4)   Exempted ownership under § 92.12.4(A). Any owner that is exempted
pursuant to § 92.12.4(A) shall not be required to place a bond or deposit as
set forth in divisions (A)(1) through (3) immediately above. However, any costs
incurred by the county for the capture and/or impoundment of the animal shall
be paid to Lincoln County prior to return of the animal, if all of the
following criteria are met:
         (a)   The impounded animal escaped or was released from an exempt
entity or person; and
         (b)   The animal can safely be impounded and returned to the exempt
entity or person or can safely be recaptured by said entity or person; and
         (c)   The exempt entity or person has taken reasonably sufficient
steps to assure that the animal will not escape or be released in the county
again; and
         (d)   The animal has not previously escaped or been released in the
county.
   (B)   Animal to remain in care of possessor. If the Animal Services
Director, or their designee, determines that the exotic animal cannot be
captured and impounded by the Animal Services Department, the Director may
authorize and direct the owner/possessor to retain the animal and within a
period of not more than 30 days, relocate the animal to proper and safe housing
located outside of Lincoln County with an institution or location with the
proper accreditation or licensure to accept the animal into their care.
      (1)   Limited applicability. This provision shall only be available if
the exotic animal has not caused injury to persons or property, and that the
possessor/owner has facilities sufficient to safely house the animal in a way
that prevents said animal from escape or causing any such injury during the
period for when it is being relocated.
      (2)   Non-waiver of penalties. The decision of the Animal Services
Director to allow for the owner/possessor to retain the animal shall not in any
way constitute a waiver of any civil penalties associated with the violation of
§ 92.12.5, and said civil penalties shall continue to accrue daily until the
animal is adequately relocated. In addition, this shall not waive the rights of
the county for criminal enforcement any violation of this Exotic Animals
Ordinance.
   (C)   Destruction of exotic animal. Unless otherwise prohibited by the
Federal Endangered Species Act or any other applicable federal or state law,
the Director may immediately destroy an exotic animal in a humane manner if:
      (1)   It is determined that the exotic animal cannot be taken into
custody or impounded without injury to person or property; or
      (2)   The owner of the exotic animal fails to timely post the bond or
cash deposit as required herein; or
      (3)   Proper and safe housing cannot be found for the exotic animal as
set forth herein;
      (4)   The inherently exotic animal has previously escaped or been
released from an exempt entity or person within the last year and poses a risk
to person or property.
(Ord. passed 1-5-2026)
§ 92.13 DISPOSITION OF DECEASED ANIMALS.
   Animal Services will investigate allegations of improper disposal of animals
and will coordinate with the County Health Department for concerns on public
health and safety. The County Health Department will provide consultation for
disposal efforts to the responsible party.
   (A)   Deceased domestic animals. The owner of a domesticated animal that
dies from any cause must bury the animal in accordance with N.C.G.S. § 106-403.
   (B)   Deceased animals in the road. The Department of Transportation shall
remove deceased animals from the road pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 136-18.
   (C)   Deceased animals when owner unknown. The Animal Services Officer will
make every effort to locate the owner of the deceased animal, and cause him/her
to dispose of the animal in compliance with N.C.G.S. § 106-403. When the
animal's owner cannot be determined, the owner of the land where the animal is
located will be responsible for the disposal of the deceased animal.
   (D)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4, and in addition to criminal enforcement
the violator shall be subject to civil penalties as defined in §
92.99. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021; Ord. passed 3-21-2022; Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.14 IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   Impoundment. Domesticated or exotic animals may be impounded when
found at large, determined to be stray, or upon any exigent circumstances
deemed necessary by the Animal Services Director or designee.
   (B)   Notice to owner of impounded animal. Animal Services will make every
reasonable effort to attempt to contact animal owners where an owner may be
suspected, or owner information exists.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 92.15 DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
   Animals in the custody of Animal Services will be disposed of as follows:
   (A)   Stray animals. Stray animals will be held for a period of 96 hours to
allow owners to reclaim the animals pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 19A-32.1.
      (1)   Cats deemed to be feral by the Animal Services Director or designee
will be held for a period of 72 hours. For the purposes of this section, feral
shall mean a domesticated feline that is unsocialized and unclaimed but lives
within the community.
   (B)   Reclaim of animals. Animals can be reclaimed by owners for fees in
accordance with the Lincoln County fee schedule. The owner of an impounded
animal shall be entitled to redeem such animal, except as provided in this
chapter, upon the payment of all redemption fees, and upon furnishing proof of
ownership. Animals cannot be reclaimed without proof of a current rabies
vaccine, or a rabies vaccine given by Animal Services Certified Rabies
Vaccinators (CRVs).
      (1)   In addition to this, dogs shall be required to wear rabies
vaccination tags upon reclaim pursuant to N.C.G.S. § 130A-190.
   (C)   Failure to reclaim. If an animal is not reclaimed after 96 hours, then
the animal will be made available for adoption, transfer to a rescue group, or
euthanasia per N.C.G.S. § 19A-32.1, and shall become property of Lincoln County
Animal Services.
   (D)   Owner surrender. Owner surrendered animals with proof of ownership
will be made available for disposition after a period of 24 hours, unless the
24-hour period has been waived by the owner.
   (E)   Nothing in this section shall prevent an animal that is seriously ill
or injured from being euthanized for humane reasons prior to the end of stray
hold per N.C.G.S. § 19A-32.1.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021; Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.16 RECORD KEEPING.
   Animal Services shall be responsible for properly keeping and providing any
and all public records regarding its operation of the animal shelter and Field
Services (occasionally referred to as Animal Control) as determined by N.C.G.S.
Chapter 132.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021; Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.17 RELATION TO OTHER LAWS.
   (A)   Hunting laws. Nothing in this chapter is intended to be in conflict
with the laws of the State of North Carolina regulating, restricting,
authorizing or otherwise affecting dogs while used in hunting, but this
exception applies only while the dogs are under the control of the owner, or
competent person, and are actually lawfully being used for hunting, or training
for hunting in compliance with applicable statutes, regulations, or ordinances.
This chapter should be read and enforced consistent with any such laws.
   (B)   Legal veterinary activities. Hospitals, clinics and other premises
operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are
exempt from the provisions of this chapter except for the provisions relating
to cruelty to animals and rabies control.
   (C)   Wildlife and research laws. The provisions of this chapter shall not
apply to the keeping of wild and dangerous animals as follows, provided, such
keeping is in all respects in compliance with applicable federal and state
rules and regulations:
      (1)   Animals used for teaching and/or research purposes.
      (2)   Wildlife rehabilitators licensed by the state or the federal
government to provide such services.
   (D)   Livestock laws. Nothing in this chapter is intended to be in conflict
with the laws of the State of North Carolina regulating livestock. This chapter
should be read and enforced consistent with any such laws.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021)
§ 92.18 ANIMAL SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Board creation. There is hereby created an Animal Services Advisory
Board to advise the County Commissioners, County Manager, and Animal Services
Director on the organization and operation of the Lincoln County Animal
Services Department.
   (B)   Board composition.
      (1)   The Advisory Board shall be composed of nine members appointed by
the Board of Commissioners. All members must reside at all times in the county.
This Board shall include one member from each of the following categories:
         (a)   Rural area member (must live in an unincorporated area);
         (b)   Veterinarian;
         (c)   Health Director or their designee;
         (d)   Hunter;
         (e)   Law Enforcement Officer;
         (f)   Urban area member (must live in an incorporated municipality);
         (g)   No Kill Philosophy Representative;
         (h)   Community Animal Group Representative; and
         (i)   Member at large.
      (2)   Each member appointed to serve on the Animal Services Advisory
Board is required to visit the Lincoln County Animal Shelter at least once per
year. Failure to do so shall result in a report from the Animal Services
Director to the Board of Commissioners. Any Board member failing to attend
regular meetings for at least 50% of the year shall also be reported to the
Board of Commissioners for review and consideration.
   (C)   Terms. For the initial terms, four of the members shall be appointed
for one-year terms, and five of the members shall be appointed for two-year
terms. All subsequent appointments shall be for two-year terms, so that the
membership appointments are staggered. Board members shall serve their complete
term unless removed for any reason by the Board of Commissioners. In the event
of any vacancy on the Board, the Board of Commissioners shall appoint a
replacement member.
   (D)   Successive terms. An Animal Services Advisory Board member may be
appointed to a maximum of three successive two-year terms but to no more than
two successive terms in the same seat.
   (E)   Selection of officers. The Board shall select in its first meeting of
each calendar year, a Chair, Vice-Chair, and Secretary. The Chair shall call
all regular and any special meetings of the Board, and shall preside at those
meetings. In the absence of the Chair, the Vice-Chair shall preside at any
regular or called meeting. In the absence of the Chair and the Vice-Chair, a
vote for an Interim Chair shall be had at the beginning of the meeting that
shall serve until the return of either the Chair or the Vice-Chair. A Clerk
shall be appointed by the Animal Services Director and shall be an employee of
the Animal Services Department.
   (F)   Animal Services responsibilities. The Animal Services Director or
their designee will attend all meetings of the Animal Services Advisory Board,
and shall be responsible for the proper advertisement of meetings, and the
recording of minutes. They also shall serve as the staff resource for the Board
in its research and deliberations. However, they shall have no vote on any
matter coming before the Board.
   (G)   Meetings. The Animal Services Advisory Board will meet on a quarterly
basis for review and discussion of any issues that it deems appropriate
regarding the operation of the Animal Services Department. Additional meetings
may be scheduled if requested by the County Commissioners, County Manager,
Animal Services Director, or the Chair of the Board.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021; Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.19 ABANDONMENT OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   Abandonment. A person commits the crime of abandonment if the person
intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with negligence leaves a domestic,
livestock, and/or an exotic animal at a location without providing minimum care
for a period exceeding 24 hours.
   (B)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in N.C.G.S. § 14-4. In addition to criminal enforcement
of this section, any person found to be in violation of this section shall be
subject to civil penalties as defined in §
92.99. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.20 INSPECTIONS, INTERFERENCE AND CONCEALMENT.
   (A)   Inspections. Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce
any of the sections of this chapter or other applicable law or whenever an
Animal Services Officer or the Director of Animal Services has probable cause
to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any violation
of this Lincoln County Animal Ordinance or other applicable law, the Animal
Services Officer(s) are empowered to enter and inspect such property at any
reasonable time and perform any duty imposed upon them by this chapter or other
applicable law, but only if the consent of the occupant or owner of the
property is freely given, an administrative search warrant or criminal search
warrant is obtained, or if legally recognized exigent circumstances exist, as
follows:
      (1)   If such property is occupied, an Animal Services Officer and/or
Director shall first present credentials to the occupant and request entry,
explaining the reasons for entry;
      (2)   If such property is unoccupied, an Animal Services Officer and/or
Director shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
person having control of the property, present proper credentials, and request
entry, explaining the reasons for entry;
      (3)   If such entry is refused or cannot be obtained because the owner or
other person having control or charge of the property cannot be found after due
diligence, an Animal Services Officer and/or the Animal Services Director may
obtain an appropriate warrant to conduct a search or inspection of the property
or seizure on the property.
      (4)   Notwithstanding any other section of this chapter, an Animal
Services Officer and/or Director shall have the authority to enter upon any
land to enforce this chapter or other applicable law if a violation of such law
is being committed in the presence of the Animal Services Officer or the Animal
Services Director and such entrance is otherwise allowed by law. Any such entry
upon private property shall not be deemed to be a trespass.
   (B)   Interference. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with,
hinder, molest, resist, or obstruct an Animal Services Officer and/or the
Animal Services Director while they are carrying out any duty created under
this chapter or other applicable law.
   (C)   Concealment of animal(s). It shall be unlawful for any person to
conceal, for the purpose of evading the permit requirement or rabies
inoculation requirement of this chapter or any other law, any unlicensed,
uninoculated or unpermitted animal from any employee of the Lincoln County
Animal Services.
   (D)   Concealment of license, permit, or rabies inoculation. It shall be
unlawful for any person to refuse to show proof of a permit or a rabies
inoculation to any employee of the shelter upon request.
   (E)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in N.C.G.S. § 14-4. In addition to criminal enforcement
of this section, any person found to be in violation of this section shall be
subject to civil penalties as defined in §
92.99. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.21 PROTECTIVE MEASURES FOR THE CONTAINMENT OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   Circumstances requiring special preventive measures. The Director of
Animal Services, or their designee, shall have the authority to require the
owner or custodian of an animal to comply with specific preventive measures, as
described in division (B) of this section, whenever Animal Services has the
authority to seize the animal for possible forfeiture or when otherwise
authorized by this chapter. Preventive measures shall only be ordered after
taking into consideration the totality of the circumstances, including, but not
limited to, the following:
      (1)   Nature of the particular animal. The behavior, size, temperament,
breed, capacity for inflicting serious injury, number of animals or other such
similar factors that would be relevant to a determination of whether preventive
measures need to be imposed for a particular situation;
      (2)   Adequacy of confinement. The adequacy of the current enclosure or
confinement, if any;
      (3)   Immediate surrounding area. The likelihood that the conditions
pertaining to the particular animal and the animal's confinement are
detrimental to the safety or welfare of citizens or the peace and tranquility
of citizens in the immediate surrounding area;
      (4)   History and ability. The history of the animal and the animal's
owner in compliance or noncompliance with this chapter as well as the owner's
ability to adequately restrain the animal when considering all relevant
factors.
   (B)   Preventive measures. If an Animal Services Officer, in consultation
with the Director determines that the circumstances require special preventive
measures, the Director shall have the authority to require any or all of the
following:
      (1)   Appropriate, specific preventive measures which might include, but
are not limited to, the following: necessary repairs for any fence or
enclosure, measures to ensure that a gate will remain closed, a fence or secure
fence as described in this division or any other similar device that would
provide greater assurance for the confinement of the animal, all of which are
subject to being specifically approved for their adequacy by the shelter.
      (2)   A fence shall be at least a minimum of four feet high and shall
constitute a secure enclosure sufficient to contain the animal at all times.
The minimum size of the enclosure may be at least 100 square feet. If the
animal is over 15 inches at the shoulder or is deemed capable of climbing a
standard four-foot fence, the Animal Services Director may require a six-foot
fence. A secure fence means a fence, as immediately described above, that may
also be enclosed on all six sides, including the top. The bottom must be
concrete, unless the sides of the fence are buried one foot deep in a
hardpacked soil. Any reference to "fence" or "secure fence" shall be defined as
stated in this division. Preventive measures may also specifically include
mandatory spay/neuter for any animal that has been declared dangerous by
Lincoln County Animal Services.
      (3)   The owner microchip the animal at the owner's expense if that is
necessary for identification, investigative or enforcement purposes.
      (4)   The owner procure liability insurance in the amount of at least
$100,000 at the owner's expense or to have the animal microchipped and/or to
display a sign on the premises warning of the animal on the premises. The
shelter shall have the authority to require the owner to show signed, written
statements about maintaining the liability insurance, the designated enclosure
for the animal and the duty to notify Animal Services if the animal escapes,
and to require the owner to give the shelter the authority to seize and impound
the animal if the owner fails to comply with this division.
   (C)   Containment order. If an Animal Services Officer determines that
specific preventive measures must be complied with by the owner of an animal,
Animal Services shall make reasonable efforts to notify the owner of the
containment order. All containment orders shall be in writing and shall state
the reasons that preventive measures are required, shall identify the specific
preventive measures that must be implemented, and shall state the designated
time period within which to comply with the containment order. The Animal
Services Director, or their designee, shall have the authority to exercise
discretion for extensions of time if that is reasonable in view of the good-
faith progress of the owner in implementing the preventive measures.
   (D)   Failure to comply with containment order. It shall be unlawful for an
owner to fail to comply with a containment order within the designated time for
compliance stated in the written order or any extension thereof. Any person
found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of $250.
Each day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and the dog
may be subject to seizure under this chapter.
   (E)   Owner's appeal of containment order. The owner may submit in writing
an appeal to the Director's determination that division (A) of this section is
applicable to the owner's premises or submit in writing a challenge to the
specific preventive measures required by the Director within three business
days of the containment order being issued. The appeal must be filed with the
Dangerous Dog Appellate Board, and said Board shall hold a hearing on the
matter within ten days of the appeal being filed. Any appeal filed hereunder
shall be subject to the procedural requirements set forth in §
92.37. If the animal has been seized and the owner wishes to appeal the seizure
and potential forfeiture as well as challenge the containment order, both
matters may be addressed in the same hearing.
(Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.22 HARBORING STRAY ANIMALS.
   (A)   Harboring unlawful. Unless otherwise mandated by state law, it shall
be unlawful for any person, without the consent of an animal's owner or keeper,
to knowingly and intentionally harbor or keep in possession by confinement any
animal that does not belong to them.
   (B)   Reporting required. Any person in possession of a stray animal shall
fill out a report provided by Lincoln County Animal Services (in person or on
the website) within 72 hours to provide notice of the stray animal's
description and location or to arrange for intake. Upon receipt of the report,
Animal Services may take the animal and process it as provided for in this
chapter.
   (C)   Stray hold. The 96-hour stray hold shall not begin until the animal is
reported to Lincoln County Animal Services. Any person who gives away, sells or
allows an otherwise stray or abandoned animal to be adopted without first
surrendering the animal to Animal Services shall have no authority over the
animal and ownership shall remain with the previous owner to the extent the
previous owner is able to be identified.
   (D)   Removal of identification. It shall also be unlawful for any person
other than the owner or keeper of the animal to remove its collar, license tag,
or rabies tag, and shall be considered a Class 3 misdemeanor.
   (E)   Refusal to surrender. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to
surrender such an animal to an employee of the shelter upon demand and shall be
considered a Class 3 misdemeanor.
(Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.23 SEIZURE, FORFEITURE AND DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
   (A)   Authority to seize and forfeit animals. In addition to any other
authority or procedure authorized by this chapter or by any other law to seize
an animal, Lincoln County Animal Services Officers shall have the authority to
immediately seize and forfeit to the Animal Shelter any animal if, and only if,
the Animal Services Director, or their designee, has probable cause to believe
that the animal:
      (1)   Under the totality of the circumstances, is dangerous or
prejudicial to the public safety or public health and the county has issued a
probable cause notice on the animal pursuant to the Lincoln County Dangerous
Dog Ordinance (§§
92.35 through
92.43);
      (2)   Is the subject of a violation of the following sections of this
chapter:
         (a)   §
92.19;
         (b)   §
92.06;
         (c)   §
92.07;
         (d)   §
92.08;
         (e)   §
92.09;
         (f)   §
92.10; and
         (g)   §
92.12.
      (3)   Is the subject of a violation of this chapter that is punishable by
escalating civil penalties and the escalated penalty appropriate to the
specific violation includes seizure of the animal.
   (B)   General seizure procedures. The seizure of any animal under this
chapter shall be done in a manner consistent with state and federal law.
      (1)   Notice and holding period. Animal Services shall conduct reasonable
efforts to identify, locate, and notify the animal's owner prior to seizure.
The animal shall be held four business days, from the date notice is sent to
the owner or from the date of seizure if the owner cannot be identified or
located after reasonable efforts to do so. The notice, if sent, shall include
the following statements:
         (a)   An order to the animal's owner to contact the Animal Shelter
immediately.
         (b)   A brief statement of the date, location, and reason for the
seizure of the animal.
         (c)   A statement that the animal is subject to forfeiture within four
business days from the date the notice was sent, if the owner fails to respond
to the notice.
         (d)   A statement that a hearing will be held, at the owner's request,
to determine if the animal shall be forfeited.
         (e)   A statement of the methods by which the owner may contact the
Animal Shelter.
      (2)   Hearing. A hearing shall be held if the owner contacts the shelter
within the four business days and requested a hearing. The hearing shall be
conducted in the same manner and with the same remedies and consequences as
those set out in the Lincoln County Dangerous Dog Ordinance.
         (a)   If the violation that is the basis of the seizure is found to
have occurred, the Board shall have the authority to order the same remedies
available in the Lincoln County Dangerous Dog Ordinance for a potentially
dangerous dog.
         (b)   If a forfeiture is ordered, the animal may be placed for general
adoption to the public.
      (3)   Failure to contact. If the animal's owner fails to contact the
Animal Shelter and request a hearing within the four business days after the
notice is sent, the animal shall be forfeited to the Animal Shelter, and may
disposed of as provided for herein.
   (C)   Dangerous dogs. Any seizure of a dangerous dog or potentially
dangerous dog shall be consistent with the requirements set forth in the
Lincoln County Dangerous Dog Ordinance.
   (D)   Applicability. This section does not permit an Animal Services Officer
to enter onto the private property of an individual, without the individual's
permission, to seize an animal unless exigent circumstances exists that require
such action. Any entry onto private property shall be in accordance with all
applicable laws and regulations, and Animal Services Officers shall work with
the Lincoln County Sheriff’s Office or the Lincolnton Police Department, if
necessary.
(Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
§ 92.99 FEES AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Fees shall be charged in accordance with the Lincoln County fee
schedule adopted by the Lincoln County Board of Commissioners on an annual
basis, and as may be amended from time to time. Fees may be waived or reduced
by the Animal Services Director, their designee, or the County Manager at their
discretion, as allowed by law. If the offender fails to pay the penalties
within 20 days after having been cited, the county may recover the penalties in
a civil action in the nature of debt. In addition, the county may, in its
discretion, take all actions to prevent violations of this chapter and to
enforce the payment of any such fines including, but not limited to, civil
actions for injunctions, abatements, and monetary judgements for outstanding
fines, including, to the extent allowed by law, the county's court costs.
   (B)   Civil penalties. Any violation under the Lincoln County Animal
Ordinance shall be subject to criminal enforcement as stated herein, and shall
also be subject to the civil penalties established as follows:
 
Type of Citation                           Penalty Amount
Warning citation                           $0
First citation (following term of warning) $100 per day
Second citation                            $200 per day
Third citation                             $300 per day
Fourth citation                            $400 per day
Fifth and subsequent                       $500 per day
 
      (1)   Discretion of Officer. If the Animal Services Officer believes that
the violation is so extreme as to require the issuance of a first citation then
they shall be permitted to forego the warning citation, so long as said
decision is approved by the Animal Services Director, or their designee.
      (2)   Court action. If the offender fails to pay all civil penalties
within 20 days of a citation being issued, the county may recover said civil
penalties in a civil action in the nature of debt, which may include, but is
not limited to court action or debt setoff.
      (3)   Repeat violations. After having been cited for a violation of this
chapter, an offender shall be subject to escalating civil penalties for any
additional violations within the following 12-calendar-month period, with a
warning citation starting with $100 per day.
   (C)   Injunctive relief or equitable remedy. Notwithstanding the assessment
of civil penalties as provided above, the county may pursue a civil action
seeking a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement or other
equitable remedy against the offender of this chapter. The action may be in
addition to, and not in lieu of, civil penalties.
(Ord. passed 6-21-2021; Ord. passed 9-15-2025)
CHAPTER 93: ADDRESSING AND ROAD NAMING
Section
   
93.01   Definitions
   
93.02   Purpose and authority
   
93.03   Street addressing map
   
93.04   Numbering system
   
93.05   Road naming
   
93.06   Addressing
   
93.07   Posting requirements
   
93.08   Procedures
   
93.09   Road name signs
   
93.10   Street name changes
   
93.11   Nonconformities
 
   
93.99   Penalty
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Any
abbreviations not covered in this chapter will use standards put forth in
Appendix C of Postal Addressing Standards Publication 28, November 1997, as
revised.
   AVENUE (AVE). A major road that runs generally in an east/west direction.
   BOULEVARD (BLVD). An unusually wide street typically in residential areas;
often with central, dividing median.
   CIRCLE (CIR). A short road that returns to itself.
   COMMUNITY BOAT SLIP. A boat slip that is conveyed to a property owner by
deed, but does not necessarily adjoin the property owner’s waterfront or non-
waterfront property. A COMMUNITY BOAT SLIP is typically located where a group
of community boats are berthed or moored, or used for embarking or
disembarking.
   COURT (CT). A dead-end right-of-way often ending as a cul-de-sac.
   DOCK. A structure extending along the shoreline or out from the shoreline
into a body of water, to which boats may be berthed or moored.
   DRIVE (DR). A curving secondary road.
   HIGHWAY (HWY). A designated state or federal highway.
   INTERSTATE (I#). A thoroughfare of the highest order and federally
designated as an INTERSTATE.
   LANE (LN). A short, private road that branches off another road and ends or
connects to another secondary road.
   LOOP (LOOP). A short road that starts and ends on the same street.
   PARKWAY (PKWY). A special scenic route or park drive.
   PIER.  A platform supported on pillars or girders, leading out from the
shore into a body of water, used as a landing stage for boats.
   PLACE (PL). A cul-de-sac or permanent dead-end road.
   PRIVATE ROAD. Any road (including an easement or right-of-way) which is not
maintained by a governmental entity or agency through the use of public funds.
Road name suffixes for PRIVATE ROADS include LANE and WAY.
   PUBLIC ROAD. Any road which is maintained by a governmental entity or agency
through the use of public funds.
   ROAD (RD). A well-traveled secondary road often connecting with a U.S. or
state primary highway. (Described in G.S. § 153A-238.)
   STREET (ST). A major road that runs generally in a north/south direction.
   STREET ADDRESS. A unique identifier for each addressable structure within
the county. The minimum adequate street address shall be defined as the
assigned structure number and the officially adopted road name. Where required
by this chapter, the STREET ADDRESS shall also include the assigned unit
designator.
   STRUCTURE. Any building, whether residential, commercial, industrial, or
institutional in nature and use.
   STRUCTURE NUMBER. The numerical portion of the street address, as assigned
by the Ordinance Administrator using the Official Street Name and Numbering Map
of the county.
   TRAIL (TRL). A local road that serves as a connector for larger roads.
   UNIT DESIGNATOR. The portion of the street address used to distinguish
individual units within the same structure.
   WAY (WAY). A minor private road that begins and ends on the same road.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2001; Ord. 2010-18, passed 12-6-2010; Ord. passed 9-11-2022)
§ 93.02 PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly assignment
of street addresses to protect the safety and welfare of the general public by
facilitating the location of individual dwellings and businesses by emergency
response personnel.
   (B)   The County Manager shall be the administrator of this chapter and
shall have the authority to designate other staff member(s) to act as
administrator(s). The Ordinance Administrator or his or her designee(s)
(hereinafter referred to as the Ordinance Administrator) shall have sole
authority to verify, modify, or assign street addresses, and to enforce the
requirements of this chapter as provided herein.
   (C)   Administrative review requests may be submitted to the County Manager
or his or her designee(s). A further appeal may be submitted to the Board of
Commissioners. Each appeal shall be in writing and addressed to the appropriate
authority.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2001; Ord. 2010-18, passed 12-6-2010)
§ 93.03 STREET ADDRESSING MAP.
   (A)   The official structure numbering map maintained by the Ordinance
Administrator is hereby adopted as the official street name and structure
numbering map of the county. All street addresses assigned shall be assigned in
accordance with this map, and no other street address or portion thereof shall
be used or displayed in the county, except those assigned in accordance with
the Official Street Name and Structure Numbering Map.
   (B)   The Official Street Name and Structure Numbering Map shall be
accessible in all places where the county's electronic records and information
are normally accessible.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2001; Ord. 2010-18, passed 12-6-2010)
§ 93.04 NUMBERING SYSTEM.
   (A)   All roads, whether public or private, shall be numbered uniformly and
consecutively along the roadway centerline. Numbers shall be assigned along the
entirety of all roads.
   (B)   The origin point of the numbering system shall be located at the
Lincoln County Courthouse Building, where the Old U.S. Highway 321 and North
Carolina Highway 27 radiate from the Courthouse Square.
   (C)   The Old U.S. Highway 321 is hereby designated as the north/south
baseline and the North Carolina Highways 27 and 73 are designated as the east/
west baseline for the numbering system.
   (D)   All roads having a north/south orientation will be numbered from the
east/west baseline. All roads having an east/west orientation will be numbered
from the north/south baseline.
   (E)   All roads, both public and private, shall be named and numbered if
three or more addressable structures, including mobile homes, are located on
and accessed by them. At the discretion of the Ordinance Administrator roads
with two addressable structures may be named and numbered upon request by the
residents along the road.
   (F)   (1)   The initial number for a road shall be determined by measuring
the perpendicular distance in feet between the appropriate baseline (division
(C) above) and the nearest terminus of the road, dividing this distance by 25,
rounding to the nearest integer, multiplying by two, and adding 100 to this
product:
         (a)   I = (2 * INT((1.5D - 0.0000065D2)/20)) + 100; and
         (b)   Where:
            1.   D = perpendicular distance to appropriate baseline;
            2.   I = initial number for the road; and
            3.   INT(D/20) = round to the nearest integer.
      (2)   The Ordinance Administrator shall have the authority to adjust the
initial number for a road to prevent the duplication of addresses along a mail
delivery route or within a postal district. The Ordinance Administrator shall
also have the authority to make adjustments from time to time as needed in the
formula stated in this section.
   (G)   A pair of natural numbers shall be assigned for each 20 feet of
roadway centerline. Odd-natural numbers shall be assigned to the left side of
the road in the direction of increasing numbers (movement away from the
baseline or origin). Even-natural numbers shall be assigned to the right side
of the road in the direction of increase.
   (H)   One block shall be 1,000 feet in length along the roadway centerline
(50 twenty-foot sections), and shall consist of 100 consecutive numbers.
   (I)   For numbering purposes, road orientation (north/south or east/west)
shall be based on the overall direction of gain between the terminus points of
the road. If the road is oriented at or near 45 degrees to the baselines, the
Ordinance Administrator shall determine the orientation of the roadway in
accordance with his or her best judgment.
   (J)   The county numbering system shall take precedence over all other
systems, regardless of originating jurisdiction or other factors.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, however, this division (J) shall not apply to
numbering done by the City of Lincolnton within its jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2001; Ord. 2010-18, passed 12-6-2010; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 93.05 ROAD NAMING.
   (A)   The Ordinance Administrator shall have sole authority to approve road
names for new development within the county, subject to the requirements
herein.
   (B)   Names for proposed or newly constructed roads may be submitted by the
owner or developer for approval by the Ordinance Administrator. However, in the
event that a proposed or newly constructed road crosses over property not owned
by the submitting owner or developer, then a petition to name the proposed road
must be submitted in accordance with the provisions as set forth in §
93.10 of this chapter.
   (C)   The Ordinance Administrator shall maintain a database of existing road
names, such that duplicate, sound-alike, and deceptively similar road names are
neither assigned nor approved.
   (D)   Road names shall be chosen that relate to the scale, location, and
history of a project area.
   (E)   Road names shall be pleasant sounding, appropriate, easy to read, and
should add pride to home ownership.
   (F)   Large developments should use a single, significant category for road
naming; small developments should use the same category within the immediate
vicinity, which helps establish location identity.
   (G)   Numerical names; alphabetical names; and frivolous, complicated, or
undesirable names are unacceptable. Compound names shall be used rarely and
shall not be used for short roads.
   (H)   The following road name suffixes are allowed: Avenue (AVE), Boulevard
(BLVD), Circle (CIR), Court (CT), Drive (DR), Highway (HWY), Lane (LN), Loop
(LOOP), Parkway (PKY), Place (PL), Road (RD), Street (ST), Trail (TRL), and Way
(WAY). Private roads shall be assigned the suffix Trail, Lane, or Way. All
other suffixes shall be reserved for public roads. If a suffix is used which is
not listed herein, the standard applied for the suffix will be obtained from
Appendix C of the Postal Addressing Standards Publication 28, November 1997, as
revised.
   (I)   Roads that cross either baseline shall bear different names on each
side of the baseline to avoid duplicating addresses along that road, and to
preserve the integrity of the county's numbering system.
   (J)   Each road shall bear the same name and uniform numbering as outlined
herein, along the entirety of the road. Exclusions from this standard shall
include the following:
      (1)   Split routes, also known as "dog-leg" or offset intersections.
Split routes shall be treated as separate roads with different names and
numbering to preserve the integrity and continuity of the numbering system; and
      (2)   Impasses or sections of a road that are impassable. Different names
and numbering ranges shall be assigned to each portion of the road on either
side of the impasse to preserve the integrity and continuity of the numbering
system and to prevent efforts in the dispatch of emergency services.
   (K)   Existing roads that are extended shall carry the same road name and
numbering order as the road from which they are extended. An example of this
would be a road extended through a cul-de-sac into a new, existing, or
additional phase of a subdivision. Extensions of roads that change the
character of the road (for example, changing a dead end to a connecting street
or road) shall be the responsibility of the developer making the extension, and
the developer shall bear all costs associated with any changes that may be
necessitated by the extension.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2001; Ord. 2010-18, passed 12-6-2010 ; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 93.06 ADDRESSING.
   (A)   Each structure shall be assigned a structure number based on the
number of the appropriate segment of roadway centerline. The structure number
shall be determined by the line perpendicular to the road centerline, which
intersects the main access or entrance to the structure. The number of the
centerline segment at the point of perpendicular intersection shall be the
number of the structure.
   (B)   If development on a private road exceeds the minimum structure
regulation (see §
93.04(E)), the road shall be named and numbered and structures re-addressed
according to the requirements herein. In such event, the petition process (as
set forth in §
93.10) shall be followed.
   (C)   One structure number shall be assigned to each structure whose units
share a common building entrance or parking area.
      (1)   Each unit within the structure shall be assigned a unit designator
such as "suite."
      (2)   Allowed unit designators include apartment numbers for apartments,
and numbers for commercial buildings.
      (3)   The unit designator shall be a number, and shall not include
alphabetic characters.
   (D)   A unique structure number shall be assigned to each unit within a
structure which provides individual driveway access to each unit.
   (E)   Mobile homes shall be assigned individual street addresses in
accordance with the requirements herein. No unit designator shall be allowed in
the address of mobile homes.
   (F)   Unit designators shall be assigned in a logical manner, with
increasing unit numbers corresponding to increasing road centerline numbering
as much as possible.
   (G)   The road name shall be the name of the road from which a structure is
numbered.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2001; Ord. 2010-18, passed 12-6-2010 ; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 93.07 POSTING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Within 90 days after written notification by the Ordinance
Administrator of the assignment of or change of structure number for any
structure, the owner of the structure shall post the assigned structure number
in compliance with the requirements herein.
   (B)   All structure numbers shall be constructed of a durable material. The
color shall contrast with the color scheme of the structure and, if mounted on
glass, shall contrast with the background and be clearly visible.
   (C)   The minimum number size for a typical single-family or duplex
residential structure shall be three inches in height.
   (D)   The minimum number size for all other structures shall be six inches
in height.
   (E)   In all cases, a number size larger than the minimum size may be
required in any instance where the minimum size does not provide adequate
identification, as deemed appropriate by the Ordinance Administrator.
   (F)   For single-family residential or duplex structures, the structure
number shall be posted and maintained within a three-foot perimeter of the
front entrance of the structure, in a location visible and readable from the
road. As an alternative, the structure number may be posted on the mailbox for
the residence as long as the mailbox is located on the same side of the road as
the residence, and as long as the mailbox is a standalone box and is not in a
cluster of mailboxes. In such instance, the structure number must be
constructed of a reflective material and must be a minimum of three inches in
height.
   (G)   For all other structures, the structure number shall be posted on a
building face most readily visible from the road from which the number is
assigned. Unit designators shall be posted at each unit within a three-foot
perimeter of the front entrance of the unit.
   (H)   In the event that a structure or its posted number is not visible from
the road from which its number is assigned, as determined by the Ordinance
Administrator, the assigned structure number shall also be posted on the
property adjacent to the road at or near every driveway or access to the
structure, as deemed appropriate by the Ordinance Administrator. Again, as an
alternative the structure number may be posted on the mailbox for the
residence, as long as the mailbox is located on the same side of the road as
the residence and as long as the mailbox is a standalone box and is not in a
cluster of mailboxes. In such instance, the structure number must be
constructed of a reflective material and must be a minimum of three inches in
height.
   (I)   Following the posting of the assigned number as required herein, the
owner shall maintain the structure number at all times in compliance with the
requirements of this section. Structure numbers and unit designators, as viewed
from the public road, shall not be obstructed from view by landscaping, shrubs,
vegetation, saw doors, canopies, or any other plant or structure.
   (J)   For all waterborne structures, with the exception of community
boatslips, the street address assigned to the structure (including number and
road name) with which the dock or pier is associated shall be posted on a sign
on the waterborne improvement at the highest accessible point. If an addressed
structure does not exist on the parcel, then an address shall be assigned to
the waterborne structure. At such a time that a structure is placed on the
parcel, the structure shall inherit the assigned address. The street address
should be clearly visible from the water, with reflectivity to ensure
visibility at night. The minimum size of the sign containing the street address
shall be 12 inches in height and 18 inches in length, or 18 inches in height
and 12 inches in length. The sign shall be non-reflective blue in color and
contain reflective white lettering in a sans serif font, which should be a
minimum of two inches in height.
   (K)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense, and said violation may also be enforced as set forth
in §
93.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2001; Ord. 2010-18, passed 12-6-2010; Ord. passed 3-21-2022;
Ord. passed 9-11-2022)
§ 93.08 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   No street address shall be issued for any building or structure until
the owner or developer has been issued a building permit for the proposed
structure, or as directed by the Ordinance Administrator and/or the Director of
Planning and Inspections.
   (B)   Final approval for a certificate of occupancy of any structure or
building erected or repaired after the effective date of this chapter shall be
withheld until permanent and proper structure numbers have been posted in
accordance with the requirements herein.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2001; Ord. 2010-18, passed 12-6-2010)
§ 93.09 ROAD NAME SIGNS.
   (A)   For all roads (whether public or private) to which this chapter
applies, road name signs shall be installed at all intersections in conformance
with the standards and policies of the county, regardless of other existing
route markings.
   (B)   All road name signs shall be installed and maintained by the county
staff.
   (C)   Developers may install custom road name signs as long as such signs
meet the criteria of this chapter and receive the prior approval of the
Ordinance Administrator. The developer shall bear all costs of maintenance of
the custom signs and all costs of any replacement, change, or modification of
the signs.
   (D)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4. Each day a violation continues shall be
deemed a separate offense, and said violation may also be enforced as set forth
in §
93.99 herein.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2001; Ord. 2010-18, passed 12-6-2010; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 93.10 STREET NAME CHANGES.
   (A)   Any existing road within the county may be officially named or renamed
by the Board of Commissioners under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Upon petition by 67% of the property owners of record along the
road in question, and subsequent adoption of a resolution by the Board of
Commissioners;
      (2)   Upon recommendation by the Ordinance Administrator and subsequent
adoption of a resolution by the Board of Commissioners; or
      (3)   Upon adoption of a resolution by the Board of Commissioners.
   (B)   In the event of road naming or renaming, a proper and adequate public
hearing shall be scheduled and advertised in accordance with G.S. § 153A-239.1
or successor statute.
   (C)   In the event of changing a road name which neither duplicates nor
sounds deceptively similar to another road name, the petitioner shall submit
the following:
      (1)   A petition signed by 67% of the property owners along the road in
question;
      (2)   The current names and addresses of the property owners along the
road in question; and
      (3)   The petition fee set by the Board of Commissioners in its then-
current fee schedule.
   (D)   Upon certification by the Ordinance Administrator that the petition
meets the spirit and intent of this chapter and that all property owners have
been notified the Ordinance Administrator shall recommend the scheduling of a
public hearing in accordance with this section.
   (E)   Prior to the public hearing, the applicant shall deposit with the
county an amount equal to the fee set by the Board of Commissioners in its
then-current fee schedule for each sign blade which must be replaced excluding
the first sign blade regardless of the condition or ownership of the sign
blades.
   (F)   If a petition is determined to be incomplete or is withdrawn prior to
advertising for the public hearing required under this chapter, the application
fee shall be returned to the applicant.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2001; Ord. 2010-18, passed 12-6-2010)
§ 93.11 NONCONFORMITIES.
   It is recognized that, as of the date of adoption of this revised chapter, a
number of situations exist in which road names and/or numbering sequences do
not conform to the requirements of this chapter. It is the intent of this
chapter that no new nonconformities be created after the effective date of this
chapter. The Ordinance Administrator shall appoint a committee of county staff
to review known nonconformities in existing road names and numbering sequences
and to determine what, if any, remedial action to be taken to correct or
improve the nonconformities. The Ordinance Administrator shall decide whether
to accept, reject, or modify any recommendation not needing action by the Board
of Commissioners. For remedies needing action by the Board of Commissioners,
the committee shall present its recommendations to the Board, which shall then
decide whether to accepts reject, or modify the remedies.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2001; Ord. 2010-18, passed 12-6-2010)
§ 93.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor as provided by G.S. § 14-
4 and may be punished as provided therein. Each day the violation continues
after the owner has been notified of the violation shall constitute a separate
violation of this chapter. The maximum fine exceeds $50 and may be set by the
court in an amount not to exceed $500.
   (B)   Civil penalties may be imposed in accordance with the following
procedure:
      (1)   Initial notification of violation;
      (2)   If not corrected within ten days, a warning citation may be issued;
      (3)   If not corrected within seven days of issuance of a warning
citation, a second citation including the fine of $20 per day as allowed by
G.S. § 153A-123 (or successor statute) shall be imposed; and
      (4)   Each day shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Notification of violation must:
      (1)   Be issued by the Ordinance Administrator;
      (2)   Be in writing, directed by name to the owner of the structure; and
      (3)   Must set forth the action necessary for the offender to be in
compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. passed 4-16-2001; Ord. 2010-18, passed 12-6-2010)
CHAPTER 94: BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
   
94.01   Adoption of governing law
   
94.02   Adoption of building code
§ 94.01 ADOPTION OF GOVERNING LAW.
   (A)   The provisions of G.S. Chapter 160D, Article 11, as amended from time
to time, are hereby incorporated and adopted as the laws governing and applying
to building inspections, and all other related duties, within the boundaries of
the county.
   (B)   The provisions of G.S. Chapter 143, Article 9, as amended from time to
time, are hereby adopted as the laws governing and applying to building,
general remodeling and construction of all kinds within the boundaries of the
county.
(Ord. passed 6-19-2023)
§ 94.02 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.
   The following regulatory codes, all appendices, and any future amendments
thereto, established pursuant to G.S. Chapter 143, Article 9, are adopted and
incorporated herein as the laws governing and applying to building, general
remodeling and construction of all kinds in the county:
   (A)   2018 North Carolina State Building Code;
   (B)   2018 North Carolina State Energy Conservation Code;
   (C)   2018 North Carolina State Existing Building Code;
   (D)   2018 North Carolina State Fuel Gas Code;
   (E)   2018 North Carolina State Mechanical Code;
   (F)   2018 North Carolina State Plumbing Code;
   (G)   2018 North Carolina State Building Code Residential Code;
   (H)   The National Electric Code;
   (I)   2019 North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured Homes; and
   (J)   1994 Edition of Volume VIII, Modular Construction Regulations.
(Ord. passed 6-19-2023)
CHAPTER 95: FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
95.001   Title
   
95.002   Applicability
   
95.003   Authority and mission
   
95.004   State code and amendments
   
95.005   Jurisdiction
   
95.006   Effective date
   
95.007   Definitions and abbreviations
Permit, Application and Review
   
95.020   Definition
   
95.021   Permits required
   
95.022   Information required with applications
   
95.023   Plan review
   
95.024   Sprinkler/standpipe application; review and permits
   
95.025   Fire alarm system application; review and permits
   
95.026   Automatic fire suppression system permits
Permit Types
   
95.040   Generally
   
95.041   Storage tanks application; review and permits (commercial or
businesses)
   
95.042   Open burning (within 100 feet of a structure)
   
95.043   Fireworks permits for public display
   
95.044   Other permits
   
95.045   Operational permits
   
95.046   Construction permits
Fee Administration
   
95.060   Fees
   
95.061   Civil citation fees
General Regulations
   
95.075   Fire lanes
   
95.076   Fire hydrants
   
95.077   Hazardous materials disclosure
   
95.078   Display of address numbers
   
95.079   High-rack dry storage for boats, also known as high-piled combustible
storage and high-rack storage systems
   
95.080   Marinas, boatyards, yacht clubs, boat condominiums, docking
facilities, and all associated piers, docks, and floats
   
95.081   Key boxes
   
95.082   Smoke detectors (for rental property; landlords and tenants)
Haunted Houses
   
95.095   Generally
   
95.096   Permit required
   
95.097   Permit-issuance procedure
   
95.098   Inspection and revocation of permit
   
95.099   Regulations regarding the use of Halloween haunted houses
Decorative Materials and Pyrotechnics
   
95.110   Generally
Violations
   
95.125   Notice of violation
   
95.126   Civil citation
   
95.127   Summary abatement
   
95.128   False alarms
   
95.129   Open burning violations
   
95.130   Carelessness with fire
   
95.131   Accumulations of waste materials
   
95.132   Unsafe, defective buildings or systems
   
95.133   Code violations
   
95.134   Appeals
Scheduled Inspections
   
95.145   Inspections; generally
   
95.146   Annual
   
95.147   Once every two years
   
95.148   Once every three years
   
95.149   To be free of charge
Reporting a Hazard or Violation
   
95.160   Hazards and violations
   
95.161   How to report a hazard or violation
   
95.162   Required information for complaints
   
95.163   Records
 
   
95.999   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 95.001 TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as the “Fire Prevention and Protection
Ordinance of Lincoln County, North Carolina.”
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.002 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all buildings and
occupancies in the State Building Code General Construction and the State Fire
Code § 102, and §§
95.145 through
95.149 of this chapter. The provisions of the North Carolina Building Code:
Fire Code/Lincoln County Fire Prevention and Protection Ordinance (NCFC/LCFPPO)
shall apply equally to existing buildings as well as new buildings.
   (B)   All one- and two-family dwellings and any buildings for use by any
farmer are exempt from operational permit fees. See also “Exceptions to
Applicability” in NCFC § 102A.
   (C)   No one is exempt from construction permits, open burning permits, or
special use permits, as defined in § 105 of the NCFC and §
95.040(B) of this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.003 AUTHORITY AND MISSION.
   The NCFC and the LCFPPO shall be enforced by the County Fire Marshal, and
his or her authorized representatives, or as otherwise provided herein. The
mission of the County Fire Marshal’s office is to minimize the risk of fire and
other hazards to the life and property of the citizens of the county. To
accomplish this, the Fire Marshal’s office shall provide effective fire
prevention, fire investigation, arson mitigation, fire inspections and code
enforcement, and assist fire departments and rescue squads in the county.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.004 STATE CODE AND AMENDMENTS.
   For the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to
life and property from fire, explosion, or exposure to hazardous materials, the
State Building Code: Fire Code and all Appendices to the code, including
Chapter 1 of the code, the permits chapter, along with State Amendments to the
code, is hereby adopted by reference and is set forth herein as the fire code
for the county. Any amendments to the aforementioned NCFC, which are adopted,
amended, and published by the State Building Code Council, shall be effective
in the county at the time they are declared in effect by the State Building
Code Council.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.005 JURISDICTION.
   In accordance with the North Carolina General Statues and the provisions of
this chapter, it will be the responsibility of the Fire Marshal’s office to
issue all fire prevention permits, to conduct all fire inspections for the
county, and to enforce the NCFC/LCFPPO.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.006 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective on January 1, 2002, and shall remain in
full force and effect until revoked.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.007 DEFINITIONS AND ABBREVIATIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words
used in the present tense include the future. Words in the masculine gender
include the feminine and neuter. Words in the feminine and neuter gender
include the masculine. The singular number includes the plural, and plural
number includes the singular. Words not defined herein shall have the meanings
stated in the State Building Code General Construction, State Building Code
General Construction, State Electrical Code, State Building Code: Fire Code,
State Gas Code, State Mechanical Code, or State Plumbing Code. Words not
defined in the state building codes shall have the meanings stated in the
Webster’s Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, as revised.
   ALTER or ALTERATION. Any change or modification in construction or
occupancy.
   AMUSEMENT DEVICE. A mechanically-operated device that is used to convey
persons in any direction as a form of amusement.
   APPEAL. To make an appeal of a ruling or decision. Is a way to appeal the
Fire Marshal’s refusal to issue or decision to revoke a permit. APPEALS shall
be in accordance with G.S. §§ 143-140 and 143-141. All APPEALS shall follow the
prescribed method as set forth in the statutes, not only as to permits but also
as to any interpretation or variation of the fire code.
   ASPHALT KETTLE. Any vessel or container used to process, heat, hold for
heating, or dispense flammable or combustible roofing materials that are in
liquid form or will take form as a result of being exposed to the vessel or
container.
   AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE. A responsible person authorized and sworn by the
Fire Marshal to enforce the provisions of the Lincoln County Fire Prevention
Ordinance. This person is not authorized to enforce the provisions of the NCFC
   BONFIRE. An outdoor fire. BONFIRES may be used for ceremonial and religious
purposes (schools, civic groups, and churches). Materials used for BONFIRES
must also comply with the EPA regulations.
   BURNING BAN. A warning issued for any outdoor burning when conditions or
local circumstances make a fire hazardous.
   CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE. At the completion of this work done under a
permit, the appropriate contractor must put in writing that all work done met
or exceeded all codes (NCFC, NPFA, or LCFPPO ) that applied to that particular
permit.
   CIVIL CITATION. A written notice of any violations of the State Building
Code: Fire Code or this chapter.
   CONSTRUCTION PERMIT. A construction permit allows the applicant to install
or modify systems and equipment for which a permit is required by § 105.6 of
the NCFC and this chapter.
   DECORATIVE MATERIAL. Materials such as curtains, draperies, streamers,
surface coverings applied over the building interior finish for decorative,
acoustical, or other effect, and also cloth, cotton batting, straw, vines,
leaves, trees, and plastic used for decorative effect. It shall not include
floor coverings, ordinary window shades, or material 1/40 inch (0.64 mm) or
less in thickness applied directly to and adhering tightly to a base.
   FEE. A charge for professional services, licenses, permits, and the like.
FEES will be according to current schedule as adopted by the Board of
Commissioners.
   FINE. A sum of money paid as a penalty. The penalties for violations of this
chapter and the state building codes will be based on the current County Civil
Citations Fee Schedule as adopted by the Board of Commissioners.
   FIRE FLOW TESTING. Tests conducted on water distribution systems to
determine the rate of flow available at various locations for firefighting
purposes.
   FIRE HYDRANT. A device used to gain access to water from a supply source.
   FIREWORKS. Devices used for noisy effects or brilliant displays. All
fireworks for private use must meet the State Building Code: Fire Code, this
chapter, and G.S. § 14-414.
   GOVERNING BODY. A city, county, state, agency, or other political government
subdivision or entity authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of
this code, as adopted or amended.
   GPM. Gallons per minute.
   HAUNTED HOUSE. Any building with several rooms or one room, displaying scary
scenes or scenes that are to represent lifelike scenes, and used by
organizations or individuals for fundraising or profit. All haunted houses must
follow §§ 95.095 through 95.099 of this chapter and the State Building Code:
Fire Code.
   HIGH-RACK DRY STORAGE FOR BOATS. Applies to the construction and operation
of storage areas for boats, also applies to the construction and operations of
marinas, boatyards, yacht clubs, boat condominiums, docking facilities, and all
associated piers, docks, and floats.
   INTER-DEPARTMENTAL APPROVAL. Approval between other departments for
different projects or jobs. Before any permits are issued for any projects, it
will be the responsibility of the contractor to obtain approval from the
Department of Development Services (including Public Utilities and Planning and
Inspections), Environmental Health, the Fire Marshal’s office, and/or any other
department(s) that may issue permits.
   KIOSK. A small structure, open at one or more sides, used to display or sell
merchandise.
   LCBC. Lincoln County Board of Commissioners.
   LCFPPO. Lincoln County Fire Prevention and Protection Ordinance.
   NCFC. North Carolina State Building Code: Fire Code, including all
amendments and all appendices to the code.
   NFPA. National Fire Protection Association.
   NUISANCE BURNING. When during a burn the smoke and/or odors create a
neighborhood nuisance, cause physical irritation exacerbating a documented
medical condition, visibility impairment, evidence of soot or ash on a property
or a structure other than the property on which the burning is done, the smoke
and odors do not rise, hang close to the ground, cross a street or highway and
cause a hazard, or three or more separate businesses or homes complain during
the burning, it shall be ceased and all fires will be extinguished.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of any matter in such a manner that the products
of combustion resulting from the burning are emitted directly into the
atmosphere without passing through a stack, chimney, or permitted air pollution
control device. This definition covers bonfires and all OPEN BURNING done
within 100 feet of a structure.
   OPERATIONAL PERMIT. A permit that allows an applicant to conduct an
operation or a business for which a permit is required by § 105.6 of the NCFC
and this chapter, for either a prescribed period or until renewed or revoked.
   PLAN REVIEW. A review process used for the determination of compliance with
this chapter and the fire code, and shall be completed within a reasonable time
of receipt of the plans after they are received in the Fire Marshal’s office.
The PLAN REVIEW shall not apply to one- and two-family dwellings. The PLAN
REVIEW shall apply to all buildings and occupancies in the State Building Code
General Construction and the State Building Code: Fire Prevention, and §§
95.145 through
95.149 of this chapter. The provisions of this code (NCFC/LCFPPO) shall apply
equally to existing as well as new buildings.
   STORAGE TANK. Any tank used for storage of flammable or combustible liquids
or hazardous materials above or below ground.
   VIOLATION. Anyone or anything that violates any of the provisions of the
NCFC or this chapter.
   VIOLATION NOTICE. A notice that specifies a period in which the violator
must correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within the
specific time, the violator shall be guilty of a new and separate offense.
   WASTED-TRIP FEE. A fee imposed for a violation that occurs when an applicant
does not have everything ready for inspection or no one is there to allow
inspection to be done.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
PERMIT, APPLICATION AND REVIEW
§ 95.020 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PERMIT. An official document issued by the Fire Marshal’s office authorizing
performance of a specified activity, use, operation, or installation. This
includes, but is not limited to, the following types:
      (1)   Use permit;
      (2)   Special use permit;
      (3)   Burning permit;
      (4)   Operational permit;
      (5)   Construction permit; and
      (6)   Permits for fire protection systems, storage tanks, and any other
items requiring a permit.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.021 PERMITS REQUIRED.
   In accordance with the detailed requirements of the county, a permit shall
be obtained from the Fire Marshal’s office, pursuant to the procedure set forth
in Chapter 1 of the NCFC, along with the State Amendments, and this chapter.
Permits shall be obtained to conduct those activities or operations as set
forth in the permit and service fee schedule as approved by the County Board of
Commissioners. All permits will be issued on an individual basis, upon
demonstration of compliance with the applicable fire code regulations. Required
operational, construction, or special use permits, as defined by this chapter
or the NCFC, shall be issued before work is started to erect, construct,
enlarge, install, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish
any building, structure, or service system. Other permits may be required to be
issued in conjunction with the permits. These may include zoning permits,
building permits, and/or food service permits. It shall be the responsibility
of the applicant to obtain any and all other applicable permits before
operating or undertaking the use for which the permit was issued.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.022 INFORMATION REQUIRED WITH APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Generally. An application for a permit shall be filed with the Fire
Marshal’s office, on a form provided by the county for that purpose, and shall
include the applicant’s answers in full to inquiries set forth in the form,
including all data as may be required by the Fire Marshal.
   (B)   Contractor’s license required. When the General Statutes require that
general construction, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, fire protection, or gas
work be performed by the appropriately licensed individual(s), no permit for
the type work shall be issued to an unlicensed person or firm.
   (C)   Drawings and specifications requirements. Drawings and specifications,
drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and
character of work, shall accompany the application for a permit. The plans
shall be included as a part of the submittals of the design of the overall
building, in the event of new construction; and shall be provided as part of
the renovation plans, in the event renovation plans are required for the
structure. The plans are design plans and specifications, and not shop drawings
by the manufacturer or installer. The drawings and specifications shall contain
information, in the form of notes or otherwise, as to technical properties of
the materials, where they are essential to show compliance with the technical
codes. All information, drawings, specifications, and accompanying data shall
bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. The Fire
Marshal’s office may also request copies of the shop drawings of the specific
system, as developed by the manufacturer and installer of the system, if it is
deemed necessary by the complexity of the proposed specific system.
   (D)   Additional data. The Fire Marshal’s office and/or the Planning and
Inspection Department may require details, computations, stress diagrams,
professional certification, and other data necessary to describe the
construction or installation of a system.
   (E)   Fire-resistive integrity. Drawings and specifications for all
buildings shall indicate how required fire-resistive integrity will be
maintained, where a penetration of a required fire-resistive wall, floor, or
partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, or
communication conducts, pipes, and systems. The drawings shall indicate in
sufficient detail how fire integrity will be maintained.
   (F)   Structural integrity. Drawings and specifications for all buildings
shall indicate how structural integrity, including lateral stability, will be
maintained where a penetration of a wall or floor or roof takes place, and
where each wall, floor, or roof assembly supports service systems.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.023 PLAN REVIEW. 
   (A)   Generally. Plan review shall apply to all buildings and occupancies in
the State Building Code General Construction, the NCFC and §§
95.145 through
95.149 of this chapter). The provisions of this
code (NCFC/LCFPPO) shall apply equally to existing as well as new buildings.
This review will be for the determination of compliance with this chapter and
the NCFC, and shall be completed within a reasonable time of the receipt of
plans. If the Fire Marshal’s review of these plans indicates the need for a
fire permit, as outlined in this chapter and the NCFC, or if there are
corrections to be made to the plans, the building permit shall not be issued
until the fire permit has been applied for or until the corrections are made to
the plans. This plan review shall not apply to one- and two-family dwellings.
   (B)   Fees. See §
95.060.
   (C)   Fines. See §
95.061.
   (D)   Revocation. The Fire Marshal may revoke a permit upon determination
that the permit holder, or any agents or employees of the permit holder, has
violated any provision of the NCFC or of this chapter, or any stated condition
of the permit. The Fire Marshal shall advise the permit holder, in writing, of
the reason for the revocation.
   (E)   Appeals. An applicant for a permit, or a permit holder, as
appropriate, may appeal the Fire Marshal’s refusal to issue, or revocation of,
a permit, or any interpretation or variation of the NCFC. Appeals shall be in
accordance with §
95.134 of this chapter, and in accordance with G.S. §§ 143-140 and 143-141.
   (F)   Nontransferable. Any permits issued shall not be transferable. Permits
shall be valid only as specified on the permit for the time period, use, and/or
project specified.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.024 SPRINKLER/STANDPIPE APPLICATION; REVIEW AND PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. A permit will be required to be obtained from the
Fire Marshal’s office for the installation of a new sprinkler and or standpipe
system. A permit will also be required for renovations or modifications to any
existing systems when more than 20 new or relocated sprinklers are required to
be added or modified.
   (B)   Permit issuance and fee. The permit fee will be based on the service
and permit fee schedule. Once the plans are approved, then a permit will be
issued to the contractor. The fee for the permit must be paid when the permit
is issued. A copy of the permit, along with the approved set of plans, will be
returned to the contractor.
   (C)   Application and plans required. Plans, blueprints, and/or hydraulic
calculations for the system being installed, along with a permit application,
shall be submitted to the Fire Marshal’s office for review and approval prior
to the issuance of a permit. No work may commence until a permit has been
issued. modification into the shop drawing process. All submittals for review
must be signed when
required by code or the North Carolina General Statutes. Plans not signed when
required will not be reviewed. The set returned approved to the contractor will
be the job copy, and must be kept on the job site at all times. All drawings
must be prepared in accordance with NFPA standards. All plans must be drawn to
scale, accompanied by required sections, and completely legible. Drawings not
legible or without complete information will be returned without review and
will require additional submittal. Fire-resistive and structural integrity must
also be shown in detail and how it will be maintained.
   (D)   Inspections required. The Fire Marshal’s office must be notified at
least 48 hours in advance to schedule any inspections.
      (1)   Inspections required include:
         (a)   Inspection of pressure testing of all piping;
         (b)   Rough-in inspection of any concealed piping;
         (c)   Inspection of any hydrants, yard or county to ensure proper
placement to meet code standards; and
         (d)   Final inspection and complete system testing.
      (2)   It will be the responsibility of the contractor to have the
necessary personnel present to conduct any tests.
   (E)   Renovations or remodeling work.
      (1)   When more than 20 sprinklers are added or relocated, a set of shop
drawings showing the extent of the renovation shall be submitted to the Fire
Marshal’s office. These drawings shall be reviewed and approved in the same
manner as for a new system. The job copies must be on the job site at all
times. All drawings must be prepared in accordance with NFPA 13. All plans must
be drawn to scale, accompanied by required sections, and completely legible.
Drawings not legible or without complete information will be returned without
review and will require additional submittal. Fire-resistive and structural
integrity must also be shown in detail and how it will be maintained.
      (2)   The Fire Marshal’s office must be notified at least 48 hours in
advance to schedule any inspections, and must be notified if any existing
system is to be shut down for any renovations. When less than 20 sprinklers are
added or modified, the Fire Marshal’s office must be notified that the work is
being scheduled. A follow-up letter must be provided to the Fire Marshal’s
office, advising that the work has been completed by a licensed fire sprinkler
contractor in accordance with the appropriate state building codes and NFPA
standards.
   (F)   Materials test and certification. Once a system has been deemed
approved by the Fire Marshal’s office, the contractor will be responsible for
issuing a materials test and certification letter to the Fire Marshal’s office.
This letter shall state that the system has been installed in accordance with
the appropriate NFPA standards, the NCFC, and the State Building Code General
Construction, along with the State Amendments to the State Building Code. The
letter shall state that the system has been tested, all materials used are
approved for their use, and the system is in full operation and meets or
exceeds the appropriate NFPA standards and the of state building codes. A
letter shall be submitted for any new system or any renovation work or when a
permit has been issued.
   (G)   Inspection report and finalization. An inspection report will be
completed after each inspection conducted on the sprinkler and/or standpipe
system. A copy will be left with the contractor, with the remaining copies of
the inspection report filed in the Fire Marshal’s office. Once all the
necessary requirements have been met for the sprinkler and/or standpipe system,
the inspector may then consider the permit complete and final, and may note as
such on the permit. No permit may be considered final until all requirements,
including receipt of the permit fee, are completed.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.025 FIRE ALARM SYSTEM APPLICATION; REVIEW AND PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. A permit will be required to be obtained from the
Fire Marshal’s office for the installation of a new fire alarm system or
renovations to an existing fire alarm system.
   (B)   Permit issuance and fee. The permit fee will be based on the service
and permit fee schedule found in the service and permit fee schedule. Once the
plans are approved, a permit will be issued to the contractor. The permit fee
must be paid when the permit is issued.
   (C)   Applications and plans required. Prior to the issuance of an alarm
system permit, plans showing the alarm system installation or renovations,
along with a permit application, shall be submitted to the Fire Marshal’s
office for approval. The plans shall be included as a part of the submittals of
the design of the overall building, in the event of new construction; and shall
be provided as part of the renovation plans, in the event renovation plans are
required for the structure. The plans are design plans and specifications, and
not shop drawings by the manufacturer or installer. These plans shall show the
location and types of all devices, alarm panels and equipment, various alarm
zones, wiring methods, monitoring, and other such specifications as necessary
to ascertain the specific type of system being required by the project. These
plans and specifications should be submitted for approval prior to the
installation of any equipment or wiring. The Fire Marshal’s office may also
request a copy of the shop drawings of the specific alarm system, as developed
by the manufacturer and installer of the system, if it is deemed necessary by
the complexity of the proposed fire alarm. All systems shall meet NFPA
standards and any other applicable NFPA requirements. It must also be shown in
detail how fire-resistive and structural integrity will be maintained.
   (D)   Inspections required. It will be the responsibility of the alarm
contractor to contact the Fire Marshal’s office at least 48 hours in advance to
schedule an inspection. An inspection will be required on all rough-in wiring
prior to any concealment by building finishes. A final inspection will be
conducted once the entire system is completed and ready for operation. A
complete check of all devices, such as pull-stations, smoke detectors, and the
like, will be required. All zones in a structure or premises shall be tested.
It will be the responsibility of the contractor to have the necessary personnel
present to conduct the test. All panels shall clearly identify zones in a
manner that will allow fire personnel to quickly identify the area in alarm. A
building schematic shall be placed at each panel, electrical rooms, and
sprinkler rooms.
   (E)   Materials test and certification. Once the system has been deemed
approved by the Fire Official, the contractor will be responsible for issuing a
materials test and certification letter to the Fire Marshal’s office. This
letter shall state that the system has been installed, in accordance with the
appropriate NFPA standards, the NCFC, and the State Building Code General
Construction, along with the State Amendments to the State Building Code, has
been tested, all materials used are approved for their use, and the system is
in full operation. This letter shall also include a certificate of compliance
as required by NFPA standards.
   (F)   Inspection report and finalization. An inspection report will be
completed after each inspection conducted on the alarm system. A copy will be
left with the alarm contractor, with the remaining copies of the inspection
report filed in the Fire Marshal’s office. Once all the necessary requirements
have been met for the alarm system, the inspector may then consider the permit
complete and final, and may note as such on the permit. No permit may be
considered final until all requirements, including receipt of the permit fee,
are completed.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.026 AUTOMATIC FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM PERMITS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      FIXED FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEM. A fire suppression system containing a
supply of an extinguishing agent that can be automatically or manually
activated to discharge through a distribution system onto or into a protected
hazard, equipment, process, and the like. Examples of such systems are as
defined in the NCFC.
   (B)   Permit required. A permit must be obtained from the Fire Marshal’s
office for the installation of a new fire suppression system or for renovations
to an existing fire suppression system.
   (C)   Permit issuance and fee. The permit fee will be based on the service
and permit fee schedule. Once the plans are approved, then a permit will be
issued to the contractor. Once the permit fee is paid, then a copy of the
permit, along with the approved plans, will be returned to the contractor.
   (D)   Application and plans required. Prior to the issuance of a fire
suppression system permit, plans showing the system installation or
renovations, along with a permit application, shall be submitted to the Fire
Marshal’s office for approval. These plans shall be shop drawings as developed
by the manufacturer or installation company for that particular fire
suppression system and shall be developed in complete detail. These plans shall
show the location and type of all devices and equipment. The various alarm
zones, wiring methods, piping methods, monitoring, and other criteria shall be
indicated. All systems shall meet NFPA requirements. It must also be shown in
detail how fire-resistive and structural integrity will be maintained.
   (E)   Inspection required. It will be the responsibility of the contractor
to contact the Fire Marshal’s office at least 48 hours in advance to schedule
an inspection. An inspection will be required on all rough-in wiring or piping
prior to any concealment by building finishes. A final inspection will be
conducted once the entire system is completed and ready for operation. A check
of all devices will be required. Any system utilizing pull-stations or cables
with fusible links shall be tested for proper operation for the Fire Official.
The contractor shall conduct any tests deemed necessary by the Fire Official to
determine the system operator capabilities. It will be the responsibility of
the contractor to have the necessary personnel present to conduct the test.
   (F)   Materials test and certification. Once the system has been deemed
approved by the Fire Official, the contractor will be responsible for issuing a
materials test and certification letter to the Fire Marshal’s office. This
letter shall state that the system has been installed in accordance with the
appropriate NFPA standards and the NCFC. The letter shall state that the system
has been tested, all materials used are approved for their use, and the system
is in full operation.
   (G)   Inspection report and finalization. An inspection report will be
completed after each inspection conducted on the automatic fire suppression
system. A copy will be left with the contractor, with the remaining copies of
the inspection report filed at the Fire Marshal’s office. Once all the
necessary requirements have been met for the automatic fire suppression system,
the inspector may then consider the permit complete and final, and may note as
such on the permit. No permit may be considered final until all requirements,
including receipt of the permit fee, are completed.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
PERMIT TYPES
§ 95.040 GENERALLY.
   (A)   Permits. Permits shall be in accordance with § 105 of the NCFC and
this chapter.
   (B)   Permits required. Permits required by this code and this chapter shall
be obtained from the Fire Marshal’s office. Permit fees, if any, shall be paid
prior to issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises
designated therein at all times, and shall be readily available for inspection
by the Fire Official.
   (C)   Types of permits. There shall be three types of permits as follows:
      (1)   Operational permit. A permit that allows the applicant to conduct
an operation or a business for which a permit is required by § 105.6 of the
NCFC and this chapter for either:
         (a)   A prescribed period; or
         (b)   Until renewed or revoked.
      (2)   Construction permit. A permit that allows the applicant to install
or modify systems and equipment for which a permit is required by § 105.6 of
the NCFC and this chapter; and
      (3)   Special use permits. Special use permits are for and/or allow
special tests, inspections, certain applications, operations, assemblies, to
maintain, store, or handle certain materials, special events, and services for
which a permit is required by § 105.6 of the NCFC and this chapter.
   (D)   Permits for the same location. When more than one permit is required
for the same location, the Fire Official is authorized to consolidate the
permits into a single permit, provided that each provision is listed in that
permit.
   (E)   Tents. Tents used at funerals are exempt from all fees and do not
require any permits.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.041 STORAGE TANKS APPLICATION; REVIEW AND PERMITS (COMMERCIAL OR
BUSINESSES).
   (A)   Permit required. A permit will be required to be obtained from the
Fire Marshal’s office for the removal or installation of new or existing
aboveground or belowground storage tanks used for flammable, combustible
liquids or hazardous materials.
   (B)   Permit issuance and fee. The permit fee will be based on the service
and permit fee schedule. Once the plans are approved, then a permit will be
issued to the contractor. Once the permit fee is paid, then a copy of the
permit, along with the approved plans, will be returned to the contractor.
   (C)   New installations; application and plans required. Plans and a permit
application shall be submitted to the Fire Marshal’s office for approval prior
to issuance of the permit. A permit shall be obtained for the installation of
stationary tanks for the storage of flammable and combustible liquids or
hazardous materials. Plans shall be submitted with each permit application. The
plans shall include the method of storage and dispensing, quantities and types
of liquids to be stored, distances from tanks and dispensers to property lines,
buildings, and rights-of-way, vehicle access, fire appliances, collision
barriers, design and construction of tanks and tank supports, seismic design of
tank supports, secondary containment, tank venting and vapor recovery
provisions, emergency controls, and any additional information required by the
Fire Official.
   (D)   Inter-departmental approval. It will be the responsibility of the
contractor to obtain approval from the Planning and Inspection Department, if
required by it, including, but not limited to, any electrical, building,
plumbing, or mechanical permits, or any zoning approval and compliance. These
approvals shall be required prior to any issuance of the tank permit.
   (E)   Inspections required. It will be the responsibility of the contractor
to contact the Fire Marshal’s office at least 48 hours in advance to schedule
an inspection.
      (1)   An inspection will be required on all rough-in wiring or piping
prior to any concealment.
      (2)   Testing tank pressure and inspecting tanks (all underground tanks
will require an inspection prior to and after installation into the excavated
burial area).
      (3)   A final inspection will be conducted once the entire system is
completed and ready for operation.
      (4)   A check of all devices will be required.
      (5)   The contractor shall conduct any tests deemed necessary by the Fire
Official to determine the system operation capabilities.
      (6)   It will be the responsibility of the contractor to have the
necessary personnel present to conduct the test.
   (F)   Materials test and certification. Once a system has been deemed
approved by the Fire Marshal’s office, the contractor will be responsible for
issuing a materials test and certification letter to the Fire Marshal’s office.
This letter shall state that the system has been installed in accordance with
the appropriate NFPA standards, state building codes, along with State
Amendments to the State Building Code. The letter shall state that the system
has been tested, all materials used are approved for their use, the system is
in full operation and meets or exceeds the appropriate NFPA standards and state
building codes. A letter shall be submitted for any new system, for any
renovation work, or when a permit has been issued.
   (G)   Inspection report and finalization. An inspection report will be
completed after each inspection has been conducted on the storage tank
installation. A copy will be left with the contractor, with the remaining
copies of the inspection report filed at the Fire Marshal’s office. Once all
the necessary requirements have been met for the storage tank system, the
inspector may then consider the permit complete and final, and may note as such
on the permit. No permit may be considered final until all requirements,
including receipt of the permit fee, are completed.
   (H)   State registration. All tanks installed underground shall be
registered with the State Department of Environmental, Health, and Natural
Resources, Division of Environmental Management, Ground Water Section. A copy
of the registration shall be submitted to the Fire Marshal’s office prior to
the final inspection.
   (I)   Abandonment and removal. All storage tanks shall be abandoned or
removed in accordance with the NCFC. A letter of certification of abandonment
or removal shall be submitted to the Fire Marshal’s office, along with a copy
of the soil testing and analysis. This information shall be submitted prior to
final approval by the Fire Marshal’s office.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.042 OPEN BURNING (WITHIN 100 FEET OF A STRUCTURE).
   (A)   Generally. Permits are required for the burning of leaves, tree
branches, or yard trimmings originating on the premises.
      (1)   In accordance with the Fire Prevention Code, any outdoor open
burning conducted within the county requires a permit to be issued by the one
of the agencies that issues burning permits. The outdoor open burning must meet
all provisions of the fire code, North Carolina Administrative Code (15A NCAC
1901 through 1907), and this chapter, prior to the issuance of any permit. No
permit shall be issued for the burning of refuse in violation of any state or
local air quality open burning regulations.
      (2)   Debris burning falling under the jurisdiction of the State Division
of Forest Resources shall meet its required permit conditions. All requirements
of the fire code shall be met along with any other state laws.
      (3)   Those provisions listed in the State Administrative Code regarding
the control and prohibition of open burning shall take precedence in all cases
where open burning is requested. Permits may not be issued for any outdoor
burning under any of the following conditions:
         (a)   Open burning of rubbish or waste material;
         (b)   Open burning for land clearing, when the burning is located
within 1,000 feet of any residential structure other than a dwelling structure
located on the property on which the burning is done; and/or
         (c)   Open burning of leaves, tree branches or yard trimmings
originating on the premises of private residences, unless the location is not
at least 50 feet from any structure and adequate provisions are made to prevent
fire from spreading to within 50 feet of any structure or other property.
   (B)   Burning site requirements.
      (1)   The location of the material to be burned shall be a minimum of 50
feet from any structure located on the property of which the burning is done.
If a possible hazard exists, the Fire Official may require this distance to be
increased.
      (2)   Piles of material should be burned in a safe matter. This would
also include bonfires for different events. Bonfires used for ceremonial and
religious purposes (schools, civic groups, and churches) may take place after
6:00 p.m. when all regulations are met. Materials used for bonfires must also
comply with the EPA regulations and the LCFPPO.
      (3)   An area ten-feet wide shall be cleared completely around the
material to be burned.
      (4)   Only natural materials, such as limbs, brush, grass, leaves, or
wood, may be burned. Heavy oils, asphalt materials, polar solvents, treated
lumber, trash, paper or items containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any
materials other than plant growth shall not be burned.
      (5)   A competent person shall constantly attend the fire until it is
extinguished.
      (6)   A garden hose with suitable water supply or other fire-
extinguishing equipment, as deemed acceptable by the Fire Official, shall be
readily available for immediate use during the course of the fire until it is
extinguished.
   (C)   Permit-issuance procedure.
      (1)   For outdoor burning, including, but is not limited to, bonfires,
clearing land in certain areas, burning leaves and brush, or other burning that
does not meet the State Forest Services requirements:
         (a)   A site inspection may be required before burning is to be done.
         (b)   The applicant shall verify all information and shall read all
the rules and regulations on the open burning permit. The applicant will then
be required to sign the permit, acknowledging the understanding and
responsibility to obey these regulations.
         (c)   It will be the responsibility of the applicant to keep this
permit available at the burn site at all times.
      (2)   The following types of open burning are permissible:
         (a)   The material burned originates on the premises of private
residences, is burned on those premises, and consists of natural materials,
such as limbs, brush, grass, leaves, yard trimmings, or wood;
         (b)   There are no public pickup services available;
         (c)   Non-vegetable materials, such as household garbage or other man-
made materials, are not burned;
         (d)   The burning is started no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and no
additional combustible material is added to the fire between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m. on the following day;
         (e)   The burning does not create a nuisance; and
         (f)   Material is not burned when the Division of Forest Resources and
the County Fire Marshal office have issued a burning ban for that area.
   (D)   Nuisance burning.
      (1)   If, at any time during the burning, the smoke and/or odors create a
neighborhood nuisance by causing physical irritation exacerbating a documented
medical condition, visibility impairment, evidence of soot or ash on a property
or structure other than the property on which the burning is done, the smoke
and odors do not rise, hang close to the ground, cross a street or highway and
cause a hazard, and three or more separate businesses or homes complain, the
burning shall be ceased and all fires will be extinguished.
      (2)   If, at any time during the burning, the regulations regarding open
burning are not met or are neglected in any way, the fire shall be
extinguished.
      (3)   All open burning, including, but not limited to, brush, limbs,
leaves, farm lands, fields and clearing of land, shall stop in the event of a
burning ban issued by the State Forest Service, or by the County Fire Marshal’s
office in conjunction with the State Forest Service.
      (4)   Willful neglect and/or willful violations of the Fire Prevention
Code shall be subject to a civil citation. Any such action shall be brought to
the Fire Marshal with proper documentation to be acted upon.
   (E)   Burning ban.
      (1)   In the event that the County Fire Marshal’s office issues a ban on
outdoor burning within 100 feet of a structure, then, in accordance with state
law, all open burning permits issued shall be deemed invalid, with no issuance
of any new permits until the ban is lifted by the County Fire Marshal’s office.
The ban may be restricted to certain areas of the county or may be enforceable
countywide. During the ban, no open burning shall be conducted at all within
100 feet of a structure; this includes any outdoor burning at residences. A
civil citation may be issued for violations.
      (2)   A burning ban on outdoor burning within 100 feet of a structure may
be issued by the County Fire Marshal’s office in the event that atmospheric
conditions or local circumstances make the fire hazardous. Atmospheric
conditions that warrant a burning ban include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Extended periods of low humidity (below 50%);
         (b)   High winds;
         (c)   Elevated temperatures; and/or
         (d)   Lack of substantial rainfall.
      (3)   Local conditions that may warrant a burning ban include, but are
not limited to:
         (a)   Flammable and/or combustible liquid spills or leaks close to a
burning site;
         (b)   A hazardous materials incident, where the proximity of the burn
site could cause a possible ignition source or prove hazardous to operations
controlling the incident; and/or
         (c)   The proximity of adjacent structures or other such hazards.
      (4)   In the event a burning ban is issued, all permit holders shall be
notified by the Fire Marshal’s office, by using contact information provided,
and also through the news media. The notification should state that the permit
is invalid and any fires shall be extinguished immediately. In conjunction with
a State Forest Service burning ban, the County Fire Marshal’s office shall
issue a burning ban of all open burning within 100 feet of a structure and all
fires shall be extinguished immediately. The local press shall be notified by
the County Public Affairs Officer that such ban is in effect, that no permits
will be issued until the ban is lifted, and that no open burning will be
allowed.
      (5)   Any burning ban issued by the Fire Marshal’s office shall be
repealed in the same manner.
   (F)   Extinguishing illegal fires, nuisance burning, fires when burning bans
are in effect, and all other fires that fall under this chapter, the NCBC, and
state regulations.
      (1)   The responding Fire Department has the authority to extinguish any
fires that do not meet this chapter, the NCBC, or state regulations, including,
but are not limited to, illegal fires, nuisance burning, and fires when burning
bans are in effect.
      (2)   The Fire Marshal’s office, or its authorized representative, has
the authority to extinguish any fires that do not meet this chapter, the NCBC,
and any state regulations, including, but are not limited to, illegal fires,
nuisance burning, and fires when burning bans are in effect. Any citations that
fall under this chapter will be issued by the Fire Marshal’s office or its
authorized representative.
      (3)   The Fire Marshal’s office, or its authorized representative, does
not have to be present to extinguish the fire(s). If the owner or person(s)
burning refuse to let the Fire Department extinguish the fire(s), then the Fire
Department can have the Fire Marshal’s office contacted (either directly or
through the Communications Center), and a representative from that office will
respond to assist the Fire Department.
      (4)   The Fire Marshal’s office and law enforcement will respond to any
nuisance burning when the person will not allow the Fire Department to
extinguish the fire.
      (5)   The Fire Marshal, or a representative of that office, will respond
to any illegal burning when needed. The Fire Marshal, or its representative,
does not need to be present to extinguish the fire. The Fire Department can
extinguish the fire and email any information about the fire to the Fire
Marshal’s office, which shall investigate the incident. If there is a problem
with the person who is burning illegally, the Fire Marshal, or its
representative, shall respond to assist the Fire Department.
      (6)   If any citations are to be issued that fall under this chapter or
the NCBC, then the Fire Marshall, or its authorized representative, shall be
responsible for conducting any investigation required and for issuing any
citation.
      (7)   If any costs are incurred in extinguishing of an illegal fire, as
provided for herein, then the individual or entity responsible for the illegal
fire shall be obligated to reimburse the Fire Marshal’s office or the
responding Fire Department for the expense.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.043 FIREWORKS PERMITS FOR PUBLIC DISPLAY.
   (A)   Permit required.
      (1)   In accordance with the Fire Prevention Code, no person shall use or
explode any fireworks for public display without having first obtained a permit
from the Fire Marshal’s office, and meeting the requirements of this chapter
and/or the NCFC.
      (2)   A permit fee, in accordance with the permit and fee schedule, shall
be required prior to issuance of the permit and shall be collected by the Fire
Marshal’s office at the time of the application for a permit.
   (B)   Permit-issuance procedure.
      (1)   Any person wishing to obtain a permit for fireworks for public
display shall first submit an application with the Fire Marshal’s office and
pay the designated fee.
      (2)   Under the Fire Prevention Code, the permit holder shall furnish a
bond or certificate of insurance in an amount deemed adequate by the Fire
Official for the payment of damages.
      (3)   The Fire Official responsible for making the site inspections shall
make any inspections as deemed necessary to assure the site is in compliance.
      (4)   Once the Fire Official is satisfied that the site is ready and in
compliance with the provisions of the this chapter and/or the NCFC, then the
permit shall be issued. The permit shall not be transferable. The permit shall
be valid only as specified as per the conditions of the permit.
   (C)   Permit revocation.
      (1)   If due to atmospheric conditions or other such conditions that may
cause a danger to life and/or property from the display of the fireworks, or if
there is a burning ban in place, the Fire Marshal may revoke the permit.
      (2)   In the event that a permit is revoked due to atmospheric
conditions, the applicant shall be entitled to a full refund of the permit fee.
      (3)   (a)   Failure to abide by the rules and regulations of the fire
code shall be subject to a civil citation and immediate revocation of the
permit.
         (b)   In this case, the permittee shall not be entitled to a refund of
the permit fee.
   (D)   Fireworks on display; permit required.
      (1)   In accordance with the LCFPPO, it shall be unlawful for any person
to possess, store, offer for sale, or sell at retail, without having first
obtained a permit, if one is required, from the Fire Marshal’s office, and
meeting the requirements of the LCFPPO and the NCFC. All fireworks offered for
sale must meet those requirements as allowed by G.S. § 14-414 and the NCFC.
      (2)   A permit fee, as provided for in the county fee schedule, shall be
required to be paid prior to the issuance of the permit required hereunder.
   (E)   Seizure and disposal of fireworks. The Fire Official shall seize,
take, remove, or cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner, all stocks
of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored, or held in violation of the
NCFC, the State Building Code, and G.S. § 14-414. Failure to abide by these
rules and regulations shall be subject to a civil citation.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.044 OTHER PERMITS.
   (A)   Generally. Other permits needed, according to Chapter 1, § 105.6 of
the NCFC, in order to perform an operation or task, will need to be obtained
from the Fire Marshal’s office. For any violation of Chapter 1 or other
chapters of the NCFC, or of this chapter, a civil citation may be issued at the
discretion of the Fire Marshal or its designee.
   (B)   Application for a permit. Applications for permits shall be made to
the Fire Marshal, on forms provided by the county, and shall include full and
complete answers from the applicant to inquiries set forth in the forms. The
appropriate fees shall accompany applications for permits, if a fee is
required, and any data as may be required by the Fire Marshal. All applications
and forms shall be available on the county’s website, or in person at the Fire
Marshal’s office. Failure to submit an application shall be just cause to deny
issuance of a permit.
   (C)   Review and issuance. The Fire Marshal shall review all applications
submitted. An on-site inspection shall be conducted to determine compliance
with applicable provisions of this chapter and/or the NCFC. If an application
for a permit is rejected by the Fire Marshal, the applicant shall be advised in
writing of the reasons for the rejection. Permits for activities requiring the
applicant to provide evidence of financial responsibility to the jurisdiction
shall not be issued unless proof of required financial responsibility is
furnished in the form of a bond or letter of credit.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.045 OPERATIONAL PERMITS.
   (A)   Generally. The following is a list of jobs/tasks that will need
operational permits.
   (B)   Specifically.
      (1)   Amusement buildings;
      (2)   Aviation facilities;
      (3)   Carnivals and fairs;
      (4)   Covered mall buildings;
      (5)   Exhibits and trade shows;
      (6)   Explosives (blasting, storage, manufacturing, and the like);
      (7)   Fireworks;
      (8)   Flammable and combustible liquids;
      (9)   Fumigation and thermal insecticidal fogging;
      (10)   Hazardous materials;
      (11)   HPM facilities;
      (12)   High-piled or high-rack storage;
      (13)   Liquid- or gas-fueled vehicles or equipment in assembly buildings;
      (14)   Open burning;
      (15)   Open flames and candles (churches are exempt);
      (16)   Organic coatings;
      (17)   Places of assembly (churches are exempt);
      (18)   Private hydrants;
      (19)   Pyrotechnic special effects material;
      (20)   Pyroxylin plastic;
      (21)   Spraying or dipping;
      (22)   Storage of scrap tires and tire byproducts;
      (23)   Temporary membrane structures, tents, and canopies (exceeding 200/
400 square feet);
      (24)   Tire-rebuilding plants; and
      (25)   Waste handling (wrecking yards, junk yards, and waste-material-
handling facilities).
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.046 CONSTRUCTION PERMITS.
   (A)   The following is a list of jobs/tasks that will need a construction
permit for the business to do the job or task. These permits must be issued
before work begins:
      (1)   Automatic fire extinguishing systems and related equipment;
      (2)   Compressed gases;
      (3)   Fire alarm and detection systems and related equipment;
      (4)   Fire pumps and related equipment;
      (5)   Flammable and combustible liquids;
      (6)   Hazardous materials;
      (7)   Industrial ovens;
      (8)   LP gas;
      (9)   Private hydrants;
      (10)   Spraying or dipping;
      (11)   Standpipe systems and related equipment; and
      (12)   Temporary membrane structures, tents, and canopies.
   (B)   The permit fee shall be based upon the county fee schedule.
   (C)   Construction permits check-off list:
      (1)   New alarm systems certification test;
      (2)   New fixed fire suppression system certification test;
      (3)   New sprinkler systems (20 heads or more);
      (4)   New standpipe systems;
      (5)   Renovations of standpipe systems;
      (6)   Renovations of fixed fire systems;
      (7)   Renovations of alarm systems;
      (8)   Renovations of sprinkler systems (20 heads or more);
      (9)   Storage tanks used for flammable/combustible liquids or hazardous
materials (aboveground and underground);
         (a)   Removal (per tank); and
         (b)   New installations (per tank).
      (10)   Inspection of the retrofitting of storage tanks and pipes
containing or used for flammable or combustible liquids or hazardous materials;
      (11)   Preliminary plans review:
         (a)   Up to 5,000 square feet;
         (b)   Five thousand one to 10,000 square feet;
         (c)   Ten thousand one to 25,000 square feet;
         (d)   Twenty-five thousand one to 100,000 square feet; and
         (e)   Over 100,000 square feet.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
FEE ADMINISTRATION
§ 95.060 FEES.
   (A)   Fees will be according to the current schedule as adopted by the Board
of Commissioners.
   (B)   An individual permit, with appropriate permit fee, shall be charged
for each event or project.
   (C)   Special use permit fees for specific events, projects, or time periods
shall be for the amount specified for that particular permit.
   (D)   Special use permits may not be combined.
   (E)   For a use permit, an appropriate permit fee shall be charged.
   (F)   For new fire alarm/sprinkler/standpipe/fire suppression systems, an
appropriate permit fee shall be charged.
   (G)   For renovations to fire alarms/sprinklers/standpipe/fire suppression
systems, an appropriate permit fee shall be charged.
   (H)   For new installations and removals of storage tanks used for
flammable/combustible liquids or hazardous materials, an appropriate permit fee
shall be charged.
   (I)   For places of assembly, see the service and permit fee schedule.
   (J)   Churches, schools, county operations and buildings, city operations
and buildings, and emergency service organizations (fire; rescue; EMS; state,
county, and city jails, detention centers, correction facilities; and state,
county, and city law enforcement agencies) are exempt from operational permit
fees. However, depending on the operation, those entities may still be required
to obtain necessary permits. Also, tents used at funerals are exempt from all
fees under this chapter, and a permit shall not be required for this use.
   (K)   No one is exempt from any construction permit fees or special use
permit fees, except as listed in § 102 of the NCFC.
   (L)   Permits shall be in accordance with § 105 of the NCFC and this
chapter.
   (M)   Service and permit fee schedule.
      (1)   Generally. Permits shall be in accordance with § 105 of the NCFC
and this chapter.
      (2)   Permits required. Permits required by this NCFC and this chapter
shall be obtained from the Fire Official. Permit fees, if any, shall be paid
prior to issuance of the permit. Issued permits shall be kept on the premises
designated therein at all times, and shall be readily available for inspection
by the Fire Official; and
      (3)   Types of permits. There shall be three types of permits as follows.
         (a)   Operational permit. An operational permit allows the applicant
to conduct an operation or a business for which a permit is required by § 105.6
of the NCFC and this chapter for either:
            1.   A prescribed period; or
            2.   Until renewed or revoked.
         (b)   Construction permit. A construction permit allows the applicant
to install or modify systems and equipment for which a permit is required by §
105.6 of the NCFC and this chapter.
         (c)   Special use permits. Special use permits are for and/or allow
special tests, inspections, certain applications, operations, and assemblies,
to maintain, store, or handle certain materials, special events, and services
for which a permit is required by § 105.6 of NCFC and this chapter.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.061 CIVIL CITATION FEES.
   (A)   State-certified fire inspectors of the County Fire Marshal’s office
are empowered to issue notices of violation and civil citations when they have
reasonable cause to believe that any person or business has violated any
provision of the NCFC, as amended, or this chapter. The notice of violation or
civil citation may be delivered in person to the violator or, if the violator
cannot be readily found, the notice of violation or civil citation may be
mailed by certified mail. The notice of violation or civil citation shall
specify the penalty to be imposed on the violator, and shall direct the
violator to appear to the Fire Marshal’s office within 30 days to pay the
penalty or, alternatively, to pay the penalty by mail.
   (B)   The notice of violation may specify a period (a minimum of 30 days and
a maximum of 90 days) during which the violator must correct the violation. If
the violation is not corrected within the specific time, the violator shall be
guilty of a new and separate offense. Violation(s) consisting of locked and/or
blocked exits, impedance of the occupants to quickly evacuate a structure or
premise, or conditions posing imminent danger to the occupants on or about the
premise, or violation(s) of occupancy limits established pursuant to the State
Building Code and/or the fire code must be fixed or corrected during the time
of the inspection if at all possible.
   (C)   If, on a first or second offense, the violator does not pay the
penalty within 30 days after issuance of the notice of violation or civil
citation, a delinquency charge of $10 will be added to the amount specified in
the notice of violation or civil citation, and the notice of the delinquency
charge shall be mailed to the violator. A criminal summons or warrant may be
issued if the penalty plus delinquency charge are not paid within five days
after the date of the delinquency notice. On a third offense of the same code
violation during the same calendar year, there is a per-day civil fee until the
violation is corrected.
   (D)   If the penalty and delinquency charge are not paid within the time
allowed, the Fire Marshal’s office may have a criminal summons issued against
the violator for the violation of the NCFC, as amended, or this chapter. Upon
conviction, the violator shall be subject, in addition to any criminal penalty
the court may impose pursuant to the provisions contained in the NCFC or this
chapter, to the penalty specified in the notice of violation or civil citation
and the delinquency charge.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 95.075 FIRE LANES.
   (A)   In accordance with the fire code, the Fire Marshal shall have the
authority to designate fire lanes necessary for fire-apparatus accessibility.
   (B)   All designated fire lanes shall be marked as specified by the Fire
Marshal. A “ NO PARKING” sign of the type specified by the Fire Marshal shall
be installed adjacent to the fire lane perimeter. Additional signs shall be
posted at intervals not exceeding 100 feet.
   (C)   All fire lanes previously designated and described by the county prior
to this amendment shall remain as fire lanes and maintained as such. The
parking of motor vehicles or other obstruction of a required fire lane shall be
prohibited at all times per the NCFC and this chapter.
   (D)   Any person who shall park in a fire lane shall be subject to a civil
citation, issued either by the Fire Marshal’s office or by a law enforcement
agency having jurisdiction.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.076 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   No person shall remove, tamper with, paint (change the color of the
hydrant so that it does not meet the NFPA standards for hydrant marking), or
render any fire hydrant inoperative or inaccessible, except as may be necessary
during emergencies, maintenance, drills, training, prescribed testing, or when
permitted by the Fire Official.
   (B)   No person shall place or keep any fence, growth (trees, flowers,
shrubs, plants, and the like), stones, signs, trash, or other material near any
fire hydrant that would prevent it from being immediately discernible or in any
other manner hinder the Fire Department from gaining immediate access to it. A
clear space of not less than three feet shall be provided on all sides of a
fire hydrant.
   (C)   No person shall park a vehicle, boat, trailer, or any other item, or
permit it to stand, whether attended or unattended, within 15 feet in either
direction of a fire hydrant.
   (D)   Hydrants to be used as fire protection shall have as a minimum of two
two-and-one-half-inch outlets and one five-inch outlet. This would allow the
minimum requirements of the Insurance Service Office. Whenever possible, pipe
systems should be arranged in loops. The County Public Works Department will be
in charge of making the decision on the minimum water supply piping size to
ensure the necessary water pressure needed to meet the water flow requirements
at the hydrant. The size of the pipe is recommended to be as follows: (1) that
no pipe less than six inches in diameter is to be used as a main water supply
line; (2) no less than a six-inch pipe is to be used for two-outlet hydrants or
to supply the hydrant from the main; (3) eight-inch or larger pipe is to be
used if it is a dead-end main or if more than one hydrant is to be supplied;
and (4) 11-inch or larger pipe is to be used for the primary main as much as
possible. Hydrants should be set plumb, with the centerline of their outlets
about 18 inches above the ground. When hydrants are installed before grading is
complete, the final grade line and accessibility should be considered.
   (E)   Although the installation of fire hydrants is usually performed by
Public Works Department personnel, the Public Works Department shall confirm
with the Fire Marshal’s office the location, spacing, and distribution of fire
hydrants. This will ensure that NFPA standards and Insurance Service Office
requirements are met. By meeting these two requirements, the county will be
providing the most adequate water supply for fire protection for the citizens
of the county who live and work in that area. The maximum distance between
hydrants shall not exceed 1,000 feet. In closely-built areas, subdivisions,
townhouses, commercial/industrial with lot frontage 100 feet or less, 500 feet
or less will be the maximum distant between hydrants. Hydrants should be
located as close as possible to streets and intersections. Hydrants located in
areas subject to heavy traffic need protection against damage from collision.
(Hydrants must be inspected and approved prior to final plot approval.)
   (F)   Due to requirements by the Insurance Rating Services and other
requirements by the insurance industry, all hydrants shall be serviced a
minimum of once a year; twice a year, if possible, is the recommended service
schedule. The Public Works Department, fire departments, and the Fire Marshal’s
office will be overseeing this section. The following is a list of guidelines
to go by to perform those requirements:
      (1)   Clean around the hydrant (this would include removing weeds and the
like);
      (2)   Remove small caps and check gaskets in caps (rotate or replace as
necessary);
      (3)   Open the hydrant slowly and flush the hydrant with caps off;
      (4)   Close the hydrant slowly. (Do not over-tighten the hydrant when
closing);
      (5)   Brush or clean hydrant cap threads as needed and lubricant the cap
threads;
      (6)   Oil the hydrant. (The lubricant used to oil hydrant and cap threads
will be a food grade grease);
      (7)   Replace caps and energize (open slowly) the hydrant. Completely
open the hydrant slowly and wait ten to 15 seconds before closing the hydrant;
      (8)   Check for any leaks;
      (9)   Close the hydrant slowly;
      (10)   Fill out proper paperwork (hydrant maintenance sheet). Make any
notes of work that needs to be done; and
      (11)   Proceed to the next hydrant.
   (G)   Fire flow testing and marking of hydrants (when flow testing is
performed, the Public Works Department must be notified). Fire flow tests are
conducted on water distribution systems to determine the rate of flow available
at various locations for firefighting purposes. An additional benefit derived
from fire flow tests is the indication of possible deficiencies (such as
tuberculation of piping or closed valves, or both), which can be corrected to
ensure adequate fire flows as needed.
      (1)   Flow tests.
         (a)   All hydrants in each fire district shall be flow tested.
         (b)   All equipment used and the testing procedure need shall be done
by NFPA standards.
      (2)   Marking of hydrants. Once all flow tests have been completed and
the flows for each hydrant have been determined, then each hydrant will need to
be marked according to NFPA standards.
      (3)   Public hydrants.
         (a)   All barrels are to be chrome yellow, except in cases where
another color has already been adopted (for hydrants maintained by the County
Water Department, the barrels will be painted with a reflective-type, bright
yellow paint). The tops and nozzle caps should be painted with the following
capacity, indicating the color scheme to provide simplicity and consistency
with colors used in signal work for safety, danger, and intermediate condition:
 
Class AA (1,500 gpm or greater)  Light blue
Class A (1,000 gpm to 1,499 gpm) Green
Class B (500 gpm to 999 gpm)     Orange
Class C (less than 500 gpm)      Red
 
         (b)   For rapid identification at night, the top of the hydrant and
the caps shall be marked with a reflective-type material.
      (4)   Private hydrants. All private hydrants (yard hydrants) within
private enclosures shall be painted solid red, with caps colored coded as
required. When private hydrants are located on public streets, they shall be
painted solid red, with caps colored coded as required to distinguish them from
public hydrants. See reference manual for private hydrant-marking procedures.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.077 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS DISCLOSURE.
   (A)   Generally. Hazardous materials disclosure shall be as specified in
G.S. §§ 95-173 through 95-218.
   (B)   Hazard identification signs.
      (1)   The increasing use of a wide variety of chemicals, many of which
introduce problems other than flammability, lead to the need for a simple
hazard identification system. The purpose of such a system would be to
safeguard the lives of those individuals who may be concerned with fire and
spills occurring in these facilities or businesses. This system provides
simple, readily recognizable and easily understood markings, which will give,
at a glance, a general idea of the inherent hazards of any material and the
order of severity of these hazards as they relate to fire prevention, exposure,
and control. Its objectives are to provide an appropriate alerting signal and
on-the-spot information to safeguard the lives of the Fire Department, rescue
squad, EMS members, and law enforcement during emergencies at these facilities.
It will also make employees aware of the potential hazards and bring the
facility into compliance with the Hazardous Chemicals Right to Know Act.
      (2)   The 704 symbols are usually seen on the exterior surfaces of
buildings and aboveground storage tanks. The 704 symbols shall be required to
identify any area that is deemed to be a hazard. This determination is to be
made by the Fire Marshal.
         (a)   Signs required. Per the fire code, hazard and identification
signs as outlined in NFPA 704 shall be placed accordingly at all entrances to
and in locations where hazardous materials are stored, handled, or used in
excess of the exempt amounts.
         (b)   Size and type of signs. The size and type of signs used to
identify hazardous materials shall be of the type and size specified in NFPA
standard. A reference guide on the sizes of signs and signals will be made
available to the public from the Fire Marshal’s office upon request.
            1.   The NFPA adopted the 704 system of identifying hazardous
materials in 1961.
            2.   The 704 system provides hazards as they relate to fire
prevention, fire exposure, and fire control.
            3.   The colors, which are diamond shaped, indicate the following
type hazards:
               a.   Blue - Health;
               b.   Red - Flammability of the products;
               c.   Yellow - Reactivity of products; and
               d.   White - Specific information entered here.
            4.   Numbers range from zero through four and are inserted on the
diamond-shaped colors (blue, red, and yellow) to indicate the degree of hazards
present, with zero being the least hazardous and four being the most hazardous.
            5.   Notations are also used in the white diamond to indicate
special hazards. Materials demonstrating unusual reactivity with water shall be
identified with the letter “W” with a horizontal line through the center of the
“W.” Materials possessing oxidizing properties shall be identified by the
letters “OXY”. Materials possessing radioactivity hazards shall be identified
by the standard radioactivity symbol.
            6.   Symbols are indicated for the most dangerous hazardous
material when more than one type of hazardous material is present.
            7.   Although 704 symbols are subject to change, depending on
changes in the area of storage or use of hazardous materials, they should be
removed from an area only when hazardous materials are no longer present.
            8.   Symbols should be located where they can be readily seen by
responding fire departments and other emergency agencies, and as near as is
practical to the area of the hazard.
            9.   The sign must be easily seen from the roadway. The sign must
be a minimum of 30 by 30 inches in size (type and size specified in NFPA
standard).
            10.   A current Material Safety Data Sheet for all chemicals stored
on the property should be put in a waterproof container located near the
entrance to the property.
            11.   The owners of the business will be given 30 days from date of
inspection to comply.
            12.   Hazardous materials that, when mixed, react violently, or
evoke toxic vapors or gases, or that, in combination, become hazardous by
reason of toxicity, oxidizing power, flammability
or other properties, shall be separated from each other in storage by distance,
partitions or other approved manner so as to preclude accidental contact
between them.
            13.   The Fire Marshal may require warning signs wherever hazardous
materials are stored, processed, or handled. The warning signs shall be
conspicuously lettered in accordance with NFPA standard.
            14.   This section shall not apply to hazardous materials in
transport, which are placarded in accordance with Department of Transportation
regulations, or applicable provisions of other NFPA codes and standards listed
in the NFPA manuals.
   (C)   Warning signs required in coin-operated, dry-cleaning establishments.
Each coin-operated, dry-cleaning establishment using the solvent known as
“perchloroe-thylene” shall display, prominently upon or near each dry-cleaning
machine, a sign warning the public of the danger of excessive solvent vapor
inhalation, or that prolonged or repeated contact of skin or eyes can be
harmful.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.078 DISPLAY OF ADDRESS NUMBERS.
   All new and existing buildings shall display their assigned address numbers
in accordance with the NCFC and
Chapter 93 of this code. The minimum addressing number size for single-family
or duplex structures must be three inches in height. The minimum addressing
number size for all other structures must be six inches in height. Numbers for
all commercial, business, public assembly, educational, and any other
structures that is open to the public must be posted on the building face that
is readily visible from the road from which the number is assigned. Unit
designators must be posted at each unit within three feet of the front entrance
of the unit. In the event that a structure, or its posted number, is not
visible from the road from which the number is assigned, the number must also
be posted at or near every driveway or access to the structure. Violation of
this section can result in a civil citation being issued by the Fire Marshal or
its designee.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.079 HIGH-RACK DRY STORAGE FOR BOATS, ALSO KNOWN AS HIGH-PILED COMBUSTIBLE
STORAGE AND HIGH-RACK STORAGE SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Any facility utilizing a rack storage system of more than one level
shall be considered to fall under the definition of “in-out dry storage
facility.”
   (B)   Factors, such as method and height of stock piling, combustibility of
materials, fuel load and rate of heat release, areas and size of piles, aisles,
automatic fire extinguishing systems, smoke removal
systems, fire protection and fire separations, and access requirements, will be
determined by consultation with the NCFC, the State Building Code, NFPA 303,
NFPA 307, NFPA 30A, NFPA 230, NFPA 231, and NFPA 13 of the National Fire
Protection Association Standards and any other codes and standards related to
these types of facilities.
      (1)   The contractor or the owner of the building will also need to
obtain a permit through the Fire Marshal’s office for this type of building.
      (2)   Plans for this type of building must be reviewed by the Fire
Marshal’s office and approved before permits can be issued.
      (3)   Prior to occupancy, buildings housing high-rack storage systems
shall be approved by the Fire Marshal’s office.
      (4)   Storage of boats and other equipment in these type buildings shall
meet the requirements of the state building codes and the NFPA 303 §§ 5-2.1 a-
h, 5-2.3 e-g, and 5-2.4 a1-6.
      (5)   The State Fire Code, along with State Amendments, and NFPA 303,
307, and 30A cover the areas of operational hazards that will need to be met,
including the working, storage, and fueling of the boats.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.080 MARINAS, BOATYARDS, YACHT CLUBS, BOAT CONDOMINIUMS, DOCKING
FACILITIES, AND ALL ASSOCIATED PIERS, DOCKS, AND FLOATS.
   The construction and operations of the above-named facilities shall meet or
exceed the requirements set forth in the state building codes and NFPA 303,
NFPA 307, NFPA 30A, NFPA 230, NFPA 231, and NFPA 13 of the National Fire
Protection Association Standards, and any other codes and standards that deal
with these types of facilities.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.081 KEY BOXES.
   The Fire Official shall have the authority to require a key box to be
installed in an accessible location where access to, or within a structure or
area is difficult because of security, in accordance with the NCFC.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.082 SMOKE DETECTORS (FOR RENTAL PROPERTY; LANDLORDS AND TENANTS).
   All rental property, and its respective landlord, shall be required to
provide a fit premises, as required in G.S. § 42-42, as amended.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
HAUNTED HOUSES
§ 95.095 GENERALLY.
   Halloween haunted houses present a difficult problem in trying to meet the
provisions of the fire code and maintain a safe environment. The following
provisions will be required to be met to assure the safety of all persons
participating and attending Halloween haunted houses.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.096 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   A special use permit shall be required to be obtained from the Fire
Marshal’s office for anyone wishing to open a Halloween haunted house to the
public. The permit fee shall be based upon the county fee schedule.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.097 PERMIT-ISSUANCE PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any person who desires to obtain a special use permit for a haunted
house shall first contact the Fire Marshal’s office to obtain the documentation
required for obtaining a special use permit.
   (B)   Following the submission of a request for a special use permit for a
haunted house, an appointment for a fire inspection shall be made to inspect
the building planned to be used as a haunted house. The permit fee shall be
paid by this time.
   (C)   A copy of the guidelines for the use of haunted houses shall be made
available in the Fire Marshal’s office and will be provided to the applicant.
The fire inspection should not be conducted until the requirements for safety
systems of the building are in place and the facility is ready for use. If all
requirements are met, then a permit will be issued at that time.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.098 INSPECTION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   (A)   At any time the haunted house is open to the public, a fire inspection
can be conducted by the Fire Official to assure compliance with all guidelines
and the fire code.
   (B)   In the event that the specified guidelines and/or the fire code
regulations are not being met, then the person that obtained the special use
permit will be subject to a civil citation. If the violations are of such a
severe nature as to be hazardous to the lives and/or well-being of the public,
then the Fire Official may revoke the special use permit, which will terminate
the further use of the haunted house. If the violations are corrected, then the
special use permit may be reinstated with no charge.
   (C)   In the event a special use permit is revoked and the occupant refuses
to comply with the required regulations, a refund of the permit fee will not be
allowed.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.099 REGULATIONS REGARDING THE USE OF HALLOWEEN HAUNTED HOUSES.
   (A)   A scaled sketch, showing the locations and the widths of egress and
exits, is required to be submitted to the Fire Marshal’s office, along with a
log showing: a description of the event, performance dates and times, and the
name of the person or persons responsible for the event.
   (B)   Emergency exits shall be provided throughout the structure to ensure
the safe and prompt egress of occupants in the event of an emergency. These
exits shall not be covered or concealed in any way and shall be available for
immediate use without any type of hindrance. These exits shall be marked
“EXIT”. All exit signs shall be of a florescent-type, with letters a minimum of
three inches in size. The Fire Official may require lighted exit and emergency
lights if he or she deems it necessary. All staff personnel shall know the
location of all exits and the proper procedures to follow when leading people
to an exit.
   (C)   Workers are to be stationed at or near each exit while the haunted
house is open to the public.
   (D)   All exits must remain unlocked and unblocked while the structure is
occupied.
   (E)   The haunted house must have workers in each room at all times of
operation. Each worker shall have a flashlight and handheld alarm (whistle,
horn, and the like) to warn of an emergency.
   (F)   All steps, ramps, or outside porches shall be lighted at all times.
   (G)   Lights shall be installed in all areas of the structure that will be
occupied. They shall be turned on in the event of an emergency to provide
sufficient light for a safe means of exiting the building.
   (H)   Multi-purpose, portable fire extinguishers shall be installed near
each exit and throughout the structure so that the maximum travel distance to
an extinguisher does not exceed 25 feet. All fire extinguishers shall be ABC
extinguishers rated ten pounds.
   (I)   All staff shall know the location and be trained in the use of all
fire extinguishers.
   (J)   No combustible or flammable liquid-type equipment shall be used in
structure.
   (K)   No open flame, candle(s), or pyrotechnics shall be used within the
structure or within 50 feet of the structure.
   (L)   No smoking shall be allowed within, or within 50 feet of, the
structure. In order to enforce this requirement, “No Smoking” signs must be
posted within and around the structure.
   (M)   The use of straw, hay, live vegetation, moss, vines, split bamboo,
leaves, cloth, foam plastics, paper, cotton batting, and similar material shall
not be used unless the materials are flame-resistant, as determined by the Fire
Prevention Code. The Fire Official will need to approve any items used and the
flame-retardant chemical used to treat those items.
   (N)   Spliced electrical cords, homemade switching devices, and/or open
junction boxes and connections shall not be permitted. Extension cords shall
not be used as a wiring method.
   (O)   The number of persons allowed inside the structure will be based on
the size of the structure. Each group shall be led through the structure by a
competent staff person. There shall be at least one empty room in between each
group. All staff persons leading groups shall be familiar with all the
guidelines required for haunted houses.
   (P)   In the event of an emergency, a warning signal will be sounded to
notify all occupants to evacuate the structure.
   (Q)   There shall be regular meetings with all personnel who will be working
at the haunted house, prior to opening the structure to the public, to review
all rules and regulations required to be followed, most importantly those rules
related to emergency evacuation procedures.
   (R)   Other considerations for the safety of the public that may be
necessary, such as decorations, fire lanes, and the like, shall be enforced by
the Fire Official.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023) Penalty, see §
95.999
DECORATIVE MATERIALS AND PYROTECHNICS
§ 95.110 GENERALLY.
   (A)   All decorative material shall be noncombustible, inherently flame-
resistant, or treated and maintained flame-resistant when tested.
   (B)   The use of pyrotechnics in the performing arts in conjunction with
theatrical, musical, or similar productions before an audience, performers, or
support personnel shall follow all state building codes and NFPA standards.
   (C)   Natural-cut Christmas trees shall be treated and maintained flame-
resistant throughout their use; except Christmas trees located in areas
protected by an approved automatic sprinkler system.
   (D)   Live Christmas trees with their roots protected by an earth ball may
be permitted, provided they are maintained in a fresh condition and are not
allowed to become dry.
   (E)   Artificial Christmas trees shall be labeled or otherwise identified or
certified by the manufacturer as being flame-retardant or flame-resistant.
   (F)   Only UL-listed electrical lights and wiring shall be used on Christmas
trees and similar decorations.
   (G)   Electrical lights are prohibited on metal artificial Christmas trees.
   (H)   Open flames shall not be located on or within the height of the
Christmas tree or other similar combustible materials.
   (I)   Natural-cut Christmas trees shall not be located near heating vents or
other fixed or portable heating devices that could cause the tree to dry out or
to be ignited.
   (J)   When installing cut Christmas trees indoors, the tree shall have the
bottom end of the trunk cut off at least one inch above the end to help the
tree absorb water. The tree shall be placed in a suitable stand with adequate
water. The water level shall be checked and maintained on a daily basis. The
tree shall be removed from the building immediately upon evidence of dryness.
   (K)   Cotton cannot be used as decorative material. A cotton substitute,
magic glass or a similar product that is fire-retardant, may be used.
   (L)   Decorations shall not block passageways, exits, or fire protection
equipment. Persons in doubt about where decorations can and cannot placed
should contact the Fire Marshal’s office at 704-736-8516.
   (M)   (1)   Door decorations shall not exceed 50% of the door space.
      (2)   Only noncombustible or flame-retardant materials should be used.
   (N)   (1)   Corridor walls shall not be covered with decorations that exceed
25% of the wall.
      (2)   Noncombustible or flame-retardant materials shall be used.
      (3)   Nothing shall be used that can be an obstruction.
   (O)   Facilities shall have written certification that items were treated to
make them fire-retardant.
   (P)   Candle safety.
      (1)   Never use candles on a tree or place near an evergreen tree.
      (2)   Make sure candles are mounted in a secure and nonflammable base
that will not tip over.
      (3)   Adequate safeguards are to be provided to avoid danger or ignition
of combustible materials or injury to occupants;
      (4)   Candles shall not be left unattended or where small children can
reach them;
      (5)   Any and all live vegetation used shall be of flame-resistant
materials or shall be rendered flame-resistant by treating with a fire-
retardant coating and maintained flame-resistant;
      (6)   Candles shall not block or impede exit widths;
      (7)   Immediately upon completion of a service, all flames shall be
properly extinguished; and
      (8)   Permits are required for use of candles in public places. Churches
are exempt. All others should contact the Fire Marshal’s office for the
permits.
   (Q)   The above guidelines shall also apply to scenery used in all stage
productions.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023) Penalty, see §
95.999
VIOLATIONS
§ 95.125 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   A notice of violation is to be considered a warning citation for fire code
violations.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.126 CIVIL CITATION.
   (A)   Any person shall be subject to all penalties allowed by law, if the
person:
      (1)   Violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter;
      (2)   Violates or fails to comply with any order made under this chapter;
      (3)   Builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or
plans submitted and approved under the LCFPPO, or any certificate or permit
issued thereunder; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the
Fire Marshal or by a court of a competent jurisdiction, within the time
affixed.
   (B)   In addition to any civil penalties that may apply, violations of this
chapter shall be a misdemeanor offense and subject the violator to the
penalties as set forth in §
10.99(C)(4) of this code and any other criminal laws that may be applicable.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.127 SUMMARY ABATEMENT.
   The Fire Marshal shall have the authority to summarily abate any condition
that is in violation of any provision of the fire code and/or this chapter that
presents an immediate fire hazard to life or property.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.128 FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to give, signal, or transmit, or
to cause or permit to be given, signaled, or transmitted, in any manner any
false alarm.
   (B)   If a fire department has to respond to a false alarm at a business or
residence more than four times in one calendar year, a citation may be issued.
There will be no fine for malfunction, natural causes (storms and the like), or
good intent. (If there is a citation issued, any money collected will be put
into an account for the primary responding Fire Department to be given to that
department before the end of each budget year.)
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.129 OPEN BURNING VIOLATIONS.
   A civil citation may be issued if any of the parts of § 95.042 of this
chapter or the NCFC are violated. The citation will be based on the violation.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.130 CARELESSNESS WITH FIRE.
   No person shall willfully/deliberately, or through carelessness or
negligence, set fire to or cause the burning of any material, in such manner as
to endanger the safety of any person or property.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.131 ACCUMULATIONS OF WASTE MATERIALS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to accumulate or store combustible waste matter
beneath manufactured homes or recreational vehicles or at any other place
within a recreational vehicle park or manufactured home community.
   (B)   Roofs, courts, yards, vacant lots, and open spaces shall be kept free
and clear of deposits or accumulations of waste paper, hay, grass, straw,
weeds, litter, combustible waste, or rubbish of any kind. All weeds, grass,
vines, or other growth, when same endangers property, or is liable to be set
fire to, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the
property.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.132 UNSAFE, DEFECTIVE BUILDINGS OR SYSTEMS.
   All buildings or service systems that are unsanitary, constitute a fire
hazard, or constitute a hazard to safety or health, bad conditions of walls,
overload floors, defective construction, decay, unsafe wiring or heating
system, inadequate means of egress, are considered unsafe. All the unsafe
building or service systems shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation or by
demolition in accordance with the provisions of the technical codes (G.S. §§
160D-1118 through 160D-1124).
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 3-21-2022) Penalty, see §
95.999
§ 95.133 CODE VIOLATIONS.
   Code violations will be based on this chapter and the NCFC.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.134 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeals from citations under the fire code. Any appeal arising from
any citation, order, decision or determination pertaining to the State Building
Code, including the fire code, as adopted herein, shall be taken to the
Commissioner of Insurance, or the Commissioner’s designee, by filing a written
notice with the Commissioner of Insurance, and county officials, within a
period of ten days of the citation, order, decision or determination (G.S. §
160D-1127 and § 143-139).
   (B)   Appeals from citations under this chapter, not within the fire code.
Any appeal arising from any citation, order, decision or determination
pertaining to the requirements of this chapter that are not within the fire
code, shall be filed with the County Manager’s office by filing a written
notice of appeal within a period of ten days of the citation, order, decision
or determination.
(Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
SCHEDULED INSPECTIONS
§ 95.145 INSPECTIONS; GENERALLY.
   The County Fire Marshal’s office will respond to any fire safety-related or
fire code complaint made to that office. Otherwise, inspections of occupancies
and businesses will be provided per the NCFC according to this chapter. The
frequency rates for the inspection of occupancies as mandated by the North
Carolina General Statutes shall supersede this schedule.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.146 ANNUAL.
   (A)   Generally. The following facilities and buildings are subject to
inspection a minimum of once a year, subject to the terms of this chapter.
   (B)   Assembly occupancy. Amusement park building, auditorium (less than
1,000 capacity), auditorium (1,000 or greater capacity), bowling alleys, court
rooms, dance halls, night clubs, exhibit
halls, libraries, meeting centers, haunted houses, motion picture theaters,
museums, passenger depots, public assembly halls, recreation facilities,
restaurants, stadiums, grandstands, and tents;
   (C)   Public educational facilities.  Public elementary, middle, and high
schools shall be inspected at a minimum of two times per year.
   (D)   Hazardous occupancy. Chemical-processing and/or storage, manufacturing
facility, compressed/flammable/combustible gas storage, distribution facility,
dry cleaners, explosive facility storage, use, manufacturing, distribution,
flammable/combustible-liquid processing storage, manufacturing, flammable/
combustible-liquid storage distribution centers, hazardous-material handling
and processing, hazardous-material storage facility, hazardous-material
production facility, hazardous-material waste disposal facility, L.P. and
natural-gas distribution facility, and laboratories/research development
centers;
   (E)   Institutional occupancy. Correction facilities, detention centers,
detoxification facilities, hospitals/mental hospitals, jails, reformatories,
residential-custodial facilities, nursing homes, and day-care centers; and
   (F)   Residential occupancy. Apartment houses (common areas), boarding
houses, day-care homes, dormitories, fraternities and sororities, group homes
(not classified as Group I), hotels/motels, residential-care facilities (not
classified as Group I).
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.147 ONCE EVERY TWO YEARS.
   (A)   The following facilities and buildings are subject to inspections, at
a minimum, at least once every two years.
   (B)   Educational above the twelfth grade (every two years); and
   (C)   Industrial occupancy: assembly plant, factory, furniture/woodworking,
manufacturing facility, processing plant, textile, and fabrication facility.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.148 ONCE EVERY THREE YEARS.
   (A)   The following facilities and buildings are subject to inspections, at
a minimum, at least one every three years.
   (B)   Assembly occupancy: church and synagogues;
   (C)   Business occupancy: automobile dealerships (no service work),
automobile dealerships (with service work) automotive self-service stations (no
service work), automotive full-service stations, automotive repair garages, car
washes, dry cleaning (not classified as hazardous), florists and nurseries,
greenhouses, laboratories (not classified as hazardous), laundries (full- and
self-service), machine shops, print shops, telephone exchanges, offices, radio
and television stations;
   (D)   Mercantile occupancy: convenience stores (dispenses flammable/
combustible liquids), department stores, drug stores, markets, retail stores,
shopping centers, sales rooms, covered malls, super markets/grocery stores, and
wholesale stores (other than warehouse). Fireworks provision to be added if the
facility sells or stores for sale; and
   (E)   Storage occupancy: aircraft hangers, helistops, private garages,
storage warehouse, and wholesale warehouse.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.149 TO BE FREE OF CHARGE.
   The fire safety inspections are provided free of charge. The only fees that
the business will incur are for certain permits when they are required. For all
jobs or tasks required by State Building Code, along with State Amendments, and
this chapter that require a permit to do a job or task, a civil citation can be
issued if the permit is not obtained.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
REPORTING A HAZARD OR VIOLATION
§ 95.160 HAZARDS AND VIOLATIONS.
   The Fire Marshal’s office will respond to any complaint regarding a life
safety hazard, illegal burning, and any other fire code violation or fire
ordinance violation in the county.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.161 HOW TO REPORT A HAZARD OR VIOLATION.
   (A)   A hazard or violation pursuant to this chapter may be reported at any
time.
   (B)   During normal business hours (Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m), a report of a hazard or violation may be made to the Fire Marshal's
office by contacting 704-736-8516.
   (C)   After the normal business hours of the Fire Marshal's office (or
during a county holiday), a report of a hazard or violation may be made to the
County Communications Center by contacting its non-emergency line at 704-736-
0282.
   (D)   A report of an active fire or emergency should be made by dialing 911.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.162 REQUIRED INFORMATION FOR COMPLAINTS.
   Any complaint of a hazard or violation under this chapter is required to
contain the following information for the complaint to be processed:
   (A)   The name of the person filing the complaint;
   (B)   The address and telephone number of the person filing the complaint;
   (C)   The location of the hazard or violation; and
   (D)   The type of problem, hazard, or violation.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.163 RECORDS.
   A written record of all complaints received, and resulting investigations,
will be maintained in the Fire Marshal's office. A report will be attached to
the complaint, stating any violations or hazards found and what actions were
taken.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
§ 95.999 PENALTY.
   The penalties for violations of this chapter and the State Building Code
will be as follows.
 
Violation(s) of the State Building Code, the State Fire Code, and/or
this Chapter, including All Referenced Enforceable Material Contained
Within (May Issue Citation)
First offense                                                    $50
Second offense                                                   $100
Third and any subsequent offenses (per each day that a violation $200
continues)
NOTES TO TABLE:   
Any violation incurred more than a year after issuance of the initial
citation shall be treated as a first offense for purposes of
establishing and imposing penalties.
 
 
Violation(s) of Occupancy Limits Established Pursuant to the State
Building Code and/or the State Fire Code (May Issue Citation)
First offense                                                    $150
Second offense                                                   $250
Third and any subsequent offenses (per each day that a violation $500
continues)
NOTES TO TABLE:   
Any violation incurred more than a year after issuance of the initial
citation shall be treated as a first offense for purposes of
establishing and imposing penalties.
 
 
Violation(s) Consisting of Locked and/or Blocked Exits, Impedance of
the Occupants to Quickly Evacuate a Structure or Premise, or
Conditions Posing Imminent Danger to the Occupants on or about the
Premise (Shall Issue Citation)
First offense                                                    $150
Second offense                                                   $250
Third and any subsequent offenses (per each day that a violation $500
continues)
NOTES TO TABLE:   
Any violation incurred more than a year after issuance of the initial
citation shall be treated as a first offense for purposes of
establishing and imposing penalties.
 
 
Violation(s) Consisting of Parking in Fire Lane, Blocking of Fire Hydrant,
Failure to Place Hazardous Materials Warning Signs (NFPA 704) Where Required
by this Chapter, False Alarms Due to Malfunctions of Alarm Systems (May Issue
Citation)
First offense                                           $50
Second offense                                          $100
Third offense (per each day that a violation continues) $200
NOTES TO TABLE:   
Any violation incurred more than a year after issuance of the initial citation
shall be treated as a first offense for purposes of establishing and imposing
penalties.
 
 
Violation(s) of the Open Burning Section of this Chapter, the County Permit
Section, and the State Fire Code (May Issue Citation)
First offense                                         $50
Second offense                                        $100
Third offense (per each day that violation continues) $200
NOTES TO TABLE:   
Any violation incurred more than a year after issuance of the initial citation
shall be treated as a first offense for purposes of establishing and imposing
penalties.
 
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 11-6-2023)
CHAPTER 96: SPECIAL EVENTS AND MASS GATHERINGS
Section
   
96.01   Purpose; scope and intent
   
96.02   Definitions
   
96.03   Permit required
   
96.04   Standards for all covered events
   
96.05   Additional standards for television and film events
   
96.06   Permit and other required fees
   
96.07   Revocation of permit
   
96.08   Exemptions
   
96.09   Appeals
 
   
96.99   Penalty
§ 96.01 PURPOSE; SCOPE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to establish a structured process for
permitting the staging of special planned public events, mass gatherings, and/
or television and film activities to ensure proper planning and adequate
allocation of county resources for events and to protect the health and safety
of the public attending such events.
   (B)   This chapter will not apply to events or mass gatherings sponsored by
local, state or federal government agencies, or schools located in Lincoln
County, as planning for events and allocation of necessary resources is already
coordinated. This chapter shall not apply to regular church or worship
activities or events. This chapter shall also not apply to businesses holding
events in venues designated to hold large numbers of people, where there is
already a safety and emergency plan approved by the county.
   (C)   When it is determined that an event does not meet the threshold of
requiring a permit, but notification of emergency first responders is
recommended, the Park and Recreation Department will forward the information to
the appropriate agencies.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2013)
§ 96.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COVERED EVENT. A special event or mass gathering that is not otherwise under
the jurisdiction of another governing authority.
   MASS GATHERING. Includes all events where at least 1,000 individuals are
expected to be or are in attendance or participating in a venue or area for a
specific purpose.
   SANCTIONING AUTHORITY. The official governing body that sanctions specific
events of the type being requested by an applicant, such as, but not limited
to, racing authorities, public sports bodies and event associations.
   SPECIAL EVENT.  
      (1)   A planned event, open to the general public, which involves the
gathering of 300 or more persons for a common purpose or goal, on public or
private property, in which any of the following may apply:
      (a)   The use, sale or display of fireworks;
      (b)   The sale, purchase, provision or consumption of alcoholic
beverages;
      (c)   The provision of live entertainment;
      (d)   The provision of overnight activities (ex: camping);
      (e)   Motorized or non-motorized vehicular racing;
      (f)   Activities located wholly or partially on public rights-of-way;
      (g)   A sport that involves physical contact between participants as part
of normal play;
      (h)   A film or television production event is also considered a special
event under this chapter.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, those activities contained in §
96.08 are specifically excluded from the definitions of an EVENT, SPECIAL EVENT
or MASS GATHERING.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2013)
§ 96.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall have, hold, sponsor, or cause to be had, held, or
sponsored, or allow to be had, held or sponsored on any real property they own
in Lincoln County any covered event without having first applied for and
received a permit from the county to hold the covered event, except as provided
in §
96.08.
   (B)   All applications for covered event permits must be made through the
Lincoln County Parks and Recreation Department. An application must be
submitted for each event proposed, and completed in its entirety. No
application shall be considered submitted until, all information required by
the application form has been provided,
   (C)   Applications for covered event permits shall be submitted at least 90
days prior to the date of the covered event. The County Manager or his/her
designee shall have the authority to reduce this time period for good cause
shown.
   (D)   (1)   The Lincoln County Parks and Recreation Department will forward
covered event applications for review by the Lincoln County Special Event/Mass
Gathering Application Review Committee. The Committee will include
representatives from the following county departments, and fire departments:
         (a)   Sheriff's Office;
         (b)   Emergency Medical Services;
         (c)   Fire Marshal/Emergency Management;
         (d)   Fire Department representative from district in which event is
planned;
         (e)   Parks and Recreation;
         (f)   Health Department/Environmental Health;
         (g)   Public Works;
         (h)   911 Communications Center;
         (i)   Planning and Inspections.
      (2)   For informational purposes the following organizations may also be
notified:
         (a)   North Carolina Department of Transportation (NCDOT);
         (b)   Duke Energy Lake Management;
         (c)   Lake Norman Marine Commission;
         (d)   NC Highway Patrol;
      (3)   If an event permit is requested for an event in the city limits of
Lincolnton, the Committee will forward the application to the city to be
considered under their application process.
      (4)   In order to receive a permit, the application must receive approval
from each entity represented on the Committee.
   (E)   Lincoln County Special Event/Mass Gathering Application Review
Committee may set conditions for permit approval. The applicant may for
example, be required to pay for fire/rescue/ medical stand by, and security/law
enforcement in order for permit approval. The applicant may be required to pay
additional fees if county facilities are being used.
   (F)   Every covered events must meet all North Carolina Building Codes,
National Electric Code and ADA Requirements
(Ord. passed 11-18-2013; Ord. passed 9-19-2022)
§ 96.04 STANDARDS FOR ALL COVERED EVENTS.
   (A)   A covered event shall be approved upon the timely completion of the
application required herein, unless the reviewing departments find one or more
of the following:
      (1)   The covered event time and location coincide with another covered
event for which a covered event permit has been issued, and it is determined by
the county or any department that there is a demonstrable safety or logistical
concern with allowing two covered events to proceed simultaneously during the
same time or at the same location. By way of illustration, but not limitation,
safety or logistical concerns could include, but not be limited to, events that
would unduly burden the resources of law enforcement or emergency services
personnel, or would, by the simultaneous time or location thereof, create the
potential for traffic hazards;
      (2) The covered event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly
movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic at or contiguous to its location in
such a manner that cannot be adequately controlled by the county's public
safety departments;
      (3)   The event will constitute a substantial hazard to the public safety
or materially interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of
residents to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of their property;
      (4)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly
points for or at the location of the special event will substantially interfere
with the county's ability to provide adequate fire, police and emergency
medical services to the public; or
      (5)   The Lincoln County Covered Event Application Review Committee
determines that the event plan does not adequately account for and protect the
public health and safety needs of the citizens of Lincoln County would be
compromised.
   (B)   It shall be impermissible for the Review Committee or its members to
inquire into the nature or content of speech to be held or to deny an
application because of the content or purpose of the covered event.
   (C)   All covered events must comply with, and provide proof of compliance
with, the following:
      (1)   All federal, state, local and event sanctioning authority mandated
medical coverage requirements;
      (2)   Lincoln County EMS Medical Standards for Mass Gatherings, if
applicable;
      (3)   Lincoln County EMS shall be the primary service provider for
Lincoln County; if additional emergency medical services are provided by the
applicant, they will only be permitted to function under the authority of
Lincoln County EMS;
      (4)   All state, federal and local fire safety and prevention standards,
codes and permitting requirements must be met. The Fire Department in the
district where the event is to be held shall be primary and all others must
function under the authority of that respective department;
      (5)   For events where alcohol is provided, served, or sold, event
organizer must secure a valid ABC permit. Copies of this permit must be
forwarded to the Parks and Recreation Department prior to the event;
      (6)   Animals are not allowed at covered events unless as a specified
part of event and provided in the application therefore. Animals brought by
spectators or participants, except as service animals, shall not be allowed;
      (7)   Event organizers shall remove all trash and debris and shall clean
up immediately after a covered event;
      (8)   The county, in its discretion, may require the applicant to provide
liability and/or special events insurance coverage for the covered event;
      (9)   Mass gatherings of 1,000 people or more must have a Crowd Control
Manager for 250 people (per NC Fire Code). Event organizer must provide a
trained Crowd Control Manager;
      (10)   All road closures or events that will impact traffic must be
approved by the NC Department of Transportation;
      (11)   Any event that takes place on or around the lake must have the
approval of both Duke Energy and the Lake Norman Marine Commission;
      (12)   Submit a completed application in the format required by the
county, which shall contain information such as the following, which will be
critical in evaluating the citizen impact and public safety related to the
event:
         (a)   General information related to the event such as:
            1.   If amplified sound will be used;
            2.   If electrical connections are required;
            3.   If tents, trailers, inflatable/air supported devices, fencing,
scaffolding, etc. will be involved in this event;
            4.   If alcohol will be provided, served or sold;
            5.   If and how many motorized vehicles (cars, boats, tractors,
etc.)are involved in the event;
            6.   If and how many vendors will be involved in the event;
            7.   If vendors will be serving or cooking food;
            8.   If fireworks or other potentially hazardous materials will be
used;
            9.   If there will be an admission charge;
            10.   If animals will be involved with the event;
            11.   First aid plans;
            12.   The number of toilets that will be accessible;
            13.   Parking plans;
            14.   Signage plan;
            15.   Crowd control plan;
            16.   Traffic control plan;
            17.   Weather contingency plans;
            18.   The amount and type of insurance that will be secured;
         (b)   Information on county, and fire support services that may be
required from:
            1.   Security/law enforcement;
            2.   Fire/rescue;
            3.   Emergency medical services standby;
            4.   Waste clean up;
            5.   Other (Park and Recreation, Health, Public Works).
(Ord. passed 11-18-2013)
§ 96.05 ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR TELEVISION AND FILM EVENTS.
   (A)   A pre-production meeting with Lincoln County Special Event/Mass
Gathering Application Review Committee or its designee must be held.
   (B)   Proof of insurance certificates for the following must be submitted
with the application:
      (1)   General liability insurance: $2,000,000;
      (2)   Automobile liability insurance: $2,000,000;
      (3)   Worker's Compensation and employer's liability insurance:
$1,000,000.
   (C)   A security deposit of $5,000 must be submitted with application.
   (D)   It is the responsibility of the television or film company to notify
the affected residents and/or businesses following the county's approval of the
application and no less than three business days prior to the planned activity.
   (E)   Production vehicles shall not block fire hydrants, driveways, or other
access ramps unless authorized by Lincoln County officials.
   (F)   Production companies are responsible for vacating locations used with
a minimum amount of noise and disruption at the end of each shooting day.
   (G)   Any filming activity involving holding, delaying or rerouting of
traffic in residential areas, or on state maintained road ways must be
accompanied by at least one deputy sheriff.
   (H)   The production company is fully responsible for clean-up and proper
disposal of all waste and materials produced.
   (I)   Removal or alteration of vegetation in the public right-of-way or on
county owned lands is prohibited unless specifically approved by the film
permit.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2013)
§ 96.06 PERMIT AND OTHER REQUIRED FEES.
   (A)   The schedule of fees for permitting and other fees for covered events
shall be approved by Resolution of the Board of County Commissioners.
   (B)   The County Commission has the authority to waive permit fees and other
required fees. The Commission will consider waiving fees if:
      (1)   The organization sponsoring the event is a not for profit
organization;
      (2)   If any funds generated by the event are used to support the event
for the following year or are used to support a community project;
      (3)   Other factors that may document the contribution the event makes to
the community that would justify waiving fees.
   (C)   If other fees for services are required, they must be paid up front,
prior to the event. If the event is canceled and the county is provided 24
hours notice, the fees for stand by service will be refunded.
   (D)   There may be other fire inspection, health and facility usage permits/
fees that may be charged.
   (E)   All permits pertaining to any special events and/or mass gatherings
must be obtained prior to the event and copies must be submitted to Parks and
Recreation Department (Ex: NCDOT, ABC permit).
(Ord. passed 11-18-2013)
§ 96.07 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Park and Recreation Director, acting on behalf of the Lincoln County
Special Event/Mass Gathering Application Review Committee has the authority to
revoke a special event/mass gathering permit if the holder of such permit fails
to comply with the provisions required in this chapter or conditions stipulated
in the permit.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2013)
§ 96.08 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Any local, state or federal governmental agency acting within the
scope of Its governmental functions;
      (2)   Any school operating in Lincoln County;
      (3)   Church or worship activities within a facility;
      (4)   Businesses holding events in venues designated to hold large
numbers of people, where there is already a safety and emergency plan approved
by the county.
   (B)   When it is determined that an event does not meet the threshold of
requiring a permit, but notification of emergency first responders is
recommended, the Park and Recreation Department will forward the information to
the appropriate agencies.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2013)
§ 96.09 APPEALS.
   Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a special event/
mass gathering permit, the conditions of a special event permit, or the
revocation of a special event permit to the County Manager and then a further
appeal may be made to the Board of County Commissioners. The appealing party
shall make the appeal to the County Manager within five business days after
receipt of the decision by Lincoln County Special Event/Mass Gathering
Application Review Committee. If the applicant wishes to appeal the County
Manager's decision, the appeal must be included on the next Board of County
Commissioners meeting agenda taking into account required agenda deadlines.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2013)
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
      (1)   Carry on a covered event without a required permit or registration
receipt;
      (2)   Fail to terminate a covered event upon revocation of a permit;
      (3)   Conduct a covered event in violation of the terms and conditions of
a permit issued for such event.
   (B)   Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall subject the
offender to a civil penalty of $100 for the first offense and $500 for a second
and any subsequent offenses. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate
offense. If a person fails to pay the civil penalties set forth herein within
20 days after being cited for a violation, the county may seek to recover the
penalty by filing a civil action in the nature of debt.
   (C)   Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   The county, by and through its duly authorized authorities, including,
but not limited to, the Lincoln County Sheriff's Office, may seek to enforce
the provisions of this chapter through any appropriate equitable remedy issued
from a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (E)   A covered event for which a permit has not been approved, an event
exempt from the chapter that otherwise would require a permit except for the
exemption, or for which the stipulations of the permit which was approved are
not met, or which is otherwise in violation of this chapter, may be shut down
by law enforcement, but only if either the County Manager or the Lincoln County
Sheriff or designee determines that all of the conditions are present:
      (1)   The covered event constitutes an immediate and direct physical
danger to citizens or property; and
      (2)   The above danger is of such an imminent nature that the remedy
provided in division (D) above will not prevent the danger prior to its
occurrence.
(Ord. passed 11-18-2013)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
      Chapter
         
110.   AMUSEMENTS
         
111.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
         
112.   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
         
113.   PAWNBROKERS, METAL DEALERS AND SCRAP DEALERS
         
114.   SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
         
115.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
CHAPTER 110: AMUSEMENTS
Section
Commercial Outdoor Shooting Ranges
   
110.01   Purpose
   
110.02   Intent
   
110.03   Authority
   
110.04   Definitions
   
110.05   Applicability
   
110.06   Performance standards
   
110.07   Development requirements
   
110.08   Operational requirements
   
110.09   Procedure for securing approval for new ranges
   
110.10   Registration and compliance of existing ranges
   
110.11   Variances
   
110.12   Violations
   
110.13   Effective date
Billiard Parlors
   
110.25   Licenses
   
110.26   Applications
   
110.27   Change of ownership
   
110.28   Qualifications of applicant
   
110.29   Review of application
   
110.30   Grounds for refusal of license
   
110.31   Form and contents of license
   
110.32   Posting, defacing, or destroying the license
   
110.33   Not assignable or transferable
   
110.34   Prohibitions to be observed by licensee and employees
   
110.35   Licensee liable for acts of agents
   
110.36   Grounds for revocation
   
110.37   Procedure for revocation
   
110.38   License tax
   
110.39   Jurisdiction
   
110.40   Conditions of bond
   
110.41   Hours of operation
   
110.42   Minors
 
   
110.99   Penalty
COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR SHOOTING RANGES
§ 110.01 PURPOSE.
   This subchapter is intended to regulate the establishment and operation of
outdoor shooting range facilities. The recreational and training complexes, due
to their potential noise impacts and safety concerns, merit careful review to
minimize adverse effects on adjoining properties. This subchapter does not
otherwise apply to the general discharge of firearms, or the use of bows and
arrows in accordance with all other applicable laws or regulations.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 7-21-2008)
§ 110.02 INTENT.
   (A)   Generally. It is the intent of this subchapter to accomplish the
following.
   (B)   Specifically.
      (1)   Permitting, registration, and compliance. New shooting range
facilities shall be established and operated only in accordance with a valid
permit issued by the county. In addition, existing ranges shall be registered
and shall comply with the provisions of this subchapter within 180 days of
enactment of this subchapter.
      (2)   Shot containment. Each shooting range facility shall be designed to
contain the bullets, shot, or arrows on the range facility.
      (3)   Noise mitigation. Each shooting range facility shall be designed to
minimize off-site noise impacts generated by the activities conducted on the
range facility.
( (Ord. 2008-01, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 110.03 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is adopted under the authority of G.S. §§ 153A-121, 153A-
123, 153A-129, 153A-133, and 14-409.45 through 14-409.47.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 7-21-2008)
§ 110.04 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARCHERY. The art, sport, or skill of shooting with a bow and arrow.
   dBA. The sound pressure level, in decibels, as measured using the impulse
mode and "A" weighting network on a precision sound level meter.
   FIREARM. A weapon, including pistols, rifles, and shotguns, capable of
firing a projectile using an explosive charge as a propellant.
   FIRING LINE. A line parallel to a target from which firearms or arrows are
discharged.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, association, club, firm, or
partnership.
   SAFETY FAN. An area on a shooting range facility designed to contain all
projectiles fired from a shooting range.
   SHOOTING RANGE. An area designed and improved to encompass shooting stations
or firing lines, target areas, berms and baffles, and other related components.
   SHOOTING RANGE FACILITY. A public or private facility, including individual
shooting ranges, safety fans or shotfall zones, structures, parking areas, and
other associated improvements, designed for the purpose of providing a place
for the discharge of various types of firearms or the practice of archery. This
does not include incidental target practice areas on private property.
   SHOOTING STATION. A fixed point from which firearms or arrows are
discharged.
   SHOTFALL ZONE. An area within which the shot or pellets contained in a
shotgun shell typically fall.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; a
manufactured or mobile home; a storage tank for gases or liquids; or any other
permanent, human-made facilities.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 7-21-2008)
§ 110.05 APPLICABILITY.
   This subchapter is applicable to all existing and future shooting ranges in
unincorporated Lincoln County outside of any municipal planning jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 7-21-2008)
§ 110.06 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. The following performance standards shall apply to all
shooting range facilities.
   (B)   Specifically.
      (1)   Shot containment. Shooting range facilities shall be designed to
contain all of the bullets, shot, or cottons or any other debris on the range
facility. Design should be in general conformity with suggested practices
contained in the most recent edition of the National Rifle Association's The
Range Source Book: A Guide to Planning and Construction, or its successor
publication.
      (2)   Noise mitigation. Noise levels measured at the property line where
the facility is maintained or, in the case of leased land, at the property line
of any leased parcel shall not exceed 65 dBA when located adjacent to
residential or commercial property or 75 dBA when adjacent to industrial
property.
   (C)   Violations. Any violation of this subsection shall be enforced subject
to §
110.12 herein.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 110.07 DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Setbacks. Notwithstanding the performance standards of §
110.06, all shooting stations on a range facility shall be located a minimum of
200 feet from any property line.
   (B)   Warning signs. Warning signs meeting National Rifle Association (NRA)
guidelines for shooting ranges shall be posted at 100-foot intervals along the
entire perimeter of the shooting range facility.
   (C)   Distance from occupied dwelling. All shooting stations shall be
located at least one-fourth mile (1,320 feet) from any existing, occupied
dwelling.
   (D)   Violations. Any violation of this subsection shall be enforced subject
to §
110.12 herein.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 110.08 OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Hours of operation. Shooting ranges shall be allowed to operate
between sunrise and sunset, except that the hours may be extended after sunset
for purposes of subdued-lighting certification of law enforcement officers, or
may be extended for other purposes only when a permit allowing the activity is
issued in advance by the Sheriff's Department. On Sundays, shooting shall not
commence before 12:30 p.m., unless a permit allowing the activity is issued in
advance by the Sheriff's Department.
   (B)   Liability insurance. The permittee shall be required to carry a
minimum of $500,000 of liability insurance. The insurance shall name the county
as an additional insured party and shall save and hold the county, its elected
and appointed officials, and employees acting within the scope of their duties
harmless from and against all claims, demands, and causes of action of any kind
or character, including the cost of defense thereof, arising in favor of a
person or group's members or employees or third parties on account of any
property damage arising out of the acts or omissions of the permittee, his or
her group, club, or its agents or representatives. The county shall be notified
in writing of any policy changes or lapses in coverage.
   (C)   Shooting range master. A qualified shooting range master, employed by
the shooting range, must be physically present at the shooting station at all
times that firearms are discharged on the shooting range.
   (D)   Violations. Any violation of this subsection shall be enforced subject
to §
110.12 herein.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 110.09 PROCEDURE FOR SECURING APPROVAL FOR NEW RANGES.
   (A)   Permit application. An application for a permit to establish and
operate a shooting range facility shall be submitted by the legal property
owner(s) or owner's agent to the Building and Land Development Department. The
permit shall be secured prior to issuance of any other building or improvement
permit by the county.
   (B)   Fees. The application shall be accompanied by an application fee of
$100.
   (C)   Required information. The applicant shall provide sufficient
information as required by these provisions in order to properly evaluate the
permit application. In addition, copies of any written agreements from the
adjoining property owners and a letter from the insurance company to provide
liability insurance shall accompany the permit application.
   (D)   Site plan. A site plan for the entire range facility which shows the
following applicable information drawn to an appropriate scale, shall accompany
the permit application:
      (1)   Property lines for any parcel upon which the range facility is to
be located, north arrow, plan scale, date, and ownership information for the
site;
      (2)   Complete layout of each range, including shooting stations or
firing lines, target areas, shotfall zones or safety fans, backstops, berms,
and baffles;
      (3)   Projected noise contours;
      (4)   Existing and proposed structures; occupied dwellings within one-
fourth mile (1,320 feet); roads, streets, or other access areas; buffer areas;
and parking areas for the range facility; and
      (5)   Any other appropriate information related to the specific type of
range(s) being proposed.
   (E)   Action.
      (1)   Within 30 working days or at the next available meeting, whichever
is sooner, the Planning Board shall take one of the following actions:
         (a)   Reject the application as incomplete;
         (b)   Approve the issuance of the permit; or
         (c)   Deny the permit request.
      (2)   In any case, the written findings to support the action taken shall
be provided to the applicant.
   (F)   Permit display. Permits shall be kept and displayed in a readily
visible location on the shooting range facility, and at all times be available
for public inspection.
   (G)   Permit transferability. A permit issued pursuant to this subchapter
may not be transferred to another operator without the written approval and
consent of the Building and Land Development Department.
   (H)   Changes or expansions. If any shooting range facility is intended to
be substantially changed or expanded to include types of ranges, operations, or
activities not covered by an approved permit or otherwise cause nonconformance
with this subchapter, a new permit for the entire facility shall be secured in
accordance with all of the provisions of this subchapter.
   (I)   Violations. Any violation of this subsection shall be enforced subject
to §
110.12 herein.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 110.10 REGISTRATION AND COMPLIANCE OF EXISTING RANGES.
   (A)   Registration. All existing ranges shall provide a site plan, prepared
in accordance with §
110.09(D), within 90 days after the effective date of this subchapter. No fees
will be charged, and no permits will be required.
   (B)   Compliance. Any existing shooting range facility determined not to be
in compliance shall be made to obtain a permit and comply with all of the
requirements of this subchapter within 180 days after the effective date of
this subchapter.
   (C)   Abandonment and discontinuance. When an existing shooting range is
discontinued without the intent to reinstate the range use, the property owner
shall notify the county of the intent.
   (D)   Violations. Any violation of this subsection shall be enforced subject
to §
110.12 herein.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 110.11 VARIANCES.
   A variance may be granted by the Planning Board upon the finding that a
practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship would result if this subchapter
were strictly applied. Variance requests shall be considered in accordance with
the guidelines and procedures of the County Zoning Ordinance or succeeding
document.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 7-21-2008)
§ 110.12 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The County Sheriff’s Department shall be responsible for the
enforcement of this subchapter. Any violation or attempted violation of this
subchapter or of any condition or requirement adopted pursuant to these
provisions may be restrained, corrected, or abated, as the case may be, by
injunction or other appropriate proceedings as allowed by state law. Any permit
issued under this subchapter may be suspended or revoked in accordance with
G.S. § 160D-1115.
   (B)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this subchapter shall
be subject to a civil penalty for each violation as set out by ordinance for
enforcement of county ordinances. No penalty shall be assessed until the person
alleged to be in violation has been notified of the violation. Each day of a
continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 7-21-2008; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 110.13 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall take effect on the 7-22-2008.
(Ord. 2008-01, passed 7-21-2008)
BILLIARD PARLORS
§ 110.25 LICENSES.
   No person shall maintain or operate billiard tables of any size regardless
or whether or not a charge is made for the maintenance or operation, and no
person shall maintain or operate a pool or billiard table or any other similar
table for any game or play for which a charge is directly or indirectly made
without a license therefore issued by the Tax Collector. This provision does
not apply to the tables located in private homes or premises owned and operated
by fraternal organizations having a national charter, American Legion Posts,
churches, YMCAs, charitable organizations as defined by the Internal Revenue
Code, and organizations to which a municipality or county contributes any
portion of the operating expense. Violation of this section shall be subject to
monetary fines and injunctive relief as provided in §
10.99 herein. A violation of this section shall not be punishable as a criminal
offense pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123(b1).
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 110.26 APPLICATIONS.
   Applicants for the license shall disclose under oath the following:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant be a
corporation, the address of the principal place of business of the corporation,
and the name and address of all of the corporate officers;
   (B)   The names of all persons who are in any manner financially interested
in the billiard tables; and
   (C)   The names of all employees who will work on the premises where the
billiard tables are located.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979)
§ 110.27 CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP.
   The owner of the billiard tables shall report to the Tax Collector any
change of ownership or interest in the billiard tables and any change of
employee or employees within 48 hours after the change.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979)
§ 110.28 QUALIFICATIONS OF APPLICANT.
   An applicant hereunder, prior to the issuance of a license, shall deliver
the following to the County Tax Supervisor:
   (A)   Written references signed by citizens of good standing showing proof
of good moral character of the applicant, or, in the case of the corporation,
good moral character of the chief executive officers of the corporation;
   (B)   If the applicant is a corporation, evidence that the corporation is
incorporated in the state or domesticated by the laws of the state;
   (C)   Payment in full of the license tax required by §
110.38; and
   (D)   A bond payable to the county in the sum of $1,000 and signed and
conditioned as provided in §
110.40.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979)
§ 110.29 REVIEW OF APPLICATION.
   The County Tax Supervisor shall forward the application to the County
Sheriff who shall review the information set forth in the application, and
investigate the premises where the billiard tables are to be located, the
reputation for character of the applicant and its employees and agents, and the
immediate community where the billiard tables are to be located. The Sheriff
shall report to the Board of Commissioners concerning the suitability of the
immediate community, the physical premises, and the applicant and his or her
employees or agents, and the Sheriff shall recommend to the Board of
Commissioners that the application be approved or denied.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979)
§ 110.30 GROUNDS FOR REFUSAL OF LICENSE.
   The license shall not be issued:
   (A)   To any person who shall have been convicted of an offense against the
provisions of this subchapter within the two years next preceding the filing of
his or her application;
   (B)   To any partnership of which a member shall have been convicted as
provided in division (A) above;
   (C)   To any person as an individual or as a partner who has been convicted
of a felony, a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or convicted of
unlawfully selling whiskey or violation of any provision of the Controlled
Substances Act of the North Carolina General Statutes;
   (D)   To any person who is not a citizen of the United States and a resident
of this state, except in the case of a corporation, in which case the manager
shall be a citizen of the United States and a resident of this state;
   (E)   To any partnership of which the partner of partners who are to be in
active control of the business are not citizens of the United States and
residents of this state;
   (F)   To any person as an individual or as a partner who has a reputation in
the community in which he or she resides for immoral character or who is a
habitual user of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs;
   (G)   To any corporation which has itself been convicted or of which any
officer or director has been convicted of a second offense against the
provisions of this chapter wither two years next preceding the filing of its
application;
   (H)   To any corporation of which any officer or director has been convicted
of a felony, a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or is of immoral
character of is a habitual user of intoxicating liquors or narcotic drugs; and/
or
   (I)   To any person who plans to locate the billiard tables in an area of
the county unsuited as the location of a billiard parlor so as to create a
public or private nuisance.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979)
§ 110.31 FORM AND CONTENTS OF LICENSE.
   Every license shall specify its effective date which shall be for a period
of one year, the name, address, and telephone of the licensee, the exact
location and telephone number of the premises where the billiard tables are to
be located, the number and size of tables authorized to be operated thereunder,
and the signature of the Tax Supervisor.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979)
§ 110.32 POSTING, DEFACING, OR DESTROYING THE LICENSE.
   Each billiard table so licensed shall receive a number and receipt from the
Tax Supervisor, and it shall be the duty of each licensee to attach the
numbered license to the table and display the license at all times. No person
shall post any such license or permit the same to be posted upon any table
other than that for which the license was issued. No person shall knowingly
deface or destroy the license. Violation of this section shall be subject to
monetary fines and injunctive relief as provided in §
10.99 herein. A violation of this section shall not be punishable as a criminal
offense pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123(b1).
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 110.33 NOT ASSIGNABLE OR TRANSFERABLE.
   No license issued hereunder shall be assigned or transferred. In the event
the premises where the tables are located, or the billiard tables themselves,
are rented or sold by the licensee to a third party who wishes to maintain the
billiard tables, the third party must apply to the Tax Supervisor for a new
license or licenses to be issued in the name of the new owner of the premises
or tables.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979)
§ 110.34 PROHIBITIONS TO BE OBSERVED BY LICENSEE AND EMPLOYEES.
   No licensee and no employee of any such licensee shall:
   (A)   Suffer or permit any dice to be thrown for money or for any thing of
value, or suffer or permit any cards, raffles, or other game of chance, or any
form of gambling in the place designated by the licensee as the location of
licensed billiard tables, or in any yard, garden, or other place appertaining
to the place or connected therewith;
   (B)   Suffer or permit the premises upon which the licensed billiard tables
are located to become disorderly;
   (C)   Permit any narcotic drugs or controlled substances as defined by the
North Carolina General Statutes to be sold or to consumed on the premises where
the licensed billiard tables are located;
   (D)   Employee in carrying on the business associated with the licensed
billiard tables any person who has been convicted of a felony, a misdemeanor
involving moral turpitude, or convicted of unlawfully selling alcoholic
beverage or narcotic drugs, or any person who is hereafter convicted of
operating a lottery, within two years of the conviction;
   (E)   Permit intoxicating liquors, wine, beer, or any other fermented malt
beverage to be sold or consumed on the premises where the licensed billiard
tables are located; and/or
   (F)   Fail to maintain the premises upon which licensed billiard tables are
located totally free of all intoxicating liquors, wine, beer, or any other
fermented malt beverage and totally free of any and all controlled substances
as defined by the North Carolina General Statutes or any other narcotic drugs.
   (G)   Violation of this section shall be subject to monetary fines and
injunctive relief as provided in §
10.99 herein. A violation of this section shall not be punishable as a criminal
offense pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123(b1).
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 110.35 LICENSEE LIABLE FOR ACTS OF AGENTS.
   The acts and conduct of the agents and employees of the licensee in the
conduct of any business or operation associated with the use of licensed
billiard tables shall be deemed the acts and conduct of the licensee.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979)
§ 110.36 GROUNDS FOR REVOCATION.
   The following shall be sufficient grounds for revocation of any license
issued pursuant to this subchapter:
   (A)   A conviction in a court of law for a violation of any provision of
this subchapter;
   (B)   Failure to maintain the premises upon which the licensed billiard
tables are located totally free of all intoxicating liquor, wine, beer, or
other fermented malt beverage;
   (C)   Failure to maintain the premises upon which a licensed billiard table
is located totally free of all controlled substances as defined by the North
Carolina General Statutes, and totally free of other narcotic drugs;
   (D)   Violation of any provision of this subchapter;
   (E)   Failure of the licensee to perform any duty required by this
subchapter;
   (F)   Failure of the licensee to maintain good order among the patrons on
the premises where the billiard tables are located; and
   (G)   Suffer or permit the premises upon which the licensed billiard tables
are located to become a nuisance to public health, safety, or morals.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979)
§ 110.37 PROCEDURE FOR REVOCATION.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the County Sheriff's Department to inspect,
periodically, the premises where licensed billiard tables are located to
determine any violations of the provisions and to otherwise enforce this
subchapter.
   (B)   Whenever the County Sheriff's Department shall have good cause to
believe there exists grounds for revocation of any license acquired hereunder,
he or she shall submit a written recommendation of revocation to the Board of
Commissioners and by registered mail shall forward on the same date a copy of
his or her recommendations to the subject licensee. The Sheriff's
recommendation shall state the specific reasons for his or her action.
   (C)   The Board of Commissioners, whenever it has good cause to believe
there exist grounds for revocation of any license required hereunder, whether
the good cause is based upon the recommendation of the Sheriff or upon other
reasonable basis shall upon its own motion set a hearing to be held before the
Board to provide the licensee an opportunity to appear and be heard by the
Board of Commissioners to rebut any evidence against him or her and to present
evidence and witnesses in his or her behalf.
   (D)   Notice of the hearing shall be forwarded to the subject licensee by
certified mail addressed to the licensee at the address as given by the
licensee on his or her application for license, and the notice shall be
sufficient. The licensee may appear before the Board personally at the hearing
or he or she may appear through his or her attorney, or he or she may be
represented at the hearing by his or her attorney.
   (E)   If the licensee fails to show good cause why his or her license should
not be revoked, the Board of Commissioners may revoke the license upon a
finding by the Board of a cause for revocation.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979)
§ 110.38 LICENSE TAX.
   The annual license tax to be collected by the Tax Supervisor for each
billiard or pool table as defined in this subchapter shall be as follows:
   (A)   Tables measuring not more than two feet wide and four feet long, $5;
   (B)   Tables measuring not more than two and one-half feet wide and ten feet
long, $10;
   (C)   Tables measuring not more than three feet wide and six feet long, $15;
   (D)   Tables measuring not more than four feet wide and eight feet long,
$20;
   (E)   Tables measuring not more than four and one-half feet wide and nine
feet long, $25; and
   (F)   Tables measuring not more than four and one-half feet wide and nine
feet long, $30.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979)
§ 110.39 JURISDICTION.
   This subchapter shall apply to the county, except for the corporate limits
of the City of Lincolnton within which this subchapter shall not apply.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979)
§ 110.40 CONDITIONS OF BOND.
   (A)   As provided above, no license shall be issued hereunder unless the
application is accompanied by a bond payable to the county in the sum of
$1,000, the bond to be signed by the applicant and a surety company or by two
sureties approved by the County Manager.
   (B)   The bond shall be conditioned as follows:
      (1)   There is no material false statement in the application;
      (2)   If the license be issued, the applicant will not during the term of
the license suffer or allow in the hall or room where the licensed billiard
tables are located, or in any room, yard, garden, or other place appertaining
thereto or connected therewith, any disorderly conduct, or suffer or permit the
premises to become disorderly; and
      (3)   The applicant will not, either by any act or conduct of his or her
own or by any act or conduct of his or her agents or employees, violate any
provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979)
§ 110.41 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   It shall be unlawful for the licensee hereunder, and it shall also bo
unlawful for the owner, operator, or manager of any establishment wherein
licensed billiard tables as defined herein are located to permit the
establishment to be open to the general public or operating between the hours
of 12:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. the following day, Mondays through Fridays, and on
Sundays. It shall also be unlawful for the persons to permit the establishments
to be opened to the public or operating on Sundays, except between the hours of
1:00 p.m. and 12:00 a.m. Violation of this section shall be subject to monetary
fines and injunctive relief as provided in §
10.99 herein. A violation of this section shall not be punishable as a criminal
offense pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123(b1).
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 110.42 MINORS.
   It shall be unlawful for any licensee hereunder and it shall also be
unlawful for any person having charge of or control of any pool room or
billiard room open to the public to admit into the room any person under the
age of 16 years. The terms POOL ROOM and BILLIARD ROOM as used in this section
are defined to mean the premises upon which licensed billiard tables are
located. Violation of this section shall be subject to monetary fines and
injunctive relief as provided in §
10.99 herein. A violation of this section shall not be punishable as a criminal
offense pursuant to G.S. § 153A-123(b1).
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 110.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
(Ord. passed 3-5-1979; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Prohibited acts
   
111.03   Permit required
   
111.04   Cooperation of complainant
§ 111.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. An individual who is participating in the act of peddling.
   PEDDLING. When an individual traveling by foot, motor vehicle, or any other
type of transportation from place to place, from house to house, or from street
to street, carrying, conveying, or transporting any goods, wares, or
merchandise of any kind, offering and exposing them for sale, or making sales
and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to
place, sells the same for sale from a wagon, motor vehicle, or other vehicle or
conveyance.
   SOLICITATION. When an individual traveling by foot, motor vehicle or any
other type of transportation from place to place, from house to house, or
street to street, is taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods,
wares, merchandise or personal property of any nature whatsoever, including,
without limitation, intangible personal property, stocks, bonds, investment
participation shares and product promotions for future delivery, or for
services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such
individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such
sale or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales or not.
   SOLICITOR. An individual who is participating in the act of solicitation.
(Ord. passed 8-4-2025)
§ 111.02 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a solicitor or peddler to perform the act of
soliciation or peddling under any of the following instances:
      (1)   On private property, after the owner, tenant, or lawful occupant of
the property has requested that the person leave the premises;
      (2)   On private property which is clearly marked with a sign that states
"No Soliciting," "No Trespassing," or a sign conveying a similar message
indicating that soliciting on the premises is prohibited;
      (3)   Within 50 feet of the entrance to any financial institution, any
automatic teller machine or any automatic teller facility;
      (4)   Within 50 feet of any outdoor dining area or outdoor merchandise
area, provided such areas are in active use at the time;
      (5)   From a person standing in line waiting to be admitted to a
commercial establishment; or
      (6)   Within 50 feet of any county-owned or operated building or
facility, unless otherwise permitted.
      (7)   Time. No solicitor or peddler shall be permitted to perform the act
of solicitation or peddling prior to 8:00 a.m. each day, and after 9:00 p.m.
each night.
   (B)   Any violation of this section shall constitute a Class 3 misdemeanor
and shall be subject to a fine of $500 per violation.
(Ord. passed 8-4-2025)
§ 111.03 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit required. Any individual who intends to perform the act of
solicitation or peddling shall be required to submit an application for a
solicitation-peddling permit to the County Manager's office at least 15
business days prior to their anticipated start date. The County Manager's
office shall issue a solicitation-peddling permit within five business days of
receipt unless sufficient criteria is met to allow for denial. The application
for a solicitation-peddling permit shall require, at minimum:
      (1)   The full name, date of birth, and permanent address of the
applicant, along with a copy of the individual driver's license or
identification card;
      (2)   The name of the business, if applicable, that the solicitation/
peddling is being performed for; and
      (3)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods or
services to be sold.
   (B)   Individual permit exception. Any civic, charitable or other
organization that intends to have minors under the age of 16 peddling or
soliciting for donations for that specific organization (example: scouts, youth
groups, and the like) shall be permitted to obtain a permit for the group that
may be used by those minors.
   (C)   Display of permit. Any solicitor or peddler shall be required to
display the permit issued hereunder, if requested.
   (D)   Revocation of permit. The County Manager, or their designee, may
revoke a permit issued hereunder if it is determined that:
      (1)   The applicant has provided false or misleading statements or has
intentionally omitted information; or
      (2)   The applicant is convicted of a crime involving larceny, fraud,
forgery, the sale of counterfeit goods and/or breaking and entering.
   (E)   Duration of permit. All permits issued hereunder shall be effective
for a period of one year unless revoked hereunder.
   (F)   Fee. Each permit issued hereunder shall be subject to a fee as set
forth in the Lincoln County Fee Schedule.
   (G)   Failure to obtain permit. Failure to obtain a permit as required
hereunder shall be a Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be subject to fine of $250
per violation.
   (H)   Effective date. This section shall be effective January 1, 2026.
(Ord. passed 8-4-2025)
§ 111.04 COOPERATION OF COMPLAINANT.
   (A)   Prior to the initiation of any criminal proceeding pursuant to this
chapter, the Lincoln County Sheriff, or their designee, shall have the option
of requiring the complaining party to sign a sworn statement of the alleged
offense and to require the cooperation of the complaining party in court
appearances arising from the complaint.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall obligate Lincoln County, the
Lincoln County Sheriff's Office, and its officers and staff members, to pursue
any proceedings hereunder where the complaining party is unwilling to sign the
sworn statement and cooperate in comt appearances arising therefrom.
(Ord. passed 8-4-2025)
CHAPTER 112: EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
Section
   
112.01   Abbreviations and definitions
   
112.02   Franchise required
   
112.03   Application for franchise
   
112.04   Granting of franchise
   
112.05   Term of franchise
   
112.06   Standards for operators and technicians
   
112.07   Standards for vehicles and equipment
   
112.08   Standards for communications
   
112.09   Insurance
   
112.10   Records
   
112.11   Rates and charges
   
112.12   Enforcement
   
112.13   Miscellaneous
   
112.14   Lincoln County Emergency Services Quality Peer Review Committee
   
112.15   Execution of contract
   
112.16   Signatories and obligations to carry out the terms and provisions of
this chapter
   
112.17   Addendums to this chapter
§ 112.01 ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Abbreviations. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
abbreviations shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AHA. American Heart Association.
      CPR. Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation.
      EMD. Emergency Medical Dispatcher.
      EMDPRS. Emergency Medical Dispatch Priority Reference System.
      EMS. Emergency Medical Services.
      EMS-NP. EMS Nurse Practitioner.
      EMS-PA. EMS Physician Assistant.
      EMT. Emergency Medical Technician.
      EMT-D. EMT-Defibrillation.
      EMT-I. EMT-Intermediate.
      EMT-P. EMT-Paramedic.
      EVD. Emergency Vehicle Driver.
      MICN. Mobile Intensive Care Nurse.
      MR. Medical Responder.
      OEMS. Office of Emergency Medical Services.
      PreMIS. Pre-hospital Medical Information System.
      SOG. Standard Operating Guideline.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      AIR MEDICAL AMBULANCE. An aircraft specifically designed and equipped to
transport patients by air. The patient care compartment of AIR MEDICAL
AMBULANCES shall be staffed by medical crew members approved for the mission by
the medical director.
      AIR MEDICAL PROGRAM. A Specialty Care Transport Program designed and
operated for transportation of patients by either fixed or rotary wing
aircraft.
      ASSISTANT MEDICAL DIRECTOR. A physician, EMS-PA, or EMS-NP who assists
the medical director with the medical aspects of the management of an EMS
System or EMS Specialty Care.
      COMMITTEE. The Lincoln County Emergency Medical Services System Quality
Management Committee.
      CONTRACT. A formal written agreement between two or more parties, which
creates an obligation to provide certain services and benefits to the citizens
of the county.
      CONVALESCENT AMBULANCE. An ambulance used on a scheduled basis solely to
transport patients having a known non-emergency medical condition. CONVALESCENT
AMBULANCES shall not be used in place of any other category of ambulance
defined in this chapter.
      COUNTY. The Board of Commissioners or its designee, the County Manager.
      EDUCATIONAL MEDICAL ADVISOR. The physician responsible for overseeing the
medical components of approved EMS educational programs in continuing
education, basic, and advanced EMS educational institutions.
      EMS EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. Any agency credentialed by the OEMS to offer
EMS educational programs.
      EMS INSTRUCTOR. A person who is credentialed by the OEMS as a Level I or
II EMS Instructor or EMD Instructor and who is approved to instruct or
coordinate EMS educational programs.
      EMS NON-TRANSPORTING VEHICLE. A motor vehicle dedicated and equipped to
move medical equipment and EMS personnel functioning within the scope of
practice of EMT-I or EMT-P to the scene of a request for assistance. EMS NON-
TRANSPORTING VEHICLES shall not be used for the transportation of patients on
the streets, highways, waterways, or airways of the state.
      EMS SYSTEM. A coordinated arrangement of resources (including personnel,
equipment, and facilities) organized to respond to medical emergencies and
integrated with other health care providers and networks, including, but not
limited to, public health, community health monitoring activities, and special
needs populations.
      FRANCHISE. A permit issued by the county to a person for the operation of
an ambulance service, a first responder, or other pre-hospital emergency
medical assistance organization.
      FRANCHISE HOLDER. Any person having been issued a franchise by the county
for the operation of an ambulance service, first responder, or other pre-
hospital emergency medical organization.
      GROUND AMBULANCE. An ambulance used to transport patients with traumatic
or medical conditions or patients for whom the need for emergency or non-
emergency medical care is anticipated either at the patient location or during
transport. GROUND AMBULANCES may be used to transport all types of patients.
      MEDIC. An individual who has completed a training program in emergency
medical care at least equal to the National Standard Curriculum for Emergency
Medical Technician; Basic, Intermediate, or Paramedic as defined by the United
States Department of Transportation and hold current license or are registered
in the state and are affiliated with the County EMS System.
      MEDICAL CREW MEMBER. EMS personnel or other health care professionals who
hold current license or are registered in the state and are affiliated with the
County EMS System.
      MEDICAL DIRECTOR. The physician responsible for the medical aspects of
the management of an EMS System or EMS Specialty Care Transport Program.
      MEDICAL OVERSIGHT. The responsibility for the management and
accountability of the medical care aspects of an EMS System. MEDICAL OVERSIGHT
includes physician direction of the initial education and continuing education
of EMS personnel; development and monitoring of both operational and treatment
protocols; evaluation of the medical care rendered by EMS personnel;
participation in system evaluation; and directing, by two-way voice
communications, the medical care rendered by the EMS personnel.
      MEDICAL RESPONDER. An individual who has completed a training program in
emergency medical care at least equal to the National Standard Curriculum for
Medical Responders as defined by the United States Department of Transportation
and hold current license or are registered in the state and are affiliated with
the County EMS System.
      MODEL EMS SYSTEM. An approved EMS System that chooses to meet the
criteria for and receives this designation by the OEMS.
      OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES (OEMS). A section of the Division of
Facility Services of the State Department of Health and Human Services located
at 701 Barbour Drive, Raleigh, North Carolina 27603.
      OPERATIONAL PROTOCOLS. The written administrative policies and procedures
of an EMS System that provide guidance for the day-to-day operation of the
system.
      OPERATOR. A person in actual physical control of an apparatus which is in
motion or which has the engine running.
      PHYSICIAN. A medical or osteopathic physician licensed by the State
Medical Board to practice medicine in the state.
      PROVIDER. An individual, firm, corporation, or association who engages or
professes to engage in the business or service of responding to medical
emergencies or transporting patients by means of ground or convalescent
ambulance.
      QUALITY MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE. A committee within an EMS System or
Specialty Care Transport Program that is affiliated with a medical review
committee as referenced in G.S. § 143-518(a)(5) and is responsible for the
continued monitoring and evaluation of medical and operational issues within
the system and for improvement of the system.
      QUICK RESPONSE VEHICLE (QRV). A motor vehicle dedicated and equipped to
move medical equipment and EMS personnel functioning within the scope of
practice of EMT-I or EMT-P to the scene of a request for assistance. QRV's are
non-transporting vehicles and shall not be used for the transportation of
patients on the streets, highways, waterways, or airways of the state.
      SYSTEM CONTINUING EDUCATION COORDINATOR. A Level I EMS Instructor within
a model EMS system who is responsible for the coordination of EMS continuing
education programs.
      TREATMENT PROTOCOLS. A written document approved by the medical directors
of both the local EMS System and the OEMS specifying the diagnostic procedures,
treatment procedures, medication administration and patient-care-related
policies that shall be completed by EMS personnel or medical crew members based
upon the assessment of a patient.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2003)
§ 112.02 FRANCHISE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Permit required. No person, either as owner, agent, or otherwise,
shall furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise, or otherwise be engaged
in or profess to be engaged in the business or service of emergency and/or non-
emergency transportation of patients within the county unless the person holds
a valid permit pursuant to G.S. § 131E-156, for each ambulance used in the
business or service issued by the State Department of Health and Human
Services, Office of Emergency Medical Services, and has been granted a
franchise for the operation of the business or service by the county pursuant
to this chapter.
   (B)   Certification required. No person shall permit an ambulance to be
operated when transporting a patient within the county unless the crew consists
of a minimum of one individual that holds a currently valid certificate as a
medical responder and at least one individual that holds a currently valid
certificate as an Emergency Medical Technician – Basic, Intermediate, or
Paramedic as defined by the United States Department of Transportation and hold
current license, certification or appropriate registration in the state and are
affiliated with the County EMS System.
   (C)   Franchise required. No person, either as owner, agent, or otherwise,
shall furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise, or otherwise be engaged
in or profess to be engaged in the business or service of medical first
responder, ambulance service, or other pre-hospital emergency medical services
organization unless granted a franchise for the operation of the business or
service by the county pursuant to this chapter.
   (D)   No franchise required. No franchise shall be required for:
      (1)   Any entity rendering assistance to a franchised ambulance service
in the case of a major catastrophe, mutual aid, or emergency with which the
services franchised by the county are insufficient or unable to cope;
      (2)   Any entity operated from a location or headquarters outside the
county in order to transport the patients who are picked up beyond the limits
of the county, or to pick up patients within the county for transporting to
locations outside the county; or
      (3)   Apparatus owned and operated by any agency of the United States
government, the state, or the county.
   (E)   Penalty. The operation of an ambulance without a valid permit or after
a permit has been denied, suspended, or revoked or without appropriate
credentialed staffing as required by G.S. § 131E-158, shall constitute a Class
1 misdemeanor pursuant to G.S. § 131E-161.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2003; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 112.03 APPLICATION FOR FRANCHISE.
   Application for a franchise to operate ground ambulances, convalescent
ambulances, a medical responder or other pre-hospital emergency medical
services organization in the county shall be made by the provider upon the
forms as may be prepared or prescribed by the county and shall contain:
   (A)   The name and address of the provider and the owner of any apparatus;
   (B)   The trade or other fictitious names, if any, under which the applicant
does business, along with a certified copy of an assumed name certificate
stating the name or articles of incorporation;
   (C)   A resume of the training and experience of all personnel associated
with the applicant in the care of patients;
   (D)   A full description of the type and level of service to be provided
including the location of the place or places from which it is intended to
operate, the manner in which the public will be able to obtain assistance and
how apparatus will be dispatched;
   (E)   An audited financial statement of the applicant as the same pertains
to the operations in the county, the financial statement to be in the form and
in the detail as may be required by the county;
   (F)   A description of the applicant's capability to provide 24-hour
emergency and non-emergency coverage, seven days per week for the district
covered by the franchise applied for, and an accurate estimate of the minimum
and maximum times for a response to calls within the district; and
   (G)   Any information the county shall deem reasonably necessary for a fair
determination of the capability of the applicant to provide pre-hospital
services in the county in accordance with the requirements of state laws and
the provisions of the regulation.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2003; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 112.04 GRANTING OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Service district. Prior to accepting applications for the operation of
a service, the Board of Commissioners may designate specific service areas as
franchise districts. The districts will be established using criteria that
include geographic size, road access, and the location of existing medical
transportation services, population, and response time. The county shall have
the authority to redistrict or rearrange existing districts at any time at
their discretion.
   (B)   Type of application. An applicant may apply for a franchise to operate
either emergency, non-emergency, convalescent transportation, or any
combination of the aforementioned services. If a franchise owner desires to
provide more than one service, then separate applications are required for each
requested service.
   (C)   Hearing. Upon receipt of an application for a franchise, the county
shall schedule a time and place for hearing the applicant(s) request(s). Within
30 days after hearing, the county shall cause the investigation as it may deem
necessary to be made of the applicant and his or her proposed operations.
   (D)   Granting franchise. A franchise may be granted if the county finds
that:
      (1)   The applicant shows that he or she meets federal, state, and local
standards outlined in the franchise ordinance;
      (2)   The proposed service will fit within the existing service so as not
to adversely affect the level of service or operations of other franchises to
render service;
      (3)   A need exists for the proposed service in order to improve the
level of pre-hospital emergency medical services available to residents of the
county and that this is a reasonable and cost effective manner of meeting the
need.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2003)
§ 112.05 TERM OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Term. The county may issue a franchise hereunder to a provider, to be
valid for a term to be determined by the county, provided that either party at
its option may terminate the franchise upon 60 days prior written notice to the
other party. After a notice of service termination is given, the provider may
reapply for a franchise if continued service is desired.
   (B)   Suspension, revocation, and termination. Upon suspension, revocation,
or termination of a franchise granted hereunder, the franchised service
immediately shall cease operations. Upon suspension, revocation, or termination
of a driver's license, medical responder or technician certificate, the persons
shall cease to drive an ambulance, provide medical care in conjunction with a
franchised service, or attend a patient. The franchise shall not permit such an
individual to drive an ambulance or provide medical care in conjunction with
the service.
   (C)   Compliance. Each franchised service shall comply at all times with the
requirements of this chapter, the franchise granted hereunder, and all
applicable state and local laws relating to health, sanitation, safety,
equipment, and apparatus design and all other laws and ordinances.
   (D)   Change of ownership. Any change of ownership or any fractional
interest of a franchised service without the approval of the county shall
terminate the franchise and shall require a new application and a new franchise
and conformance with all the requirements of this chapter as upon original
franchising.
   (E)   Sell, assign, and mortgage. No franchise shall be sold, assigned,
mortgaged, or otherwise transferred without the approval of the county; and a
finding of conformance with all the requirements as upon original franchising.
Each franchised service, its equipment and the premises designated in the
application and all records relating to its maintenance and operation, as such,
shall be open to inspection by the state, county, or their designated
representatives.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2003)
§ 112.06 STANDARDS FOR OPERATORS AND TECHNICIANS.
   (A)   Operator standards. Standards for emergency vehicle operators will be
at the minimum equal to the State Fire Rescue Commission, Emergency Vehicle
Driver Certification, or those of the National Academy of Professional Drivers
(NAPD).
   (B)   Medical technician standards. Standards for medical technicians are
National Standard Curriculum for Emergency Medical Technician; Basic,
Intermediate, and Paramedic as defined by the United States Department of
Transportation and hold current license or are registered in the state,
pursuant to G.S. §§ 131E-158 and 131E-159, and shall be applied and the same
are incorporated herein by reference.
   (C)   Direction and control. All personnel providing pre-hospital medical
care will be subject to the direction and control of the County EMS System
Medical Director and their level of services subject to review by the Lincoln
County Emergency Medical Services Quality Management Committee.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2003)
§ 112.07 STANDARDS FOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.
   Apparatus and equipment standards (medical) as developed by the State
Medical Care Commission pursuant to G.S. § 131E-157, and shall be applied and
the same are incorporated herein by reference. All advance life support
equipment is to be approved by the State Medical Care Commission.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2003)
§ 112.08 STANDARDS FOR COMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   Two-way communications. Each apparatus shall be equipped with an
operational two-way radio capable of establishing good quality voice
communications from within the geographic confines of the county to the
communications center in the county in which the apparatus is based. Each
ambulance shall be equipped with two-way radio communications capabilities
compatible with all hospitals' emergency departments to which transportation of
patients is made on a regular or routine basis anywhere within the state.
   (B)   FCC licenses.
      (1)   Each provider shall maintain current authorizations or Federal
Communication Commission licenses for all frequencies and/or radio transmitters
operated by that provider.
      (2)   Copies of all authorizations and licenses shall be on display and
available for inspection per Federal Communication Commission rules and
regulations.
   (C)   Base telephone. Each base of operations must have at least one open
telephone line. Telephone numbers must be registered with each law enforcement
agency and communications center in the county.
   (D)   Emergency dispatches. All emergency apparatus shall be dispatched
through the County Communications Center.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2003)
§ 112.09 INSURANCE.
   (A)   Required insurance. No franchise shall be issued under this chapter,
nor shall the franchise be valid after issuance, nor shall any apparatus be
operated in the county unless the franchise holder has at all times in force
and effect insurance coverage, issued by an insurance company licensed to do
business in the state, for each and every apparatus owned and/or operated by or
for the service providing for the payment of damages; for each medical first
responder or other pre-hospital emergency medical services organization:
      (1)   Issued in the sum of $1,000,000 for injury to or death of
individuals in accidents resulting from any cause for which the owner of the
vehicle would be liable on account of liability imposed on him or her by law,
regardless of whether the ambulance was being driven by the owner or his or her
agency;
      (2)   In the sum of $1,000,000 for the loss of or damage to the property
of another, including personal property, under like circumstances, in the sums
as may be required by the state or as approved by the county;
      (3)   Each in the sum of $1,000,000 for malpractice; and
      (4)   Each in the sum of $1,000,000 for general liability.
   (B)   Malpractice insurance. The Board of Commissioners may at its own
discretion provide malpractice insurance for franchised, volunteer pre-hospital
emergency medical services.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2003)
§ 112.10 RECORDS.
   Each franchise holder shall maintain the following records:
   (A)   Call report. Shall show time call was received, time apparatus was
dispatched, time arrived at destination, time in service, and time returned to
base. The call report shall list all individuals and apparatus on each response
and a narrative of actions taken at the scene of the call;
   (B)   Organizations that transport patients; patient care report. Shall
record all times associated with the call including times received, enroute,
arrival at scene, departure from scene, arrival at destination and time
returned to base or back in service. The trip record shall be so designed as to
provide the patient with a copy thereof containing all required information. A
copy of the trip record may serve as a receipt for any charges paid;
   (C)   Daily inspection report. Shall list contents and description of
operations for each apparatus, signed by the individual verifying vehicle
operations and equipment;
   (D)   Weekly inspection report by secondary providers. Shall list contents
and description of operations for each apparatus signed by the individual
verifying vehicle operations and equipment; and
   (E)   Training records. Shall record all information associated with the
training session including the topic/title, date, start time, completion time,
total hours, location, the instructor, and all attendee's original signature(s)
for each class.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2003)
§ 112.11 RATES AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Rate schedule. Each franchise holder shall submit a schedule of rates
to the county for approval and shall not charge more or less then the approved
rates without specific approval by the county.
   (B)   Collections; emergency.
      (1)   No ambulance service shall attempt to collect rates on emergency
calls until the patient has reached the point of destination or has received
medical attention and is in a condition deemed by a physician fit to consult
with the service.
      (2)   The service may attempt to collect rates with family or guardian of
the patient once the patient is in the process of receiving medical attention.
   (C)   Collections; non-emergency. On non-emergency calls where a person
requires transportation to a non-emergency facility, attempts to collect
payment can be made before the ambulance begins its trip.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2003)
§ 112.12 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The County Director of Emergency Medical Services, operating under the
supervision and direction of the County Manager, shall be the enforcing agency
for the regulations contained in the ordinance.
   (B)   The office will:
      (1)   Receive all franchise proposals from potential providers;
      (2)   Study each proposal for conformance to this chapter;
      (3)   The Peer Review Committee will recommend to the Board of
Commissioners, through the County Manager, the award of franchise(s) to the
applicant(s) submitting the best proposal(s);
      (4)   Inspect the premises, vehicles, equipment, and personnel of
franchise holders to assure compliance to this chapter and perform any other
inspections that may be required;
      (5)   The Peer Review Committee will recommend to the Board of
Commissioners, through the County Manager, the temporary or permanent
suspension of a franchise in the event of noncompliance with the franchise
terms of this chapter. Additionally, recommend the imposition of misdemeanor or
civil penalties as provided therein;
      (6)   Ensure by cooperative agreement with other services or agencies the
continued service in a district where a franchise has been suspended;
      (7)   Receive monthly reports from franchise holders and consolidate the
same into a quarterly summary for review by the Peer Review Committee and the
County;
      (8)   Receive complaints from the public, enforcement agencies, and other
franchise holders regarding franchise infractions. Review complaints with the
committee and execute corrective action under the recommendation of the
committee;
      (9)   With the approval of the committee, recommend improvements to the
county, which will ensure a higher degree of quality medical services;
      (10)   Maintain all records required by this chapter and other applicable
county regulations;
      (11)   Perform such of the above functions as may be requested by any
municipality within the county; and
      (12)   Serve as staff to the Lincoln County Emergency Services Peer
Review Committee on all matters that pertain to the committee.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2003; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 112.13 MISCELLANEOUS.
   The county may inspect a franchise holder's records, premises, and equipment
at any time in order to ensure compliance with this chapter and any franchise
granted hereunder.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2003)
§ 112.14 LINCOLN COUNTY EMERGENCY SERVICES QUALITY PEER REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   The Lincoln County Emergency Services Peer Review Committee which is
appointed by the Board of Commissioners, will have the responsibility and duty
of advising the Director, County Emergency Services, on matters relating to the
enforcement of this chapter as specified in §
112.12 and shall develop and recommend for approval by the Board of
Commissioners the standards of care, policies, procedures, and actions which
will maintain and improve the quality of emergency medical services and pre-
hospital care for the residents of the county.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2003; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 112.15 EXECUTION OF CONTRACT.
   When an ambulance service, medical first responder group, or other pre-
hospital emergency medical provider has satisfactorily met all other
requirements herein stated, then the provider shall execute a contract with the
county to provide service in return for financial aid and/or other assistance
as provided for in the contract.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2003)
§ 112.16 SIGNATORIES AND OBLIGATIONS TO CARRY OUT THE TERMS AND PROVISIONS OF
THIS CHAPTER.
   (A)   At the time of the execution of the contract referred to above, each
provider shall signify by signing the contract that the provider intends to
carry out the provisions and obligations set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   The duly authorized officer of the provider shall sign for the
provider, with appropriate signature(s) being attested to by the Secretary of
the Board.
   (C)   The County Manager, acting under the authority of the Board of
Commissioners, shall sign for the county, with his or her signature being
attested to by the Clerk to the Board of Commissioners.
   (D)   Upon signing of this chapter and the execution of this contract, all
prior agreements between parties shall become null and void.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2003)
§ 112.17 ADDENDUMS TO THIS CHAPTER.
   The Board of Commissioners may, through appropriate action, amend or expand
this chapter to include other emergency medical response agencies as deemed
necessary and/or appropriate.
(Ord. passed 10-6-2003)
CHAPTER 113: PAWNBROKERS
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Pawnbroker authority
   
113.03   License required
   
113.04   Requirements for licensure
   
113.05   Record keeping requirements
   
113.06   Pawnbroker fees; interest rates
   
113.07   Pawnbroker transactions
   
113.08   Prohibitions
   
113.09   License renewal
   
113.10   Bond
Electronic Record Keeping and Reporting Requirements
   
113.20   Purpose
   
113.21   Definitions
   
113.22   Pawnbrokers
   
113.23   Cash converters
   
113.24   Dealers
   
113.25   Secondary metals recyclers
 
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PAWN or PAWN TRANSACTION. A written bailment of personal property as
security for a debt, redeemable on certain terms within 180 days, unless
renewed, and with an implied power of sale on default.
   PAWNBROKER. Any person engaged in the business of lending money on the
security of pledged goods and who may also purchase merchandise for resale from
dealers and traders.
   PAWNSHOP. The location at which, or premises in which, a pawnbroker
regularly conducts business.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, joint venture, association, or any
other legal entity, however organized.
   PLEDGED GOODS. Tangible personal property which is deposited with, or
otherwise actually delivered into, the possession of a pawnbroker in the course
of his or her business in connection with a pawn transaction.
   PURCHASE. Any item purchased from an individual for the purpose of resale
whereby the seller no longer has a vested interest in the item.
(Ord. passed 8-5-1990)
§ 113.02 PAWNBROKER AUTHORITY.
   A pawnbroker licensee is authorized to: make loans on pledges of tangible
personal property, deal in bullion stocks, purchase merchandise for resale from
dealers, traders, and wholesale suppliers, and use its capital and funds in any
lawful manner within the general scope and purpose of its creation.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, no pawnbroker has the authority
enumerated in this section unless he or she has fully complied with the laws
regulating the particular transactions involved.
(Ord. passed 8-5-1990)
§ 113.03 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to establish or conduct
a business of pawnbroker unless the person, firm, or corporation has procured a
license to conduct business in compliance with the requirements of G.S. Ch. 66,
Art. 45. Every person, firm, or corporation, their guests or employees, who
shall knowingly violate any of the provisions of this part, shall, on
conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor pursuant to G.S.
§ 66-396. If the violation is by an owner or major stockholder or managing
partner of the pawnshop and the violation is knowingly committed by the owner,
major stockholder, or managing partner of the pawnshop, then the license of the
pawnshop may be suspended at the discretion of the Court pursuant to G.S. § 66-
396.
(Ord. passed 8-5-1990; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 113.04 REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSURE.
   (A)   To be eligible for a pawnbroker's license, an applicant must:
      (1)   Be of good moral character; and
      (2)   Not have been convicted of a felony within the last ten years.
   (B)   Every person, firm, or corporation desiring to engage in the business
of pawnbroker within the boundary of the county, and outside the corporate
limits if the City of Lincolnton shall make application to the county for a
license to conduct the business. The application shall provide:
      (1)   The name and address of the person, and, in case of a firm or
corporation, the names and addresses of the persons composing the firm or of
the officers, directors, and stockholders of the corporation, excluding
shareholders of publicly traded companies;
      (2)   The name of the business and the street and mailing address where
the business is to be operated;
      (3)   A statement indicating the amount of net assets or capital proposed
to be used by the petitioner in operation of the business; this statement shall
be accompanied by an unaudited statement from an accountant or certified public
accountant verifying the information contained in the accompanying statement;
      (4)   An affidavit by the petitioner that he or she has not been
convicted of a felony within the last ten years; and
      (5)   A certificate from the County Sheriff or the State Bureau of
Investigation that the petitioner has not been convicted of a felony in the
state within the last ten years.
   (C)   A fee of $200 shall be charged for issuance of the license to defray
administrative costs.
   (D)   Any license granted under this chapter may be revoked by the county
after a hearing, for substantial abuses of this chapter by the licensee.
(Ord. passed 8-5-1990)
§ 113.05 RECORD KEEPING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every pawnbroker shall keep consecutively numbered records of each and
every pawn transaction, which shall correspond in all essential particulars to
a detachable pawn ticket or copy thereof attached to the record.
   (B)   The pawnbroker shall, at the time of making the pawn or purchase
transaction, enter upon the pawn ticket a record of the following information
which shall be typed or written in ink and in the English language:
      (1)   A clear and accurate description of the property, including model
and serial number if indicated on the property;
      (2)   The name, residence address, phone number, and date of birth of
pledgor;
      (3)   Date of the pawn transaction;
      (4)   Type of identification and the identification number accepted from
the pledgor;
      (5)   Description of the pledgor including approximate height, weight,
sex, and race;
      (6)   Amount of money advanced;
      (7)   The date due and the amount due;
      (8)   All monthly pawn charges, including interest, annual percentage
rate on interest, and total recovery fee; and
      (9)   Agreed upon "stated value" between pledgor and pawnbroker in case
of loss or destruction of pledged item; unless otherwise noted, "stated value"
is the same as the loan value.
   (C)   The following shall be printed on all pawn tickets:
      (1)   The statement that, "Any personal property pledged to a pawnbroker
within this state is subject to sale or disposal when there has been no payment
made on the account for a period of 60 days past maturity date of the original
contract. No further notice is necessary.";
      (2)   The statement that, "The pledgor of this item attests that it is
not stolen, has no liens or encumbrances, and is the pledgor's to sell or
pawn.";
      (3)   The statement that, "The item pawned is redeemable only by the
bearer of this ticket or by identification of the person making the pawn."; and
      (4)   A blank line for the pledgor's signature and the pawnbroker's
signature or initials.
   (D)   The pledgor shall sign the pawn ticket and shall receive an exact copy
of the pawn ticket which shall be signed or initialed by the pawnbroker or any
employee of the pawnbroker. These records shall be available for inspection and
pickup each regular workday by the Sheriff or his or her designee. These
records shall be a correct copy of the entries made of the pawn or purchase
transaction and shall be carefully preserved without alteration, and shall be
available during regular business hours.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any person presenting a
pawn ticket to a pawnbroker is presumed to be entitled to redeem the pledged
goods described on the ticket.
   (F)   Penalties. Every person, firm, or corporation, their guests or
employees, who shall knowingly violate any of the provisions of this part,
shall, on conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor
pursuant to G.S. § 66-396. If the violation is by an owner or major stockholder
or managing partner of the pawnshop and the violation is knowingly committed by
the owner, major stockholder, or managing partner of the pawnshop, then the
license of the pawnshop may be suspended at the discretion of the Court
pursuant to G.S. § 66-396.
(Ord. passed 8-5-1990; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 113.06 PAWNBROKER FEES; INTEREST RATES.
   (A)   No pawnbroker shall demand or receive an effective rate of interest
greater than 2% per month, and no other charge of any description or for any
purpose shall be made by the pawnbroker, except that the pawnbroker may charge,
contract services, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Title investigation;
      (2)   Handling, appraisal, and storage;
      (3)   Insuring a security;
      (4)   Application fee;
      (5)   Making daily reports to local law enforcement officers; and
      (6)   For other expenses, including losses of every nature, and all other
services.
   (B)   (1)   In no event may the total of the above listed monthly fees on a
pawn transaction exceed 20% of the principal up to a maximum of the following:
 
First month                 $100
Second month                $75
Third month                 $75
Fourth month and thereafter $50
 
      (2)   In addition, pawnbrokers may charge fees for returned checks as
allowed by G.S. § 25-3-506.
(Ord. passed 8-5-1990)
§ 113.07 PAWNBROKER TRANSACTIONS.
   In every pawn transaction:
   (A)   The original pawn contract shall have a maturity date of not less than
30 days, provided that nothing herein shall prevent the pledgor from redeeming
the property before the maturity date;
   (B)   Any personal property pledged to a pawnbroker is subject to sale or
disposal when there has been no payment made on the account for a period of 60
days past maturity date of the original contact; provided pawnbroker is
renewable if renewal is agreed upon by both parties;
   (C)   Every pawn ticket or receipt for the pawn shall have printed thereon
the provisions of division (A) above which shall constitute: notice of the sale
or disposal, notice of intention to sell or dispose of the property without
further notice, and consent to the sale or disposal. The pledgor thereby
forfeits all right, title, and interest of, in, and to the pawned property to
the pawnbroker who thereby acquires absolute title to the same, whereupon the
debt is satisfied and the pawnbroker may sell or dispose of the unredeemed
pledges as his or her own property. Any sale or disposal of property under this
section terminates all liability of the pawnbroker and vests in the purchaser
the right, title, and interest of the borrower and pawnbroker;
   (D)   If the borrower loses his or her pawn ticket, he or she shall not
thereby forfeit his or her right to redeem, but may, before the lapse of the
redemption period, make an affidavit with indemnification for the loss. The
affidavit shall describe the property pawned and shall take the place of the
lost pawn ticket unless the pawned property has already been redeemed with the
original pawn ticket; and
   (E)   A pledgor is not obligated to redeem pledged goods or make any payment
on a pawn transaction.
   (F)   Penalties. Every person, firm, or corporation, their guests or
employees, who shall knowingly violate any of the provisions of this part,
shall, on conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor
pursuant to G.S. § 66-396. If the violation is by an owner or major stockholder
or managing partner of the pawnshop and the violation is knowingly committed by
the owner, major stockholder, or managing partner of the pawnshop, then the
license of the pawnshop may be suspended at the discretion of the Court
pursuant to G.S. § 66-396.
(Ord. passed 8-5-1990; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 113.08 PROHIBITIONS.
   A pawnbroker shall not:
   (A)   Accept a pledge from a person under the age of 18 years;
   (B)   Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of a pledgor in
connection with a pawn transaction;
   (C)   Accept any waiver, in writing or otherwise, of a right or protection
accorded a pledgor under this chapter;
   (D)   Fail to exercise reasonable care to protect pledged goods from loss or
damage;
   (E)   Fail to return pledged goods to a pledgor upon payment of the full
amount due the pawnbroker on the pawn transaction. In the event the pledged
goods are lost or damaged while in the possession of the pawnbroker, it shall
be the responsibility of the pawnbroker to replace the lost or damaged goods
with merchandise of like kind and equivalent value. In the event the pledgor
and pawnbroker cannot agree as to replacement, the pawnbroker shall reimburse
the pledgor in the amount of the value agreed upon pursuant to §
113.05;
   (F)   Take any article in pawn, pledge, or as security from any person,
which is known to the pawnbroker to be stolen unless there is a written
agreement with local or state police;
   (G)   Sell, exchange, barter, or remove from the pawnshop any goods pledged,
pawned, or purchased earlier than 48 hours after the transaction, except in
case of redemption by pledgor or items purchased for resale from wholesalers;
   (H)   Operate more than one pawnshop under one license, and the shop must be
at a permanent place of business; or
   (I)   Take as pledged goods any manufactured mobile home, recreational
vehicle, or motor vehicle other than a motorcycle.
   (J)   Penalties. Every person, firm, or corporation, their guests or
employees, who shall knowingly violate any of the provisions of this part,
shall, on conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor
pursuant to G.S. § 66-396. If the violation is by an owner or major stockholder
or managing partner of the pawnshop and the violation is knowingly committed by
the owner, major stockholder, or managing partner of the pawnshop, then the
license of the pawnshop may be suspended at the discretion of the Court
pursuant to G.S. § 66-396. A violation of division (F) shall not be enforced
hereunder and shall instead be prosecuted under G.S. § 14-71 pursuant to G.S. §
66.396(b).
(Ord. passed 8-5-1990; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 113.09 LICENSE RENEWAL.
   (A)   Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be for a period of
one year.
   (B)   The license may be renewed for additional periods of one year upon
compliance with the requirements of §
113.04.
(Ord. passed 8-5-1990)
§ 113.10 BOND.
   Every person, firm, or corporation licensed under this chapter shall, at the
time of receiving the license, file with the county a bond payable to the
county in the sum of $5,000, to be executed by the licensee, and by two
responsible sureties or a surety company licensed to do the business in this
state, to be approved by the county, which shall be for the faithful
performance of the requirements and obligations pertaining to the business so
licensed. The county may sue for forfeiture of the bond upon a breach thereof.
Any person who obtains a judgment against a pawnbroker and upon which judgment
execution is returned unsatisfied may maintain an action in his or her own name
upon the bond, to satisfy the judgment.
(Ord. passed 8-5-1990)
ELECTRONIC RECORD KEEPING AND REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
§ 113.20 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to provide for a means of electronic
record keeping and record submission of pawnbrokers, cash converters, dealers
and secondary metals recyclers to the Lincoln County Sheriffs Office.
(Ord. passed 4-21-2014)
§ 113.21 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CASH CONVERTER. As defined in G.S. § 66-387(2).
   DEALER. As defined in G.S. § 66-406(1).
   PAWNBROKER. As defined in G.S. § 66-387(4).
   SECONDARY METALS RECYCLER. As defined in G.S. § 55-420(8).
(Ord. passed 4-21-2014)
§ 113.22 PAWNBROKERS.
   Pawnbrokers shall keep the records required by G.S. § 66-391 in an
electronic format and shall report such records electronically in a manner
authorized by the Lincoln County Sheriff s Office. Every person, firm, or
corporation, their guests or employees, who shall knowingly violate any of the
provisions of this part, shall, on conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a
Class 2 misdemeanor pursuant to G.S. § 66-396. If the violation is by an owner
or major stockholder or managing partner of the pawnshop and the violation is
knowingly committed by the owner, major stockholder, or managing partner of the
pawnshop, then the license of the pawnshop may be suspended at the discretion
of the Court pursuant to G.S. § 66-396.
(Ord. passed 4-21-2014; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 113.23 CASH CONVERTERS.
   Cash converters shall keep the records required by G.S. § 66-392 in an
electronic format and shall report such records electronically in a manner
authorized by the Lincoln County Sheriffs Office. Every person, firm, or
corporation, their guests or employees, who shall knowingly violate any of the
provisions of this part, shall, on conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a
Class 2 misdemeanor pursuant to G.S. § 66-396. If the violation is by an owner
or major stockholder or managing partner of the pawnshop and the violation is
knowingly committed by the owner, major stockholder, or managing partner of the
pawnshop, then the license of the pawnshop may be suspended at the discretion
of the Court pursuant to G.S. § 66-396.
(Ord. passed 4-21-2014; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 113.24 DEALERS.
   (A)   Dealers shall keep the records required by G.S. § 66-410 in an
electronic format and shall file such records electronically in a manner
authorized by the Lincoln County Sheriffs Office.
   (B)   Penalties. Every person, firm, or corporation, their guests or
employees, who shall knowingly violate any of the provisions of this part,
shall, on conviction thereof, be deemed guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor
pursuant to G.S. § 66-413. In addition, any dealer so convicted shall be
ineligible for a dealer’s permit for a period of three years from the date of
conviction pursuant to G.S. § 66-413. Each and every violation shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. passed 4-21-2014; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 113.25 SECONDARY METALS RECYCLERS.
   (A)   Secondary metals recyclers shall keep the receipts and the records
required by G.S. §§ 66-421 and 66-422 in an electronic format, and shall
transfer such receipts and records electronically directly to the County
Sheriff’s Office in a manner authorized by the Sheriff’s Office.
      (1)   In order to properly monitor all receipts for the purchase of
regulated metals, the County Sheriff’s Office may require that all secondary
metal recyclers implement the use of the online database system used by the
Sheriff’s Office at the time that records are required to be provided. If the
Sheriff’s Office changes the online database system it uses, then it will
notify all secondary metal recyclers in its system of the change. The Sheriff’s
Office shall allow for a reasonable transition period for all secondary metal
recyclers to implement the use of the new database.
      (2)   All receipts for purchases shall be uploaded to the online database
system by the secondary metal recycler within three business days of the
purchase. Furthermore, all entries must include all identifying information of
the individual delivering the regulated metals, as well as any and all
identifying information of the purchased regulated metals pursuant to G.S, §
66-421.
   (B)   Violations. Pursuant to G.S. § 66-429, the following violations shall
apply to this section:
      (1)   Unless the conduct is covered by some other provision of law
providing greater punishment, any person knowingly and willfully violating any
of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor for
a first offense. A second or subsequent violation of this section is a Class 1
felony.
      (2)   Revocation of permits. If the owner or the employees of a fixed
site are convicted of an aggregate of three or more violations of this section
within a ten year period, the permit associated with that fixed site shall be
immediately revoked by the Sheriff for a period of six months. Any attempt to
circumvent this section by procuring a permit through a family member shall
result in extension of the revocation period for an additional 18 months.
(Ord. passed 4-21-2014; Ord. passed 3-21-2022; Ord. passed 12-19-2022)
§ 113.99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this section shall be enforced pursuant to G.S. Ch. 66,
Art. 45.
(Ord. passed 8-5-1990; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
CHAPTER 114: SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
General Provisions
   
114.01   Public display of sexually explicit material in establishments
frequented by minors prohibited
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 114.01 PUBLIC DISPLAY OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL IN ESTABLISHMENTS
FREQUENTED BY MINORS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners does hereby find that there exists an
increasing trend in the display of sexually explicit material in commercial
establishments within the county in such a manner that the material is within
the open view of minors and is thereby easily accessible to them. The Board of
Commissioners further find that the public display of the material is adverse
and detrimental to the health, safety, and welfare of its citizens,
particularly minors, and the peace and dignity of the county, and as a matter
of policy the display should be regulated under the police power of this
county.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the character and content of the cover of
the material, or failure to exercise reasonable inspection which would disclose
the character and content of the cover of the material.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18 years.
      PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, or
other legal entity.
      PUBLIC DISPLAY. The placing, exposing, or exhibiting of sexually explicit
material in or on a newsstand, display rack, window, showcase, display case, or
similar place so that the material is easily visible from a public
thoroughfare, sidewalk, or from that portion of the interior of any business or
commercial establishment frequented by minors or where minors are or may be
invited as part of the general public.
      SEXUALLY EXPLICIT MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, or newspaper which
contains on the cover any photograph, picture, drawing, depiction, or other
visual representation showing human sexual intercourse, masturbation,
homosexual acts, direct physical stimulation or touching of unclothed genitals
or pubic areas of the human male or female, flagellation or torture by or upon
a person who is nude or clad in revealing or bizarre costumes, uncovered or
less than opaquely covered post pubertal human genitals or pubic areas.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly place on public
display sexually explicit material in any business establishment frequented by
minors or where minors are or may be invited as a part of the general public.
However, the sexually explicit material may be displayed on any shelf, rack,
stand, or ledge which has an opaque screen or border of sufficient height so
that only the title of any such material is visible.
   (D)   Violation and penalty. Any person or business found to be displaying
material harmful to minors, including the public display of sexually explicit
material, if having custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment and knowing the character or content of the material, he/she/it
displays material that is harmful to minors at that establishment so that it is
open to view by minors as part of the invited general public, shall be
punishable under G.S. § 14-190.14 and any violation herein shall be enforced as
a Class 2 misdemeanor. Each day’s violation shall be considered a separate
offense.
   (E)   In addition to the criminal penalties herein provided, violations of
this section may be enforced by the institution of proceedings in the form of a
civil action for equitable and injunctive relief to restrain or prohibit the
violation. The proceeding shall be brought in the County Superior Court. The
institution of any proceeding for equitable or injunctive relief under this
section shall not relieve any party to the proceedings from any criminal
penalty prescribed for violations of any part of this section.
   (F)   This section shall not apply within the City of Lincolnton, North
Carolina.
   (G)   This section shall be in full force and effect beginning the 8-7-1980.
(Ord. passed 7-7-1980; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
CHAPTER 115: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
   
115.01   Drinking and littering
§ 115.01 DRINKING AND LITTERING.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for a person to drink beer while standing,
walking, or riding on any of the highways and roads of the county, and,
likewise, it shall, be unlawful to drink beer in any of the parking lots,
public or private, in the county.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink whiskey or alcoholic
beverages while standing, walking, or riding on the highways and roads of the
county, and, likewise, it shall be unlawful to drink whiskey or other alcoholic
beverages in parking lots, public or private, in the county.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to discard empty beer cans, beer
bottles, and whiskey bottles in any of the parking lots, public or private, in
the county, or litter any of the properties in the county other than the
property owned individually by the person discarding and littering beer cans,
beer bottles, and whiskey bottles.
   (D)   This section shall apply to the county, other than the corporate
limits of the City of Lincolnton for the reason that the City of Lincolnton has
a similar ordinance applying to the corporation of Lincolnton.
   (E)   Penalty. Violation of this section shall be punishable as a Class 3
misdemeanor, and any person convicted of the violation shall be subject to
punishment as provided in G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. passed 4-7-1970; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
      Chapter
         
130.   GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL OFFENSES
Section
   
130.01   Protection of markers and operation of boats on Lake Norman
§ 130.01 PROTECTION OF MARKERS AND OPERATION OF BOATS ON LAKE NORMAN.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to move, remove, deface, damage or
destroy, or obliterate any navigational marker, safety marker, danger marker,
or information sign or structure erected upon or in the waters of Lake Norman,
or upon the immediate shores thereof, by the Lake Norman Commission acting as
the joint regulating authority of Catawba, Iredell, Lincoln, and Mecklenburg
Counties.
   (B)   Pursuant to G.S. § 75A-14.1, it shall be unlawful for any person to
operate any water-borne craft upon the waters of Lake Norman within 50 feet of
any marked boat launching area, dock, pier, marina, boat storage structure, or
private or public boat service areas, at greater than “No Wake” speed.
   (C)   No person operating or responsible for the operation of a water-borne
craft shall permit it to enter any marked swimming area upon the waters of Lake
Norman.
   (D)   Definitions.
      (1)   GREATER THAN “NO WAKE” speed is defined as speed which shall create
an appreciable or damaging wake, or shall risk injury to life or property.
      (2)   MARKED shall mean in accordance with the Uniform Waterway Marking
System as adopted by the State Wildlife Commission and its amendments thereto.
   (E)   Penalty. Pursuant to G.S. § 75A-18, a person who violates this section
is responsible for an infraction as defined in G.S. § 14-3.1 and shall pay a
fine of $50.
(Ord. passed 12-13-1966; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
      Chapter
         
150.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
         
151.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
         
152.   SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
         
153.   HISTORIC PROPERTIES
         
154.   WATERSHED PROTECTION
         
155.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
         
156.   ZONING CODE
CHAPTER 150: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Enhanced Agricultural Districts
   
150.001   Title
   
150.002   Policy and purpose
   
150.003   Authority
   
150.004   Definitions
   
150.005   Agricultural District Advisory Board
   
150.006   Creation of enhanced agricultural districts
   
150.007   Certification and qualification of farmland
   
150.008   Application, approval, and appeal procedure
   
150.009   Revocation of conservation agreement
   
150.010   Public hearings
   
150.011   Public notification
   
150.012   Subdivision ordinance and zoning ordinance review
   
150.013   Building permit registration
   
150.014   Waiver of sewer assessments
   
150.015   Consultation authority
   
150.016   State agency notification
   
150.017   Legal provisions
Lincolnton-Lincoln County Regional Airport Zoning
   
150.030   Short title
   
150.031   Definitions
   
150.032   Airport zones
   
150.033   Airport zone height limitations
   
150.034   Use restriction
   
150.035   Nonconforming uses
   
150.036   Permits
   
150.037   Enforcement
   
150.038   Board of Adjustment
   
150.039   Appeals
   
150.040   Judicial review
   
150.041   Conflicting regulations
   
150.042   Effective date
Land Farming
   
150.055   Title
   
150.056   Definition
   
150.057   Purpose
   
150.058   Violations
   
150.059   Monitoring and assistance
   
150.060   Enforcement
   
150.061   Transportation of soil for land farming regulated
   
150.062   Effective date
Lake Norman Surface Zoning
   
150.075   Generally
   
150.076   Description of area
   
150.077   Fixed facilities on or near the waters of Lake Norman
   
150.078   Prevention of violations
   
150.079   Approval of the Lake Norman Marine Commission
   
150.080   Effective date
   
150.081   Appeals
   
150.082   Review and approval
 
   
150.999   Penalty
ENHANCED AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS
§ 150.001 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Enhanced
Agricultural District Ordinance."
(Ord. passed 10-15-2007)
§ 150.002 POLICY AND PURPOSE.
   The Board of Commissioners recognizes the critical need for proper
management of environmental issues as the county faces growth in the coming
years. It is the policy of this county to conserve, protect, and encourage the
development, improvement, and preservation of its agriculture land and forest
land for the production of food, fiber, and other products. When other land
uses extend into agricultural and forest areas, agricultural and forestry
operations often become the subject of nuisance suits. It is the purpose of
this subchapter to reduce potential nuisance suits by providing advance notice
to surrounding landowners of the presence of enhanced agricultural districts
and to encourage the preservation and protection of farm land from nonfarm
development, recognizing the importance of agriculture to the economic and
cultural life of the county.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2007)
§ 150.003 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is adopted pursuant to authority conferred by G.S. §§ 106-
735 through 106-744 and G.S. Chapter 153A.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2007)
§ 150.004 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT ADVISORY BOARD. Lincoln County Agricultural District
Advisory Board.
   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. Lincoln County Board of Commissioners.
   CHAIRPERSON. Chairperson of the Lincoln County Agricultural District
Advisory Board.
   CONSERVATION AGREEMENT. An agreement between an agricultural operation
(landowner) and the county prohibiting non-farm use.
   DISTRICT. Enhanced agricultural district, as established by this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2007)
§ 150.005 AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Creation. The Board of Commissioners shall establish an Agricultural
District Advisory Board to implement the provisions of this program.
   (B)   Membership. The Agricultural District Advisory Board shall consist of
no less than seven members appointed by the Board of Commissioners.
   (C)   Membership requirements.
      (1)   Each Advisory Board member shall be a county resident. Each
district shall be assigned to a member of the Board who shall monitor and
represent that district in all business conducted by the Board. Individual
members will represent those districts closest to them geographically.
      (2)   At least five of the seven members shall be actively engaged in
farming.
      (3)   The members actively engaged in farming, as well as other members,
shall be selected for appointment by the Board of Commissioners from the names
of individuals submitted to the Board of Commissioners by the Lincoln Natural
Resources Committee, the Soil and Water Conservation District Board of
Supervisors, the county office of the North Carolina Cooperative Extension
Service, the USDA Farm Service Agency County Committee, nonprofit agricultural
organizations, conservation organizations, agribusiness, and the public at
large.
   (D)   Tenure. The initial board is to consist of two appointees for terms of
one year; two appointees for terms of two years; and three appointees for terms
of three years. Thereafter, all appointments are to be for terms of three
years, with reappointment permitted.
   (E)   Vacancies. Any vacancy on the Agricultural District Advisory Board is
to be filled by the Board of Commissioners for the remainder of the unexpired
term.
   (F)   Removal. Any member of the Agricultural District Advisory Board may be
removed for cause by the Board of Commissioners subsequent to written charges
being presented to the member and after consultation with the Agricultural
District Advisory Board.
   (G)   Funding. The per diem compensation, if any, for the members of the
Agricultural District Advisory Board may be fixed by the Board of Commissioners
and funds may be appropriated to the Agricultural District Advisory Board to
perform its duties.
   (H)   Agricultural District Advisory Board procedure.
      (1)   Chairperson. The Agricultural District Advisory Board shall elect a
Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson each year at its first meeting of the fiscal
year. The Chairperson shall preside over all regular or special meetings of the
Agricultural District Advisory Board. In the absence or disability of the
Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall preside and shall exercise all the
powers of the Chairperson. Additional officers may be elected as needed.
      (2)   Jurisdiction. The Agricultural District Advisory Board may adopt
rules of procedure not inconsistent with this subchapter or with other
provisions of state law.
      (3)   Agricultural District Advisory Board year. The Agricultural
District Advisory Board shall use the county fiscal year as its meeting year.
      (4)   Meetings. Meetings of the Agricultural District Advisory Board
shall be held at the call of the Chairperson and at any other times as the
Agricultural District Advisory Board may specify in its rules of procedure, or
upon the request of at least a majority of the Agricultural District Advisory
Board membership. A meeting shall be held at least annually and notice of any
meetings to the members shall be in writing, unless otherwise agreed to by all
Agricultural District Advisory Board members. Meeting dates and times shall be
posted as far in advance as possible at the meeting site and by advertisement
in local newspapers or by other means of public dissemination of the meeting
dates as may be agreed upon by at least a majority of the Agricultural District
Advisory Board membership. All meetings shall be open to the public. A quorum
of the Agricultural District Advisory Board must be present to conduct
business.
      (5)   Majority vote. The concurring vote of a majority of the members of
the Agricultural District Advisory Board present shall be necessary to decide
in favor of an applicant; or to pass upon any other matter on which it is
required to act under this subchapter. To reverse any order, requirement,
decision, or determination of the Agricultural District Advisory Board, the
concurring vote of a majority of all members of the Agricultural District
Advisory Board shall be necessary.
      (6)   Records. The Agricultural District Advisory Board shall keep
minutes of the proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question, or
if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall keep records of
its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the
office of the Agricultural District Advisory Board and shall be a public
record.
      (7)   Administrative. The Soil and Water Conservation District will serve
the Agricultural District Advisory Board for record keeping, correspondence,
application procedures under this subchapter, and whatever services the Board
needs to complete its duties.
   (I)   Duties. The Agricultural District Advisory Board shall:
      (1)   Review and approve applications for qualified farm land and
enhanced agricultural districts and make recommendations concerning the
establishment and modification of agricultural districts;
      (2)   Conduct public hearings on public projects likely to have an impact
on agricultural operations, particularly if the projects involve condemnation
of all or part of any qualifying farm;
      (3)   Advise the Board of Commissioners on projects, programs, or issues
affecting the agricultural economy or activities within the county that will
affect agricultural districts;
      (4)   Review and make recommendations concerning proposed amendments to
this subchapter;
      (5)   Develop a county-wide farm land protection plan as defined in G.S.
§ 106-744(e) for presentation to the Board of Commissioners; and
      (6)   Study additional methods of farm land conservation and make
recommendations to the Board of Commissioners; and perform other agricultural
related tasks or duties assigned by the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2007)
§ 150.006 CREATION OF ENHANCED AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Implementation. In order to implement the purposes stated in §
150.002, this program provides for the creation of enhanced agricultural
districts that meet the following standards.
      (1)   The district shall contain one or more qualified farms that contain
a total of not less than 50 acres.
      (2)   If a district consists of more than one qualifying farm, each farm
must be within one mile of at least one other qualifying farm within the
district.
   (B)   Encourage formation. The county may take any action as it deems
appropriate through the Agricultural District Advisory Board or other entities
or individuals to encourage the formation of the districts and to further their
purposes and objectives, including the implementation of a public information
program to reasonably inform landowners of the agricultural district program.
   (C)   Withdrawal. Enhanced agricultural districts require an irrevocable
agricultural term easement between the Agricultural District Advisory Board and
the agriculture producer that cannot be revoked for ten years.
   (D)   Display. The districts shall be designated on county GIS mapping
system and marked on county maps displayed for public view in the following
county offices:
      (1)   Register of Deeds;
      (2)   Building and Land Development;
      (3)   Tax Mapping;
      (4)   Soil and Water Conservation District/NRCS; and
      (5)   Cooperative Extension.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2007)
§ 150.007 CERTIFICATION AND QUALIFICATION OF FARMLAND.
   To secure county certification as qualifying farmland, a farm must:
   (A)   Be participating in the farm present-use-value taxation program
established by G.S. §§ 105-277.2 through 105-277.7;
   (B)   Be certified by the Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly
the Soil Conservation Service) of the United States Department of Agriculture
as being a farm on which:
      (1)   At least two-thirds of the land is composed of soils that:
         (a)   Are best suited for providing food, seed, fiber, forage, timber,
forestry products, horticultural crops, and oil seed crops;
         (b)   Have good soil qualities;
         (c)   Are favorable for all major crops common to the county where the
land is located;
         (d)   Have a favorable growing season; and
         (e)   Receive the available moisture needed to produce high yields for
an average of eight out of ten years.
      (2)   At least two-thirds of the land has been actively used in
agricultural, horticultural, or forestry operations as defined by G.S. § 105-
277.2(1), (2) and (3) during each of the five previous years, measured from the
date on which the determination must be made as to whether the land in question
qualifies.
   (C)   Be managed in accordance with the Natural Resources Conservation
Service defined erosion-control practices that are addressed to highly-erodible
land if highly-erodible land exist on the farm; and
   (D)   Be the subject of a conservation agreement, as defined in G.S. § 121-
35, between the county and the owner of the land that prohibits nonfarm use or
development of the land for a period of at least ten years, except for the
creation of not more than three lots that meet applicable county zoning and
subdivision regulations.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2007)
§ 150.008 APPLICATION, APPROVAL, AND APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Application procedure.
      (1)   A landowner may apply to participate in the program by making
application to the Chairperson of the Agricultural District Advisory Board or a
designated staff person. The application shall be on forms provided by the
Agricultural District Advisory Board. The application to participate in a
district may be filed with the certification for qualifying farm land.
      (2)   Subject to approval of the application, the landowner shall execute
a conservation agreement per §
150.007(D).
   (B)   Approval process.
      (1)   Upon submission of the application to the Agricultural District
Advisory Board, the Agricultural District Advisory Board shall meet within 60
days to approve or disapprove the application. The Chairperson shall notify the
applicant by first-class mail of approval or disapproval of participation in
the agricultural district.
      (2)   Upon receipt of an application, the Chairperson will forward copies
immediately to the following offices which shall be asked to provide comments,
if any, to the Agricultural District Advisory Board prior to the date set for
the Agricultural District Advisory Board vote on the application: the Lincoln
County Tax Assessor; the Lincoln Soil and Water Conservation District office;
and the Natural Resources Conservation Service. The offices shall evaluate,
complete, and return their copies to the Chairperson within 30 days of receipt.
   (C)   Appeal. If the Agricultural District Advisory Board denies an
application, the petitioner shall have 30 days to appeal the decision to the
Board of Commissioners. The appeal shall be presented in writing. The decision
of the Board of Commissioners is final.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2007)
§ 150.009 REVOCATION OF CONSERVATION AGREEMENT.
   An agricultural easement entered into between a county or city and landowner
shall be irrevocable for a period of ten years from the date the agreement is
executed. At the end of its term, an agricultural easement shall automatically
renew for a term of three years, unless notice of termination is given in a
timely manner by either party as prescribed in the ordinance establishing the
enhanced agricultural program. The benefits set forth in this subchapter shall
be available to the farm land that is the subject of the agricultural easement
for the duration of the agricultural easement.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2007)
§ 150.010 PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   (A)   Purpose. Pursuant to G.S. § 106-740, which provides that no state or
local public agency or governmental unit may formally initiate any action to
condemn any interest in qualifying farm land within a district until the agency
or unit has requested the Agricultural District Advisory Board to hold a public
hearing on the proposed condemnation, this subchapter provides for those
hearings.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   Upon receiving a request, the Agricultural District Advisory Board
shall publish notice describing the proposed action in the appropriate
newspapers of the county within five business days of the request, and will in
the same notice notify the public of a public hearing on the proposed
condemnation, to be held within 30 days of receipt of the request.
      (2)   The Agricultural District Advisory Board shall meet to review:
         (a)   Whether the need for the project has been satisfactorily
established by the agency or unit of government involved, including a review of
any fiscal impact analysis conducted by the agency involved; and
         (b)   Whether there are alternatives to the proposed action that have
less impact and are less disruptive to the agricultural activities of the
district within which the proposed action is to take place.
      (3)   Land value will not be a factor in the selection between properties
under consideration for the proposed action.
      (4)   Within ten days after the hearing, the Agricultural District
Advisory Board shall make a report containing its findings and recommendations
regarding the proposed action. The report shall be made available to the public
prior to its being conveyed to the decision-making body of the agency proposing
the acquisition.
      (5)   Pursuant to G.S. § 106-740, the Board of Commissioners shall not
permit any formal initiation of condemnation by local agencies while the
proposed condemnation is properly before the Agricultural District Advisory
Board within these time limitations.
      (6)   Prior to initiating condemnation proceedings which would convert
land in a district to nonfarm uses, the county or any other local unit of
government shall submit to the Agricultural District Advisory Board a statement
that the governmental unit has considered alternatives to condemning farm land
in the district.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2007)
§ 150.011 PUBLIC NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to help meet the needs of
agriculture as an industry and to prevent conflicts between enhanced
agricultural district participants and nonfarm landowners in proximity to
districts.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   Notification. Upon certification of qualifying farm land and
designation of real property as a district, the Agricultural District Advisory
Board, in cooperation with the county, shall provide notification to property
owners, residents, and other interested persons in and adjacent to any
designated agricultural district. The purpose of the notification is to inform
all current and potential residents and property owners in and adjacent to an
agricultural district that farming and agricultural activities may take place
in this district any time during the day or night. These activities may
include, but are not limited to, the following: pesticide spraying, manure
spreading, machinery operations, livestock operations, forestry operations,
including logging, and similar activities.
         (b)   Types of notification.
            1.   Signs identifying approved agricultural districts shall be
placed along the rights-of-way of major roads;
            2.   Maps identifying approved districts shall be provided to the
Register of Deeds, the Soil and Water Conservation office, the Cooperative
Extension office, Building and Land Development, and Tax Mapping; and
            3.   The following notice shall be available for public inspections
in the Register of Deeds office:
NOTICE TO REAL ESTATE PURCHASERS IN LINCOLN COUNTY OF ENHANCED AGRICULTURAL
DISTRICTS FOR FARMLAND CONSERVATION.
   Lincoln County has established enhanced agricultural districts for farmland
conservation to protect and preserve agricultural lands and activities. These
districts have been developed and mapped by the County to inform all purchasers
of real property that certain agricultural activities including, but not
limited to, pesticide spraying, manure spreading, machinery operations,
livestock operations, forestry operations including logging and similar
activities may take place in these districts any time during the day or night.
Maps and information on the location and establishment of these districts can
be obtained from the Soil & Water Conservation District Office/NRCS, Register
of Deeds, Cooperative Extension Service, Building & Land Development and Tax
Mapping.
      (2)   Limit of liability. In no event shall the county or any of its
officers, employees, or agents be held liable in damages for any misfeasance,
malfeasance, or nonfeasance occurring in good faith in connection with the
duties or obligations imposed by this subchapter.
      (3)   No cause of action. In no event shall any cause of action arise out
of the failure of a person researching the title of a particular tract to
report to any person the proximity of the tract to a qualifying farm or
enhanced agricultural district as defined in this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2007)
§ 150.012 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE AND ZONING ORDINANCE REVIEW.
   Developers of subdivisions or planned unit developments shall designate, on
preliminary development plans, the existence of the districts located within
one-half aerial mile of the proposed development.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2007)
§ 150.013 BUILDING PERMIT REGISTRATION.
   The county shall require persons applying for a building permit to sign the
following statement, which shall be maintained at the office of the
Agricultural District Advisory Board: "I have reviewed the most current Lincoln
County Agricultural Districting Map found in the Register of Deeds office. I
understand that activities such as pesticide spraying, manure spreading,
machinery operation, livestock operations, logging and other common farming and
forestry activities may occur at any time in these areas."
(Ord. passed 10-15-2007)
§ 150.014 WAIVER OF SEWER ASSESSMENTS.
   Preexisting agricultural districts that exist before a new sewer district is
established will be exempt from sewer assessment.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2007)
§ 150.015 CONSULTATION AUTHORITY.
   The Agricultural District Advisory Board may consult with the Lincoln
Natural Resources Committee, North Carolina Cooperative Extension Service,
Lincoln Soil and Water Conservation District, Natural Resources Conservation
Service office, North Carolina Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services,
and with any other individual, agency, or organization the Agricultural
District Advisory Board deems necessary to properly conduct its business.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2007)
§ 150.016 STATE AGENCY NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   A copy of this subchapter shall be sent to the office of the North
Carolina Commissioner of Agriculture and Consumer Services, the Board of
Commissioners, the county office of the North Carolina Cooperative Extension
Service, and the Soil and Water Conservation District office after adoption.
   (B)   At least annually, the county shall submit a written report to the
Commissioner of Agriculture and Consumer Services on the county's agricultural
district program, including the following information:
      (1)   Number of landowners enrolled;
      (2)   Number of acres applied;
      (3)   Number of acres certified;
      (4)   Number of acres denied; and
      (5)   Date certified.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2007)
§ 150.017 LEGAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Conflicts. Whenever the provisions of any federal or state statute
require more restrictive provisions than are required by this subchapter, the
provisions of the statute shall govern.
   (B)   Amendments. After notification and in consultation with the
Agricultural District Advisory Board, this subchapter may be amended from time
to time by the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 10-15-2007)
LINCOLNTON-LINCOLN COUNTY REGIONAL AIRPORT ZONING
§ 150.030 SHORT TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Lincolnton-Lincoln
County Regional Airport Zoning Ordinance."
(Ord. passed 11-5-2001)
§ 150.031 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRPORT. Lincolnton-Lincoln County Regional Airport.
   AIRPORT ELEVATION. The highest point of an airport's usable landing area
measured in feet from sea level. The Lincolnton-Lincoln County Regional Airport
is 878 feet above sea level.
   APPROACH SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway
centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface
and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in
§
150.033. In plan, the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the
perimeter of the approach zone.
   APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL, and CONICAL ZONES. These zones are set
forth in §
150.032.
   BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. A Board consisting of five members appointed by the
Board of Commissioners, as provided in G.S. Chapter 63, Article 4.
   CONICAL SURFACE. A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery
of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to one for a horizontal distance of
4,000 feet.
   HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION. An obstruction determined to have a substantial
adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
   HEIGHT. For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this subchapter and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean
sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
   HORIZONTAL SURFACE. A horizontal plane 100 feet above the established
airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter
of the horizontal zone.
   LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for and intended to
be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds maximum
gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
   NONCONFORMING USE. Any preexisting structure, object of natural growth, or
use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this subchapter or any
amendment thereto.
   NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing instrument
approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal
guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in
nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile
object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in §
150.033.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint stock association, or governmental entity; includes a trustee, a
receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative of any of them.
   PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY. A runway having an existing or planned
instrument approach procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System (ILS) or a
Precision Approach Radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision
approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout
plan or any other planning document.
   PRIMARY SURFACE. A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the
runway has a specially-prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200
feet beyond each end of that runway; for military or planned hard surface, the
primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary
surface is set forth in §
150.032. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the
elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
   RUNWAY. A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
   STRUCTURE. An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by
a person, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes,
smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines.
   TRANSITIONAL SURFACES. These surfaces extend outward at 90-degree angles to
the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven
feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and
approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES for those portions of the precision approach surfaces,
which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a
distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach
surface and at 90-degree angles to the extended runway centerline.
   TREE. Any object of natural growth.
   UTILITY RUNWAY. A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by
propeller aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2001)
§ 150.032 AIRPORT ZONES.
   (A)   In order to carry out the provisions of this subchapter, there are
hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land
lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal
surfaces, and conical surfaces as they apply to the Lincolnton-Lincoln County
Regional Airport. The zones are shown on the Lincolnton-Lincoln County Regional
Airport Zoning Map consisting of one sheet, representing the current version on
file in the Zoning Department, which is attached to the ordinance codified in
this subchapter and made a part hereof. An area located in more than one of the
following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive
height limitation.
   (B)   The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows.
      (1)   Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than
three-fourth mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. The inner edge of this
approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet
wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 3,500 feet at a
horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is
the continuation of the centerline of the runway.
      (2)   Transitional zones. The transitional zones are the areas beneath
the transitional surfaces.
      (3)   Horizontal zone. The horizontal zone is established by swinging
arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of
each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those
arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones.
      (4)   Conical zone. The conical zone is established as the area that
commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom
a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. The conical zone does not include the
transitional zone.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2001)
§ 150.033 AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this subchapter, no structure shall be
erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow, in any
zone created by this subchapter to a height in excess of the applicable height
limit herein established for that zone.
   (B)   The applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of
the zones in question as follows:
      (1)   Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than
three-fourth mile nonprecision instrument approach zone. Slopes 34 feet outward
for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the
extended runway centerline;
      (2)   Transitional zones. Slope seven feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and
the approach surface, and extending to a height of 100 feet above the airport
elevation which is 878 feet above mean sea level;
      (3)   Horizontal zone. Established at 100 feet above the airport
elevation or at a height of 978 feet above mean sea level;
      (4)   Conical zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning
at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at 100 feet above the airport
elevation and extending to a height of 300 feet above the airport elevation;
and
      (5)   Excepted height limitations.
         (a)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as prohibiting the
construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree, to a
height up to 50 feet above the surface of the land.
         (b)   Height shall be measured from the highest point on the ground
along the periphery of the structure or tree to the highest point on the
structure or tree.
         (c)   Nothing in this subchapter shall be construed as prohibiting the
construction of a wireless communication tower within the horizontal or conical
zones provided that the applicant is able to demonstrate compliance with all
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) standards and regulations and receive
approval from the FAA for the construction of the proposed tower.
      (6)   Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of this subchapter
shall be subject to the penalties as provided in UDO § 11.2.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2001; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 150.034 USE RESTRICTION.
   No use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this
subchapter in such a manner as to create electrical interference with
navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft,
make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others,
result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in
the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any
way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft
intending to use the airport. Any person found to be in violation of this
subchapter shall be subject to the penalties as provided in UDO § 11.2.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2001; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 150.035 NONCONFORMING USES.
   (A)   Regulations not retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this
subchapter shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other
change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations
as of the effective date of this subchapter or any amendment thereto, or
otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming use. Nothing
contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or
intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was
begun prior to the effective date of this subchapter, and is diligently
prosecuted.
   (B)   Marking and lighting. Notwithstanding division (A) above, the owner of
any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the
installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of the markers and lights as
shall be deemed necessary by the Lincolnton-Lincoln County Regional Airport
Authority to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the
airport the presence of the airport obstructions. The markers and lights shall
be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the county.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2001)
§ 150.036 PERMITS.
   (A)   Future uses.
      (1)   Except as specifically provided in divisions (A)(1)(a) through (A)
(1)(c) below, no material change shall be made in the use of land, and no
structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted, or otherwise established,
in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for
and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which
the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be
determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the
regulations herein prescribed. If the determination is in the affirmative, the
permit shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions
of this subchapter shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in
accordance with division (D) below.
         (a)   In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and
conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than
70 feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain,
land contour, or topographic features, the tree or structure would extend above
the height limits prescribed for the zones.
         (b)   In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a
horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of the runway, no
permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than 70 feet of
vertical height above the ground, except when the tree or structure would
extend above the height limit prescribed for the approach zones.
         (c)   In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones
beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for
any tree or structure less than 70 feet of vertical height above the ground,
except when the tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or
topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for the
transition zones.
      (2)   Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction or alteration
of any structure, or growth of any tree, in excess of any of the height limits
established by this subchapter, except as set forth in §
150.033(B)(5). In the event a tree is allowed to grow in excess of the height
limits established by this subchapter, except as set forth in §
150.033(B)(5), the tree shall be removed, topped, trimmed, or otherwise
modified to bring into compliance with this subchapter. If the County Manager
or his or her designee determines that the tree adversely affects the safe use
of the airport, the county will pay for the direct cost to remove, top, trim,
or otherwise modify the tree to bring into compliance with this subchapter.
   (B)   Existing uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an airport obstruction that is a hazard to air
navigation or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a
greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this
subchapter, or any amendments thereto, or that it is when the application for a
permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall
be granted.
   (C)   Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed. Whenever the County Manager
determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more
than 80% torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be
granted that would allow the structure or tree to exceed the applicable height
limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
   (D)   Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property not in accordance
with the regulations prescribed in this subchapter, may apply to the Board of
Adjustment for a variance from the regulations. The application for variance
shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation
Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air
navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. The
variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or
enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and relief
granted, will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard
to air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with
the spirit of this subchapter. Additionally, no application for variance to the
requirements of this subchapter may be considered by the Board of Adjustment
unless a copy of the application has been furnished to the County Manager for
advice as to the aeronautical effects of the variance. If the County Manager
does not respond to the application within 15 days after receipt, the Board of
Adjustment may act on its own to deny the application.
   (E)   Obstruction marking and lighting. Any permit or variance granted may,
if the action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this subchapter
and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the
owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the Lincolnton-Lincoln
County Regional Airport Authority, at its own expense, to install, operate, and
maintain thereon the marking and lights as may be necessary.
   (F)   Permits. The Director of Development Services (the “Director”) shall
review all applications for development to ensure compliance with all
regulations of this subchapter. All applications shall be complete prior to
review by the Director. The Director, in his or her discretion, may request
that additional information be submitted as necessary to ensure a thorough and
complete review of the application. All applications shall be submitted with a
nonrefundable fee in accordance with a fee schedule adopted by the Board of
Commissioners.
   (G)   Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of this subchapter shall
be subject to the penalties as provided in UDO § 11.2.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2001; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 150.037 ENFORCEMENT.
   It shall be the duty of the County Manager to administer and enforce the
regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall be
made to the Building Inspector upon a form published for that purpose.
Applications required by this subchapter to be submitted to the County Manager
shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Application for action by
the Board of Adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted by the County Manager.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2001; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 150.038 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Board of Adjustment to have and exercise the
following powers:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by the County Manager in the enforcement of this
subchapter;
      (2)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this
subchapter upon which the Board of Adjustment under the regulations may be
required to pass; and
      (3)   To hear and decide specific variances.
   (B)   The Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members appointed by the
Board of Commissioners and each shall serve for a term of three years and until
a successor is duly appointed and qualified.
   (C)   (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and
in harmony with the provisions of this subchapter.
      (2)   Meetings of the Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of
the Chairperson and at any other times as the Board of the Adjustment may
determine.
      (3)   The Chairperson, or, in the absence of the Chairperson, the Acting
Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
      (4)   All hearings of the Board of Appeals shall be public.
      (5)   The Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon each question; or if absent or failing to
vote, indicating that fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and
other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office
of the County Clerk and on due cause shown.
   (D)   The Board of Adjustment shall make written findings of facts and
conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal
conclusions from the facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order,
requirement, decision, or determination which comes before it under the
provisions of this subchapter.
   (E)   The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of
Adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the County Manager or decide in favor of the applicant on any
matter upon which it is required to pass under this subchapter, or to effect
variation to this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2001)
§ 150.039 APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the
County Manager, made in the administration of this subchapter, may appeal to
the Board of Adjustment.
   (B)   (1)   All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as
provided by the rules of the Board of Adjustment, by filing with the County
Manager a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof.
      (2)   The County Manager shall forthwith transmit to the Board of
Adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed was taken.
   (C)   (1)   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the
action appealed from unless the County Manager certifies to the Board of
Adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason
of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would in the opinion of the
County Manager cause imminent peril to life or property.
      (2)   In that case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by the order
of the Board of Adjustment or notice to the County Manager and on due cause
shown.
   (D)   (1)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing
appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and
decide the same within a reasonable time.
      (2)   Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by agent or by
attorney.
   (E)   The Board of Adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this
subchapter, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make any order,
requirement, decision, or determination as may be appropriate under the
circumstances.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2001)
§ 150.040 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the Board
of Adjustment may appeal to the Superior Court, as provided in G.S. § 160D-
1401.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2001; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 150.041 CONFLICTING REGULATIONS.
   Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this subchapter and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or
trees, and the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation
or requirement shall govern and prevail.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2001)
§ 150.042 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   Whereas the immediate operation of the provisions of this subchapter is
necessary for the preservation of the public health, public safety, and general
welfare, an emergency is hereby declared to exist, and this subchapter shall be
in full force and effect from and after its passage by the Board of
Commissioners and publication and posting as required by law.
(Ord. passed 11-5-2001)
Cross-reference:
   Effective date of ordinances, see §
10.15
LAND FARMING
§ 150.055 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Lincoln County Land
Farming Ordinance."
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 150.056 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LAND FARMING. The method of depositing soil contaminated with petroleum
hydrocarbons upon other soil and exposing the same to any combination of air,
light, and nutrients as will result in the petroleum hydrocarbons being
destroyed by naturally occurring microorganisms.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 150.057 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to:
   (A)   Regulate the cleanup of sites containing underground storage tanks
which have contained petroleum products or any other material that remains, or
waste of which are, or may contaminate the soil with petroleum hydrocarbons
above acceptable levels; and
   (B)   Regulate the technique of treating and disposing of soil-containing
petroleum hydrocarbons commonly known as land farming.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 150.058 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person who shall dispose of or procure the disposal of any soil
containing petroleum hydrocarbons in violation of the terms of this subchapter
shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor, and may also be subject to additional
penalties and fines pursuant to North Carolina General Statutes.
   (B)   Each day of a violation of this   subchapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (C)   In addition to the above provisions, this subchapter may be enforced
by any appropriate equitable remedy authorized by G.S. § 153A-123 ,which
equitable remedies shall include, but not limited to, injunction, order of
abatement, a mandatory or prohibitory injunction, and any other orders of the
court that may be necessary and lawful to enforce and carry out the provisions
of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 150.059 MONITORING AND ASSISTANCE.
   The county recognizes that it is primarily the function of appropriate
federal and state agencies to monitor the transportation, treatment, and
disposal of soils containing hydrocarbons. However, the county recognizes that
the agencies are frequently understaffed and underfunded. One purpose of this
subchapter is, therefore, to supplement and complement the activities of the
federal and state agencies in the areas covered by this subchapter.
(Ord. passed - -)
§ 150.060 ENFORCEMENT.
   All persons who shall own, lease, or have possession of any property upon
which petroleum-contaminated soil is located, or who have any interest in the
property, or who shall be the agent, employee, or contractor of any such
person, shall, prior to the engaging in the treatment or disposal technique
known as land farming:
   (A)   Comply with all provisions of G.S. Chapter 143, Article 21A, as
amended, and other applicable rules and regulations promulgated thereunder as
they now exist and are hereafter amended;
   (B)   Comply with the provisions of all permits that may be issued by the
state allowing disposal of petroleum-contaminated soils;
   (C)   Comply with all federal statutes, laws, rules, and regulations
applicable to the disposal or remediation of petroleum-contaminated soils;
   (D)   Satisfy the County Health Department that they have so complied with
the federal and state laws, rules, and regulations by submitting to the County
Health Department the test results and data as it may require for determination
that the materials proposed for land farming are suitable for the treatment
technique and that the technique used has complied with all the federal and
state laws, rules, and regulations;
   (E)   Submit to the County Health Department a sworn statement from an
approved testing laboratory that the soil proposed for land farming is
appropriate for that purpose as defined by the state regulations;
   (F)   Submit written acknowledgment from the State Department of Natural and
Human Resources that the petroleum-contaminated soils have been determined to
be nonhazardous and are appropriate for treatment by land farming;
   (G)   Certify to the County Health Department that the soil to be disposed
of shall not be deposited in any form or fashion closer than:
      (1)   One hundred feet from any public or private water supply including
wells;
      (2)   Two hundred feet from any stream, lake, river, or natural
drainageway;
      (3)   One hundred feet from any property line; and/or
      (4)   Five hundred feet from any residence, school, hospital, playground,
or recreational park area.
   (H)   Submit authorization to the County Health Department authorizing its
agents and employees to go upon the property to make any investigation
necessary to determine compliance.
   (I)   Penalties. Any person found to be in violation of this subchapter
shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and may also be subject to additional
penalties and fines pursuant to North Carolina General Statutes.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 150.061 TRANSPORTATION OF SOIL FOR LAND FARMING REGULATED.
   (A)   (1)   Soils discovered in the county containing petroleum
hydrocarbons, if appropriate, may be remediated by land farming in compliance
with this subchapter and may be transported within the county to appropriate
destinations in the county for remediation, hereagain, in compliance with this
subchapter.
      (2)   No soils contaminated with petroleum hydrocarbons originating
outside of the county may be transported from a location outside of the county
into the county for land farming purposes.
   (B)   Persons, firms, or corporations engaged in transporting petroleum
contaminated soil in the county shall at all times have in their possession a
manifest describing the soils being transported, the hydrocarbon contamination,
the point of origination of the soils, and the destination of the soils, and be
prepared to exhibit the manifest to the County Health Department, its agents,
employees, and contractors, and anyone else authorized and designated to
enforce this subchapter.
   (C)   Penalties. Any person found to be in violation of this subchapter
shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and may also be subject to additional
penalties and fines pursuant to North Carolina General Statutes.
(Ord. passed - -; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 150.062 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be effective and be enforced as of 5-18-1992.
(Ord. passed - -)
Cross-reference:
   Effective date of ordinances, see §
10.15
LAKE NORMAN SURFACE ZONING
§ 150.075 GENERALLY.
   This subchapter shall be known as and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance
of the Lake Norman Surface," and is enacted for the purpose of enhancement of
public recreation and water safety on Lake Norman.
(Ord. passed 12-4-1972)
§ 150.076 DESCRIPTION OF AREA.
   This subchapter shall apply to the surface waters of Lake Norman, lying
below contour elevation 760 feet above mean sea level, U.S.G.S. Datum; and to
land areas bordering on and directly affecting the use of the waters of Lake
Norman located within 1,000 feet of the shoreline of the lake when measured
from full pond level at contour elevation 760 feet above mean sea level,
U.S.G.S. Datum.
(Ord. passed 12-4-1972)
§ 150.077 FIXED FACILITIES ON OR NEAR THE WATERS OF LAKE NORMAN.
   (A)   Generally. Any facilities, structures, construction, or human-made
improvement which are to be placed on, above, within, or adjacent to the waters
of Lake Norman which by their placement affect the use of waters, to include,
but not to be limited to, piers, floating pier extensions, floating boat
houses, moorings or floats, marine railways, hoists and lifts, breakwaters,
fillings, dredgings, signs, lighting, and overhead transmission lines, and
public and private swimming areas and private bridges shall be subject to the
provisions of this subchapter. All dimensional requirements herein, when
reference is made to the water surface, shall be measured from the full pond
level at contour elevation 760 feet above mean sea level, U.S.G.S. Datum.
   (B)   Piers. Pier facilities shall be located and constructed to remain
within an area defined generally projection perpendicular to the shore at the
lot corners and defined more specifically as follows.
      (1)   A projection over the water shall be established at each of the two
property corners on the shoreline. Each projection shall be perpendicular to a
line connecting two points on the 760-foot contour line where a ten-foot radius
from the property corner intersects with the 760-foot contour line.
      (2)   The pier facility may extend over the water for a distance of 80
feet from the shore regardless of the depth; and may extend beyond 80 feet to a
depth of ten feet measured at full pond or a maximum extension over the water
of 120 feet from shore. However, in no event shall a pier facility, when
located in a cove, extend more than one-third the width of the cove, measured
from the shore at the point of the proposed construction to the nearest point
on the opposite shore.
   (C)   Reflectors.
      (1)   Shall have two white reflectors, a minimum of six inches above full
pond elevation, on each further most corner of the extension of the pier into
the water, reflecting light parallel to the shore in each direction and
directly across the water in line with the shore from each corner; and
      (2)   White reflectors shall be placed at intervals of 15 feet or less,
six inches above the water, on each side of the pier beginning at its outermost
extension into the water of Lake Norman, including all floats and other
appurtenances, and extending to the 760-foot contour on the shoreline.
   (D)   Moorings and floats.
      (1)   When placed in the lake for navigational purposes, shall be so
placed only with the expressed written approval of the Lake Norman Marine
Commission or State Wildlife Commission;
      (2)   When placed for the purpose of mooring boats or other legal and
authorized floating objects, the mooring shall be separated on every side form
any other mooring by a distance of 50 feet;
      (3)   Shall be located so as to permit unobstructed passage on the lake
of through boats; and
      (4)   Shall not be anchored in such a manner as to deny or obstruct in
any manner access to the lake from boat docks, boat houses, or boat launching
ramps.
   (E)   Marine railways.
      (1)   Shall have permanent signs complying with the requirements of the
uniform marking system designating the locations of the marine railway;
      (2)   Shall not extend above the normal or natural lake bed at the time
of construction more than 18 inches, between a horizontal measurement extending
from the 760-foot contour to a water depth of 15 feet below the 760-foot
contour; and
      (3)   The location of railway and signs shall be approved by the Lake
Norman Marine Commission for their effect on marine safety.
   (F)   Breakwaters. When constructed for the purpose of protecting docks,
piers, or other facilities:
      (1)   Shall be so placed as to protect the particular facility for its
width only and shall not offer area protection which might overly obstruct
passage on the lake;
      (2)   Shall be located and marked so as not to be a hazard to boating at
any time; and
      (3)   Shall be approved by the Lake Norman Marine Commission through the
submission of accurate plans for the breakwater and the location thereof
showing the adjacent shoreline and facility to be protected.
   (G)   Hoists and lifts. Hoists and lifts shall, due to the unique nature of
their construction, conform to all federal and state requirements applying
thereto.
   (H)   Filling.
      (1)   Shall be designed by a registered engineer and approved by the Lake
Norman Marine Commission;
      (2)   Shall not be placed above the water level without proper and
adequate riprapping to prevent fill from being eroded into the lake;
      (3)   Fill so placed shall be sufficiently compacted to reach 90% maximum
dry density using the Standard Proctor Test, as defined by ASTN D698-66T; and
      (4)   Shall not obstruct access to or be a hazard to passage on the lake
or a nuisance to adjacent property owners.
   (I)   Dredging.
      (1)   Shall not be conducted in such a way that the spoil therefrom is
placed back in the lake thus reducing water depth in areas outside of the
dredged area; and
      (2)   Shall be reported to the Lake Norman Marine Commission prior to
commencement.
   (J)   Signs. Other than navigational signs, should be constructed in such a
manner as to be compatible with the adjacent visual qualities of the area in
which they are located:
      (1)   Shall not unduly obstruct the view of the lake for any adjacent
lakeshore occupant;
      (2)   Shall not be placed in the water nor within 25 horizontal feet of
the water edge at elevation 760;
      (3)   When lighted, shall have fixed nonmoving, indirect or internal
lighting when necessary;
      (4)   There shall be no off-site advertising signs placed or maintained
so as to be visible from the lake; and
      (5)   Off-site direction signs on the lake shore may be installed by the
Lake Norman Marine Commission at the request and expense of the owner and/or
commercial operator.
   (K)   Lighting.
      (1)   Which offers navigational aid on Lake Norman, whether public or
private, shall be approved by the Lake Norman Marine Commission;
      (2)   When installed for purposes other than navigational, shall not be
moving or flashing or colored in any manner, except a continuous nonflashing
yellow light for insect control; and
      (3)   Shall not be of such intensity as to cause night blindness for boat
operators on the lake and not inhibit vision in any way.
   (L)   Overhead transmission lines. Overhead transmission lines shall be
constructed to a minimum height of 48 feet as maximum deflection above the full
pond level.
   (M)   Public and private swimming areas.
      (1)   Shall not be defined in water beyond a depth of 15 feet;
      (2)   In no event shall extend more than 80 feet from the shore, with the
exception to any public or private swimming area constructed by Duke Energy,
its subsidiaries, or Lincoln County within the boundaries of Lake Norman;
      (3)   Shall extend into the water so as to remain confined within a
projection of the side lot lines of the lot on which the area is located,
maintaining the side yard requirements of this or any other ordinance or
regulation; and
      (4)   Public swimming areas shall be, and private swimming areas may be,
marked and protected in keeping with the State Wildlife Commission regulations,
§ IV per 12d.
   (N)   Penalties. Any violation of this subchapter shall be punishable as a
Class 3 misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500 per
violation, pursuant to Session Law 1991-797.
(Ord. passed 12-4-1972; Ord. passed 6-3-1985; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 150.078 PREVENTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   In case any structure or other facility is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, placed, or maintained or any
building, structure, or land is used in violation of this subchapter, the
county in which the violation occurs, or any other duly constituted authority,
may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
placement, maintenance, or use, to restrain, correct, or abate the violation,
to prevent the occupancy or use of the facility or land, or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about the premises.
(Ord. passed 12-4-1972)
§ 150.079 APPROVAL OF THE LAKE NORMAN MARINE COMMISSION.
   In furtherance of any requirement of this subchapter concerning approval of
the Lake Norman Marine Commission, information may be obtained from: Lake
Norman Marine Commission, P.O. Box 2454, Cornelius, NC 28031; and written
approval executed by its duly authorized officer or agent shall be made only
after consideration by the Lake Norman Marine Commission at a regular or duly
called special meeting of the Commission.
(Ord. passed 12-4-1972; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 150.080 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter shall be effective and in full force from and after the date
of its passage, or incorporation into existing ordinances by all counties
bordering on Lake Norman (Catawba County, Iredell County, Mecklenburg County,
and Lincoln County), but shall remain in force thereafter in each county until
specifically repealed or nullified by action of each of the counties
respectively and after 30-days written notice to the Lake Norman Marine
Commission.
(Ord. passed 12-4-1972; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 150.081 APPEALS.
   In order that appeals from the specific provisions of this subchapter may be
considered as to their effect on public recreation and water safety, variances
to these requirements, when applied for through the appropriate Board of
Adjustment or Board of Commissioners, shall require the written opinion of the
Lake Norman Marine Commission to be included therein before being heard.
(Ord. passed 12-4-1972)
§ 150.082 REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   The Administrator shall review all applications for zoning permits to ensure
compliance with all regulations of this subchapter. All applications shall be
complete prior to review by the Administrator. The Administrator in his or her
discretion may request that additional information be submitted necessary to
ensure a thorough and complete review of the application. All applications
shall be submitted with a nonrefundable fee in accordance with a fee schedule
adopted by the Board of Commissioners. The provision of G.S. § 160D-405
relating to appeals shall apply to this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 11-19-1990; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 150.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter for which no
specific penalty is prescribed shall be subject to §
10.99.
   (B)   Each violation of §§
150.030 through
150.042, or of any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated thereunder, shall
constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $50
or imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day a violation
continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. passed 10-19-1987; Ord. passed 11-5-2001)
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Statutory authorization
   
151.02   Findings of fact
   
151.03   Statement of purpose
   
151.04   Objectives
   
151.05   Definitions
General Regulations
   
151.20   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
151.21   Basis for establishing the Special Flood Hazard Areas
   
151.22   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
151.23   Compliance
   
151.24   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
151.25   Interpretation
   
151.26   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
151.40   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
151.41   Floodplain development application, permit, and certification
requirements
   
151.42   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
151.43   Corrective procedures
   
151.44   Variance procedures
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
151.55   General standards
   
151.56   Specific standards
   
151.57   Standards for floodplains without established Base Flood Elevations
   
151.58   Standards for riverine floodplains with BFE, but without established
floodways or non-encroachment areas
   
151.59   Floodways and non-encroachment areas
Legal Status Provisions
   
151.70   Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood damage
prevention ordinance
   
151.71   Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits
   
151.72   Effective date
 
   
151.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The state legislature has in G.S. Chapter 143, Article 21, Part 6; G.S. §
153A-121; and G.S. § 160D-923, delegated to local governmental units the
responsibility to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health,
safety, and general welfare. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners does ordain
as follows.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 151.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the county are
subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health
and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the
occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
§ 151.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights, or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that
serve the uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
§ 151.04 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Protect human life, safety, and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e., water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and bridges)
that are located in flood prone areas;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas; and
   (G)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a Special
Flood Hazard Area.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
§ 151.05 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same
parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports, and
storage sheds are common urban ACCESSORY STRUCTURES. Pole barns, hay sheds, and
the like qualify as ACCESSORY STRUCTURES on farms, and may or may not be
located on the same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
   ADDITION (TO AN EXISTING BUILDING). An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). A determination of the water surface elevations
of the base flood as published in the Flood Insurance Study. When the BFE has
not been provided in a Special Flood Hazard Area, it may be obtained from
engineering studies available from a federal, state, or other source using
FEMA-approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined with the
freeboard, establishes the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY. A building, portion of a building, or exterior
area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically
reactive products.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DISPOSAL. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on
any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid
waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into
any waters, including groundwaters.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated
floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers,
pilings, or columns.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures, or development into a floodplain, which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was
completed before the initial effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD INSURANCE. The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the Special Flood Hazard
Areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are delineated.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). An examination, evaluation, and determination
of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate),
flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. The Flood Insurance Study report includes
Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs),
if published.
   FLOOD PRONE AREA. See FLOODPLAIN.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances, and other applications of police power. This term describes
federal, state, or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities,
structures, and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   FLOOD ZONE. A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or
Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the
area.
   FREEBOARD. The height added to the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) to account for
the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater that
the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such
as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of
urbanization of the watershed. The Base Flood Elevation plus the freeboard
establishes the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, limited to a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. As defined in G.S. Chapter 130A,
Article 9, a facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment,
recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the
structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE.
      (1)   Any structure that is:
         (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
         (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
         (c)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks
in communities with a Certified Local Government (CLG) Program; or
         (d)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a
historic district designated by a community with a Certified Local Government
(CLG) Program.
      (2)   Certified Local Government (CLG) Programs are approved by the U.S.
Department of the Interior in cooperation with the State Department of Cultural
Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having met the
requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended in
1980.
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG). The elevation of the ground, sidewalk, or patio
slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion of the
building.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The LOWEST FLOOR of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than
a basement area is not considered a building's LOWEST FLOOR, provided that such
an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, not including the land value and that of
any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. MARKET VALUE may be
established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of this chapter, the National Geodetic Vertical
Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as
corrected in 1988, or other vertical control datum used as a reference for
establishing varying elevations within the floodplain, to which Base Flood
Elevations (BFEs) shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel to
determine datum used.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management regulations
and includes any subsequent improvements to the structures.
   NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot
as designated in the Flood Insurance Study report.
   POST-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred on or after the effective date of the initial Flood
Insurance Rate Map.
   PRE-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred before the effective date of the initial Flood Insurance
Rate Map.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure is above ground.
   PUBLIC SAFETY and/or NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). A vehicle, which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   REFERENCE LEVEL. The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of
the lowest floor for structures within all Special Flood Hazard Areas.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The Base Flood Elevation plus the
freeboard. In Special Flood Hazard Areas, where Base Flood Elevations (BFEs)
have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus two feet of
freeboard. In Special Flood Hazard Areas where no BFE has been established,
this elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impact of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the
ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, and the like.
   SALVAGE YARD. Any nonresidential property used for the storage, collection,
and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including, but not limited to,
vehicles, appliances, and related machinery.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any facility involved in the disposal of
solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35).
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36), any place
at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or
any other method.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as determined in §
151.21.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual START
OF CONSTRUCTION means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas,
liquid, or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any
one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. See definition of SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT. SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means flood-related damage sustained by a
structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place
during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any correction of existing violations of state or community health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in §§
151.40 through
151.44 and
151.55 through
151.59 is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION (WSE). The height, in relation to mean sea level, of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine
areas.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 151.20 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all Special Flood Hazard Areas within the
jurisdiction, including Extra-Territorial Jurisdictions (ETJs) if applicable,
of the county and within the jurisdiction of any other community whose
governing body agrees, by resolution, to such applicability.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
§ 151.21 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   (A)   The Special Flood Hazard Areas are those identified under the
Cooperating Technical State (CTS) agreement between the state and FEMA in its
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and its accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRM), for the county dated 8-16-2007, which are adopted by reference and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
   (B)   The initial Flood Insurance Rate Maps are as follows for the
jurisdictional areas at the initial date: Lincoln County Unincorporated Area,
dated 12-1-1981.
   (C)   Special Flood Hazard Areas also include those identified by the City
of Lincolnton in its Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, dated 12-1-1981, which
with accompanying data are adopted by reference and declared to be part of this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
§ 151.22 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within Special Flood Hazard Areas determined in accordance with the
provisions of §
151.21.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
§ 151.23 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations. Any person found to be in violation
of this subchapter shall be subject to the penalties as provided in UDO § 11.2.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 151.24 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
§ 151.25 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
§ 151.26 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by human-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that
land outside the Special Flood Hazard Areas or uses permitted within such areas
will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create
liability on the part of the county or by any officer or employee thereof for
any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any
administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 151.40 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Director or his or her designee, hereinafter referred to as the
Floodplain Administrator, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
§ 151.41 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT, AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application requirements. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities located within Special Flood Hazard Areas. The following items shall
be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and
other development;
         (b)   The boundary of the Special Flood Hazard Area as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
151.21, or a statement that the entire lot is within the Special Flood Hazard
Area;
         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
151.21;
         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as
determined in §
151.21;
         (e)   The Base Flood Elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in §§
151.21,
151.42, or
151.57;
         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
         (g)   The certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor
or professional engineer.
      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
Special Flood Hazard Area, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed
reference level (including basement) of all structures;
         (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure in Zone AE, A, or AO will be floodproofed; and
         (c)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
      (3)   If floodproofing, a floodproofing certificate (FEMA Form 81-65)
with supporting data and an operational plan that includes, but is not limited
to, installation, exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measures;
      (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter are
met. These details include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation
on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
         (b)   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with §
151.56(B)(4)(c) when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AO,
AE, and A1- 30.
      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor;
      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;
      (7)   Certification that all other local, state, and federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received;
      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of §
151.56(B)(6) and (B)(7) are met; and
      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on
plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation.
   (B)   Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
      (1)   A description of the development to be permitted under the
floodplain development permit;
      (2)   The Special Flood Hazard Area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in §
151.21;
      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
reference level and all attendant utilities;
      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
protection of all public utilities;
      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines;
      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse, as
applicable;
      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AO, AE, or A1-30;
and
      (8)   Limitations of below BFE enclosure uses if applicable (i.e.,
parking, building access, and limited storage only).
   (C)   Certification requirements.
      (1)   Elevation certificates.
         (a)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required prior to
the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit
holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
elevation of the reference level, in relation to mean sea level. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by the review shall be corrected by the permit holder prior to the
beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to
make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development
permit.
         (b)   An elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is required after the
reference level is established. Within seven calendar days of establishment of
the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of the
reference level, in relation to mean sea level. Any work done within the seven-
day calendar period and prior to submission of the certification shall be at
the permit holder's risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the
certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by the review shall be
corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being
permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make
required corrections shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
         (c)   A final as-built elevation certificate (FEMA Form 81-31) is
required after construction is completed and prior to certificate of
compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by the review shall be corrected by the permit
holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance.
In some instances, another certification may be required to certify corrected
as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make
required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate
of compliance/occupancy.
      (2)   Floodproofing certificate. If nonresidential floodproofing is used
to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a floodproofing
certificate (FEMA Form 81-65), with supporting data, an operational plan, and
an inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of
any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to
the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design
elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to
mean sea level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the
direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by
same. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the
operational plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies
detected by the review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit
approval. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required
corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to
construct in accordance with the certified design shall be cause to withhold
the issuance of a certificate of compliance/occupancy.
      (3)   Foundation certificate. If a manufactured home is placed within
Zone A, AO, AE, or A1-30 and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36
inches in height above grade, an engineered foundation certification is
required in accordance with the provisions of §
151.56(B)(3)(b).
      (4)   Watercourse. If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a
description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a
professional engineer's certified report on the effects of the proposed project
on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties
located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the location of the
proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the
permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit.
      (5)   Exemptions. The following structures, if located within Zone A, AO,
AE, or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing certification
requirements specified in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) above:
         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of §
151.56(B)(6)(a);
         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of §
151.21(B)(7); and
         (c)   Accessory structures less than 150 square feet meeting
requirements of §
151.56(B)(8).
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
§ 151.42 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Generally. The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be
limited to, the following duties.
   (B)   Specifically.
      (1)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits
for all proposed development within Special Flood Hazard Areas to assure that
the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
      (2)   Review all proposed development within Special Flood Hazard Areas
to assure that all necessary local, state, and federal permits have been
received;
      (3)   Notify adjacent communities and the State Department of Crime
Control and Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator
for the National Flood Insurance Program, prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse, and submit evidence of the notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA);
      (4)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained;
      (5)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment areas
unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of §
151.59 are met;
      (6)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with §
151.41(C);
      (7)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which
all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been
floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of §
151.41(C);
      (8)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all
public utilities in accordance with the provisions of §
151.41(C);
      (9)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of §§
151.41(C) and
151.56(B)(2);
      (10)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of
boundaries of the Special Flood Hazard Areas, floodways, or non-encroachment
areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped
boundary and actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The
person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this subchapter;
      (11)   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with §
151.21, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any Base Flood Elevation (BFE)
data, along with floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a
federal, state, or other source, including data developed pursuant to §
151.57(B)(2)(b), in order to administer the provisions of this chapter;
      (12)   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway
or non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with §
151.21, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-
encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source in
order to administer the provisions of this chapter;
      (13)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure
or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a Special Flood Hazard Area is
above the Base Flood Elevation, advise the property owner of the option to
apply for a Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain a copy of the
Letter of Map Amendment (LOMA) issued by FEMA in the floodplain development
permit file;
      (14)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the
administration of this chapter and make these records available for public
inspection, recognizing that the information may be subject to the Privacy Act
of 1974, as amended;
      (15)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant
to a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator
shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that
the work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and
the terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator
has a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action;
      (16)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation
of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the
condition(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work
order constitutes a misdemeanor;
      (17)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain
Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason(s) for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked;
      (18)   Make periodic inspections throughout the Special Flood Hazard
Areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator
and each member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action;
      (19)   Follow through with corrective procedures of §
151.43;
      (20)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance
requests;
      (21)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to,
the FIS Report, FIRM, and other official flood maps and studies adopted in
accordance with §
151.21, including any revisions thereto including Letters of Map Change, issued
by FEMA. Notify the state and FEMA of mapping needs; and
      (22)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including Letters
of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F) and Letters of Map Revision (LOMR).
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
§ 151.43 CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in the
notification.
   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal service,
stating:
      (1)   The building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
      (2)   A hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at a
designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      (3)   Following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue an
order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
   (C)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of this chapter, they shall issue an
order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation
within a specified time period, not less than 60 calendar days, nor more than
180 calendar days. Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is
imminent danger to life or other property, they may order that corrective
action be taken in the lesser period as may be feasible.
   (D)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the Clerk within ten days
following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order
of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall
hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or
revoke the order.
   (E)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made, or fails to comply with an order of the Board of Commissioners
following an appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to the penalties as provided in the UDO § 11.2.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 151.44 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment as established by the county, hereinafter
referred to as the "Appeal Board," shall hear and decide requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal
the decision to the court, as provided in G.S. § 7A-250.
   (C)   Variances may be issued for:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the
definition as stated in §
151.05, provided the provisions of divisions (I)(2), (I)(3), and (I)(5) below
have been satisfied, and the facilities are protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public
safety; and/or
      (3)   Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements
of this section.
   (D)   In passing upon variances, the Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of the damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under §
151.05 as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (E)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.
   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach any conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
chapter.
   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the Base Flood Elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and that the construction below
the Base Flood Elevation increases risks to life and property, and that the
issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the Base Flood Elevation
will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per $100
of insurance coverage. The notification shall be maintained with a record of
all variance actions, including justification for their issuance.
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
the state upon request.
   (I)   Conditions for variances:
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances;
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or
non-encroachment area if the variance would result in any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge;
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief;
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit
approval; and
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 151.55 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. In all Special Flood Hazard Areas, the following provisions
are required.
   (B)   Specifically.
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement of the structure.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      (3)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
      (4)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding to the Regulatory Flood Protection Elevation. These
include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/
kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable
boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
      (5)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
      (6)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      (7)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
      (8)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall
meet the requirements of "new construction" as contained in this chapter.
      (9)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction,
or replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of
this chapter and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-
encroachment area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional
encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway,
non-encroachment area, or stream setback, and provided that the repair,
reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements of this
chapter.
      (10)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted. A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a Special Flood Hazard Area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory
flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of §
151.41(C).
      (11)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
      (12)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
      (13)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
      (14)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall
have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by federal or state law, including § 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1334.
      (15)   When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard
area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
      (16)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood
elevation shall apply.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of this subchapter shall
be subject to the penalties as provided in UDO § 11.2.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 151.56 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   (A)   Generally. In all Special Flood Hazard Areas where Base Flood
Elevation (BFE) data has been provided, as set forth in §§
151.21 or
151.57, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
151.55, are required.
   (B)   Specifically.
      (1)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall
have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.05.
      (2)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.05. Structures located in A, AE, AO, and A1-30 Zones may be floodproofed to
the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that
all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify that the standards of this division (B)(2) are
satisfied. The certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator
as set forth in §
151.41(C), along with the operational and maintenance plans.
      (3)   Manufactured homes.
         (a)   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that
the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
151.05.
         (b)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the State Regulations for Manufactured Homes adopted by the
Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. § 143-143.15. Additionally, when the
elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above
the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or
engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in
height, an engineering certification is required.
         (c)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of division (B)(4) below.
         (d)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved, or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This
plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the
local Emergency Management Coordinator.
      (4)   Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed area, of new construction and
substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor:
         (a)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall
only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior
door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion
of the enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms,
except to enclose storage areas;
         (b)   Shall be constructed entirely of flood-resistant materials; and/
or
         (c)   Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE, and A1-30, flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
            1.   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
            2.   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
            3.   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit;
            4.   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the adjacent grade;
            5.   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
            6.   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
      (5)   Additions/improvements.
         (a)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
            1.   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any
more nonconforming than the existing structure; and/or
            2.   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
         (b)   Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the
existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall require
only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction; and
         (c)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
            1.   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction; and/or
            2.   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (6)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:
         (a)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully
licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or
         (b)   Meet all the requirements for new construction.
      (7)   Temporary nonresidential structures. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of the structure
(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood, or other type of flood warning
notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the
Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
         (a)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. The time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to one
year;
         (b)   The name, address, and phone number of the individual
responsible for the removal of the temporary structure;
         (c)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);
         (d)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the
entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
         (e)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside
the Special Flood Hazard Area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
      (8)   Accessory structures.
         (a)   When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, and the
like) are to be placed within a Special Flood Hazard Area, the following
criteria shall be met:
            1.   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking, or restroom areas);
            2.   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
            3.   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood
damage potential;
            4.   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
            5.   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with the provisions of §
151.55(B)(1);
            6.   All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed
in accordance with the provisions of §
151.55(B)(4); and
            7.   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection
elevation in conformance with the provisions of division (B)(4)(c) above.
         (b)   An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square
feet that satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an elevation
or floodproofing certificate. Elevation or floodproofing certifications are
required for all other accessory structures in accordance with §
151.41(C).
   (C)   Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of this subchapter shall
be subject to the penalties as provided in UDO § 11.2.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 151.57 STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS.
   (A)   Generally. Within the Special Flood Hazard Areas designated as
Approximate Zone A and established in §
151.21, where no Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the
following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
151.55 shall apply.
   (B)   Specifically.
      (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, or new development shall be permitted within a distance of 20
feet each side from top of bank or five times the width of the stream,
whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      (2)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be determined based on the following criteria.
         (a)   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is available from other
sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within the areas
shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and shall be
elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in §§
151.55 and
151.56.
         (b)   When floodway data is available from a federal, state, or other
source, all new construction and substantial improvements within floodway areas
shall also comply with the requirements of §§
151.56 and
151.59.
         (c)   All subdivision, manufactured home park, and other development
proposals shall provide Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data if development is
greater than five acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured home sites. The
Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in accordance
with §
151.21 and utilized in implementing this chapter.
         (d)   When Base Flood Elevation (BFE) data is not available from a
federal, state, or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be
elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to or above the Regulatory Flood
Protection Elevation, as defined in §
151.05. All other applicable provisions of §
151.56 shall also apply.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of this subchapter shall
be subject to the penalties as provided in UDO § 11.2.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 151.58 STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BFE, BUT WITHOUT ESTABLISHED
FLOODWAYS OR NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   Along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided by FEMA or is available
from another source but neither floodway nor non-encroachment areas are
identified for a Special Flood Hazard Area on the FIRM or in the FIS report,
the following requirements shall apply to all development within those areas:
   (A)   Standards of §§
151.55 and
151.56; and
   (B)   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated, no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting
technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of this subchapter shall
be subject to the penalties as provided in UDO § 11.2.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 151.59 FLOODWAYS AND NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   (A)   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located
within the Special Flood Hazard Areas established in §
151.21. The floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas
due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris
and potential projectiles.
   (B)   The following provisions, in addition to standards outlined in §§
151.55 and
151.56, shall apply to all development within those areas.
      (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements, and other developments shall be permitted unless:
         (a)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain Administrator
prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or
         (b)   A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been approved
by FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must also be obtained upon completion
of the proposed encroachment.
      (2)   If division (B)(1) above is satisfied, all development shall comply
with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.
      (3)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except replacement
manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision,
provided the following provisions are met:
         (a)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of §
151.56(B)(3); and
         (b)   The no encroachment standard of division (B)(1) above.
   (C)   Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of this subchapter shall
be subject to the penalties as provided in UDO § 11.2.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
§ 151.70 EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION ORDINANCE.
   This chapter in part comes forward by reenactment of some of the provisions
of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted 12-7-1981, as amended, and it
is not the intention to repeal but rather to reenact and continue to enforce
without interruption of the existing provisions, so that all rights and
liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be enforced. The
enactment of this chapter shall not affect any action, suit, or proceeding
instituted or pending. All provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance
of the county enacted on 12-7-1981, as amended, which are not reenacted herein
are repealed. The date of the initial flood damage prevention ordinance for
each municipal jurisdiction within the county is as follows: City of
Lincolnton, 5-5-1987.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
§ 151.71 EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof
for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this chapter; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under the
outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date of
issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
§ 151.72 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective 8-16-2007.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
   If not stated otherwise, any person found to be in violation of this chapter
shall be subject to the penalties as provided in UDO § 11.2, and shall be
subject to civil action for abatement or injunctive relief.
(Ord. passed 8-6-2007; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
CHAPTER 152: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL
Section
   
152.01   Title
   
152.02   Purpose
   
152.03   Definitions
   
152.04   Scope and exclusions
   
152.05   Mandatory standards for land-disturbing activity
   
152.06   Erosion and sedimentation control plans
   
152.07   Basic control objectives
   
152.08   Design and performance standards
   
152.09   Storm water outlet protection
   
152.10   Borrow and waste areas
   
152.11   Access and haul roads
   
152.12   Operations in lakes or natural watercourses
   
152.13   Responsibility for maintenance
   
152.14   Additional measures
   
152.15   Fees
   
152.16   Environmental Review Board
   
152.17   Plan appeals
   
152.18   Inspections and investigations
   
152.19   Injunctive relief
   
152.20   Restoration after noncompliance
 
   
152.99   Penalty
§ 152.01 TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as the “Lincoln County Soil Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Ordinance.”
(Ord. passed 1-22-2007; Ord. passed 12-18-2023)
§ 152.02 PURPOSE.
   This chapter is adopted for the purposes of:
   (A)   Regulating certain land-disturbing activity to control accelerated
erosion and sedimentation in order to prevent the pollution of water and other
damage to lakes, watercourses, and other public and private property by
sedimentation; and
   (B)   Establishing procedures through which these purposes can be fulfilled.
(Ord. passed 1-22-2007; Ord. passed 12-18-2023)
§ 152.03 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCELERATED EROSION. Any increase over the rate of natural erosion as a
result of land-disturbing activity.
   ACT. The North Carolina Sedimentation Pollution Control Act of 1973 and all
rules and orders adopted pursuant to it.
   ADEQUATE EROSION CONTROL MEASURE, STRUCTURE, or DEVICE. One that controls
the soil material within the land area under responsible control of the person
conducting the land-disturbing activity.
   AFFILIATE. A person that directly, or indirectly through one or more
intermediaries, controls, is controlled by, or is under common control of
another person.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Department or other state or a local government
agency that has been delegated erosion and sedimentation plan review
responsibilities in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
   BEING CONDUCTED. A land-disturbing activity has been initiated and not
deemed complete by the approving authority.
   BOARD. The Environmental Review Board as established by the joint resolution
of the Lincolnton Mayor, Lincolnton City Council, and the Lincoln County Board
of Commissioners, together with any amendments thereto.
   BORROW. Fill material that is required for on-site construction and is
obtained from other locations.
   BUFFER ZONE. The strip of land adjacent to a lake or natural watercourse.
   CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. The document required by the State Building Code
certifying that a new building shall not be occupied or a change made in
occupancy, nature, or use of a building until after all required building and
services systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes
and other applicable laws and ordinances and released by the County Department
of Developmental Services.
   COMMISSION. The State Sedimentation Control Commission.
   COMPLETION OF CONSTRUCTION or DEVELOPMENT. No further land-disturbing
activity is required on a phase of a project except that which is necessary for
establishing a permanent ground cover.
   DEPARTMENT. The State Department of Environment and Natural Resources.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Division of Land Resources of the Department
of Environment and Natural Resources.
   DISCHARGE POINT or POINT OF DISCHARGE.  The point where runoff leaves a
tract of land where a land-disturbing activity has occurred or enters a lake or
natural watercourse.
   DISTRICT. The Lincoln Soil and Water Conservation District created pursuant
to G.S. Chapter 139.
   ENERGY DISSIPATER. A structure or a shaped channel section with mechanical
armoring placed at the outlet of pipes or conduits to receive and break down
the energy from high velocity flow.
   EROSION. The wearing away of land surface by the action of wind, water,
gravity, or any combination thereof.
   GROUND COVER. Any natural vegetative growth or other material that renders
the soil surface stable against accelerated erosion.
   HIGH QUALITY WATER (HQW) ZONES. Areas within one mile and draining to HQWs.
   HIGH QUALITY WATERS. Those classified as such in 15A NCAC 02B .0224, which
is herein incorporated by reference, including subsequent amendments and
additions.
   LAKE or NATURAL WATERCOURSE. Any stream, river, brook, swamp, sound, bay,
creek, run, branch, canal, waterway, estuary, and any reservoir, lake, or pond.
   LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any use of the land by any person in residential,
industrial, educational, institutional, or commercial development, highway and
road construction and maintenance  that results in a change in the natural
cover or topography, and that may cause or contribute to sedimentation.
   LOCAL GOVERNMENT. Any county, incorporated village, town, or city, or any
combination of counties, incorporated villages, towns, and cities, acting
through a joint program pursuant to the provisions of the Act.
   NATURAL EROSION. The wearing away of the earth’s surface by water, wind, or
other natural agents under natural environmental conditions undisturbed by
humans.
   PARENT. An affiliate that directly, or indirectly through one or more
intermediaries, controls another person.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture,
public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or
private institution, utility, cooperative, interstate body, or other legal
entity.
   PERSON CONDUCTING LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY. Any person who may be held
responsible for violation unless expressly provided otherwise by this chapter,
the Act, or any order adopted pursuant to this chapter or the Act.
   PERSON WHO VIOLATES or VIOLATOR. As used in G.S. § 113A-64, any landowner or
other person who has financial or operational control over the land-disturbing
activity; or who has directly or indirectly allowed the activity, and who has
failed to comply with any provision of the Act, the rules of this chapter, or
any order or local ordinance adopted pursuant to the Act as it imposes a duty
upon that person.
   PLAN. An erosion and sedimentation control plan.
   SEDIMENT. Solid particulate matter, both mineral and organic, that has been
or is being transported by water, air, or gravity from its site or origin.
   SEDIMENTATION. The process by which sediment resulting from accelerated
erosion has been or is being transported off the site of the land-disturbing
activity or into a lake or watercourse.
   SILTATION. Sediment resulting from accelerated erosion which is settleable
or removable by properly designed, constructed, and maintained control
measures; and which has been transported from its point of origin within the
site of a land-disturbing activity; and which has been deposited, or is in
suspension in water.
   STORM DRAINAGE FACILITIES. The system of inlets, conduits, channels,
ditches, and appurtenances that serve to collect and convey storm water through
and from a given drainage area.
   STORM WATER RUNOFF. The runoff of water resulting from precipitation in any
form.
   SUBSIDIARY. An affiliate that is directly, or indirectly through one or more
intermediaries, controlled by another person.
   TEN-YEAR STORM. A rainfall of an intensity that, based on historical data,
is predicted by a method acceptable to the approving authority to be equaled or
exceeded, on the average, once in ten years, and of a duration that will
produce the maximum peak rate of runoff for the watershed of interest under
average antecedent wetness conditions.
   TRACT. All contiguous land and bodies of water being disturbed or is to be
disturbed as a unit, regardless of ownership.
   TWENTY-FIVE YEAR STORM. A rainfall of an intensity that, based on historical
data, is predicted by a method acceptable to the approving authority to be
equaled or exceeded, on the average, once in 25 years, and of a duration that
will produce the maximum peak rate of runoff for the watershed of interest
under average antecedent wetness conditions.
   UNCOVERED. The removal of ground cover from, on, or above the soil surface.
   UNDERTAKEN. The initiating of any activity, or phase of activity, that
results or will result in a change in the ground cover or topography of a tract
of land.
   VELOCITY. The speed of flow through a cross section perpendicular to the
direction of the main channel at the peak flow of the storm of interest, but
not exceeding bank full flows.
   WASTE. Surplus materials resulting from on-site land-disturbing activities
and disposed of at other locations.
   WATER SUPPLY WATERSHED. Any water supply watershed protection area regulated
with various controls within the jurisdictional boundaries of Lincoln County or
the City of Lincolnton.
   WETLANDS. Land having the vegetative, soil and hydrologic characteristics to
be regulated by §§ 401 and 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act, as defined by
the United States Army Corp of Engineers and the State Division of Water
Quality.
(Ord. passed 1-22-2007; Ord. passed 12-18-2023)
§ 152.04 SCOPE AND EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   Geographical scope of regulated land-disturbing activity. This chapter
shall apply to land-disturbing activity within the territorial jurisdiction of
the City of Lincolnton, including the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City
of Lincolnton (as applicable) and Lincoln County as allowed by agreement
between the local governments, the extent of annexation or other appropriate
legal instrument or law.
   (B)   Exclusions from regulated land-disturbing activity. Notwithstanding
the general applicability of this chapter to all land-disturbing activity, this
chapter shall not apply to the following types of land-disturbing activity:
      (1)   Activities, including the production and activities relating or
incidental to the production of crops, grains, fruits, vegetables, ornamental
and flowering plants, dairy, livestock, poultry, and all other forms of
agriculture undertaken on agricultural land for the production of plants and
animals useful to man, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Forage and sod crops, grain and feed crops, tobacco, cotton, and
peanuts;
         (b)   Dairy animals and dairy products;
         (c)   Poultry and poultry products;
         (d)   Livestock, including beef cattle, llamas, sheep, swine, horses,
ponies, mules, and goats;
         (e)   Bees and apiary products;
         (f)   Fur-producing animals;
         (g)   Mulch, ornamental plants, and other horticultural products. For
purposes of this section, MULCH means substances composed primarily of plant
remains or mixtures of such substances.
      (2)   An activity undertaken on forestland for the production and
harvesting of timber and timber products, and conducted in accordance with
standards defined by the Forest Practice Guidelines Related to Water Quality
(Best Management Practices), as adopted by the State Department of Agriculture
and Consumer Services. If land-disturbing activity undertaken on forestland for
the production and harvesting of timber and timber products is not conducted in
accordance with standards defined by the Forest Practice Guidelines Related to
Water Quality, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to such activity and
any related land-disturbing activity on the tract.
      (3)   An activity for which a permit is required under the Mining Act of
1971, G.S. Chapter 74, Article 7.
      (4)   A land-disturbing activity over which the state has exclusive
regulatory jurisdiction as provided in G.S. § 113A-56(a).
      (5)   An activity that is essential to protect human life during an
emergency.
      (6)   Activities undertaken to restore the wetland functions of converted
wetlands to provide compensatory mitigation to offset impacts permitted under §
404 of the Clean Water Act.
      (7)   Activities undertaken pursuant to Natural Resources Conservation
Service standards to restore the wetlands functions of converted wetlands as
defined in Title 7 Code of Federal Regulations § 12.2.
   (C)   Erosion and sedimentation control measures. All land-disturbing
activities, including those that disturb less than one acre, shall provide
adequate erosion control measures, structures, or devices in accordance with
this chapter.
   (D)   Plan approval requirement for land-disturbing activity. No person
shall undertake any land-disturbing activity subject to this chapter without
first obtaining plan approval from the county of land-disturbing activity that
meets any of the following criteria:
      (1)   Uncovers one acre or more; and/or
      (2)   Any nonresidential land disturbance of 20,000 square feet or
greater requiring a building permit.
   (E)   Permit requirement.  Any land disturbance 1,000 square feet or
greater, not meeting the requirements as set forth in divisions (D)(1) and (D)
(2) of this section, but requiring a building permit, must complete an erosion
and sediment control application.
   (F)   Protection of property. Persons conducting land-disturbing activity
shall take all reasonable measures to protect all public and private property
from damage caused by such activity.
   (G)   More restrictive provisions shall apply. Whenever conflicts exist
between federal, state, or local laws, ordinances, or rules, the more
restrictive provisions shall apply.
   (H)   Plan approval exceptions. Notwithstanding the general requirement to
obtain a plan approval prior to undertaking land-disturbing activity, a plan
approval shall not be required for land-disturbing activity that does not meet
the requirements as set forth in divisions (D)(1) or (D)(2) of this section. In
determining the area, lands under one or diverse ownership being developed as a
unit will be aggregated.
(Ord. passed 1-22-2007; Ord. passed 12-18-2023)
§ 152.05 MANDATORY STANDARDS FOR LAND-DISTURBING ACTIVITY.
   No land-disturbing activity subject to the control of this chapter shall be
undertaken except in accordance with the following mandatory standards.
   (A)   Buffer zone; standard buffer. No land-disturbing activity during
periods of construction or improvement to land shall be permitted in proximity
to a lake or natural watercourse unless a buffer zone is provided along the
margin of the watercourse of sufficient width to confine visible siltation
within the 25% of the buffer zone nearest the land-disturbing activity.
      (1)   Projects on, over, or under water. This division (A) shall not
apply to a land-disturbing activity in connection with the construction of
facilities to be located on, over, or under a lake or natural watercourse.
      (2)   Buffer measurement. Unless otherwise provided, the width of a
buffer zone is measured horizontally from the edge of the water to the nearest
edge of the undisturbed area, with the 25% of the strip nearer the land-
disturbing activity containing natural or artificial means of confining visible
siltation.
   (B)   Graded slopes and fills. The angle for graded slopes and fills shall
be no greater than the angle that can be retained by vegetative cover or other
adequate erosion control measures, structures, or devices. In any event, slopes
left exposed will, within 21 calendar days of completion of any phase of
grading, be planted or otherwise provided with temporary or permanent ground
cover, devices, or structures sufficient to restrain erosion. The angle for
graded slopes and fills must be demonstrated to be stable. STABLE is the
condition where the soil remains in its original configuration, with or without
mechanical constraints.
   (C)   Fill material. Materials being used as fill shall be consistent with
those described in 15A NCAC 13B .0562, unless the site is permitted by the
Department’s Division of Waste Management to operate as a landfill. Not all
materials described in § .0562 may be suitable to meet geotechnical
considerations of the fill activity and should be evaluated accordingly.
   (D)   Ground cover. Whenever land-disturbing activity shall meet the
requirements for a plan approval (as defined herein), the person conducting the
land-disturbing activity shall install erosion and sedimentation control
devices and practices that are sufficient to retain the sediment generated by
the land-disturbing activity within the boundaries of the tract during
construction upon and development of the tract, and shall plant or otherwise
provide a permanent ground cover sufficient to restrain erosion after
completion of construction or development. Except as provided in §
152.08(B)(3)(b), provisions for a permanent ground cover sufficient to restrain
erosion must be accomplished within 90 calendar days following completion of
construction or development.
   (E)   Prior plan approval. Whenever land-disturbing activity shall meet the
requirements for a plan approval (as defined herein), no person shall initiate
any land-disturbing activity unless, 30 or more days prior to initiating the
activity, a plan for the activity is filed with and approved by the county. An
erosion and sedimentation control plan may be filed less than 30 days prior to
initiation of a land-disturbing activity, if the plan is submitted under an
approved, express-permit program. The land-disturbing activity may be initiated
and conducted in accordance with the plan once the plan has been approved, and
a pre-construction conference has been held with the county. The county shall
forward to the Director of the Division of Water Resources a copy of each plan
for a land-disturbing activity that involves the utilization of ditches for the
purpose of de-watering or lowering the water table of the tract.
   (F)   Erosion and sedimentation control plan. The land-disturbing activity
shall be conducted in accordance with the approved erosion and sedimentation
control plan.
(Ord. passed 1-22-2007; Ord. 2012-21, passed 10-1-2012; Ord. passed 12-18-2023)
§ 152.06 EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLANS.
   (A)   Plan submission. A plan shall be prepared for all land-disturbing
activities subject to this chapter whenever the proposed activity meets the
requirements set forth in § 152.04(D)(1) or (2). The plan shall be filed with
the county, and a copy shall be simultaneously submitted to the Lincoln Soil
and Water Conservation District at least 30 days prior to the commencement of
the proposed activity.
   (B)   Financial responsibility and ownership.  
      (1)   Plans may be disapproved unless accompanied by an authorized
statement of financial responsibility and documentation of property ownership.
This statement shall be signed by the person financially responsible for the
land-disturbing activity or his or her attorney in fact. The statement shall
include the mailing and street addresses of the principal place of business of:
          (a)   The person financially responsible;
         (b)   The owner of the land; and
         (c)   Any registered agents.
      (2)   If the person financially responsible is not a resident of the
state, a state agent must be designated in the statement for the purpose of
receiving notice of compliance or noncompliance with the plan, the Act, this
chapter, or rules or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this chapter.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (C) or (K) of this section, if the
applicant is not the owner of the land to be disturbed, the draft erosion and
sedimentation control plan must include the owner’s written consent for the
applicant to submit a draft erosion and sedimentation control plan, and to
conduct the anticipated land-disturbing activity.
   (C)   If the applicant is not the owner of the land to be disturbed and the
anticipated land-disturbing activity involves the construction of utility lines
for the provision of water, sewer, gas, telecommunications, or electrical
service, the draft erosion and sedimentation control plan may be submitted
without the written consent of the owner of the land, so long as the owner of
the land has been provided prior notice of the project.
   (D)   Two copies of the plan shall be filed with the County Natural
Resources Division of Development Services. A copy of the approved plan shall
be maintained on the job site for the duration of the job. A plan approval
issued under this chapter shall be prominently displayed until all construction
is complete, all permanent sedimentation and erosion control measures are
installed, and the site has been stabilized. A copy of the approved plan shall
be kept on file at the job site.
   (E)   Efforts should be made to prevent the uncovering of more than 20 acres
at any one time. If more than 20 acres are to be uncovered at any one time, the
plan shall contain the following additional information:
      (1)   The method of limiting time of exposure and amount of exposed area
to achieve the objectives of this chapter;
      (2)   A cut/fill analysis that shows where soil will be moved from one
area of the tract to another as ground elevation is changed;
      (3)   Construction sequence and construction phasing to justify the time
and amount of exposure;
      (4)   Techniques to be used to prevent sedimentation associated with
larger disturbed areas; and
      (5)   Additional erosion control measures, structures, and devices to
prevent sedimentation.
   (F)   Environmental Policy Act document. Any plan submitted for a land-
disturbing activity for which an environmental document is required by the
North Carolina Environment Policy Act (G.S. § 113A-1 et seq.) shall be deemed
incomplete until a complete environmental document is available for review. The
county shall promptly notify the person submitting the plan that the 30-day
time limit for review of the plan pursuant to this chapter shall not begin
until a complete environmental document is available for review.
   (G)   The land-disturbing activity described in the plan shall not result in
a violation of rules adopted by the Environmental Management Commission to
protect riparian buffers along surface waters.
   (H)   The land-disturbing activity described in the plan shall not result in
a violation of any local ordinance, law, rule or regulation, including, but not
limited to, zoning, tree protection, stream, lake and watershed buffers and
floodplain regulations.
   (I)   Content. The plan required by this section shall contain architectural
or engineering drawings, maps, assumptions, calculations, and narrative
statements as needed to adequately describe the proposed development of the
tract, and the measures planned to comply with the requirements of this
chapter. Plan content may vary to meet the needs of specific site requirements.
Detailed guidelines for plan preparation may be obtained from the county on
request.
   (J)   Soil and Water Conservation District comments.  The District shall
review the plan and submit any comments and recommendations to the county
within 20 days after the District received the plan, or within any shorter
period of time as may be agreed upon by the District and the county. Failure of
the District to submit its comments and recommendations within 20 days or
within any agreed-upon shorter period of time shall not delay final action on
the plan.
   (K)   Timeline for decisions on plans. The county will review each complete
plan submitted to it and, within 30 days of receipt thereof, will notify the
person submitting the plan that it has been approved, approved with
modifications, or disapproved. Failure to approve, approve with modifications,
or disapprove a complete plan within 30 days of receipt shall be deemed
approval. The county will review each revised plan submitted to it and, within
15 days of receipt thereof, will notify the person submitting the plan that it
has been approved, approved with modifications, or disapproved. Failure to
approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove a revised plan within 15
days of receipt shall be deemed approval.
   (L)   Approval.  The county shall only approve a plan upon determining that
it complies with all applicable state and local regulations for erosion and
sedimentation control. Approval assumes the applicant’s compliance with the
federal and state water quality laws, regulations and rules. The county shall
condition approval of plans upon the applicant’s compliance with federal and
state water quality laws, regulations and rules.
   (M)   Disapproval for content.  The county may disapprove a plan or draft
plan based on its content. A disapproval based upon a plan’s content must
specifically state in writing the reasons for disapproval.
   (N)   Other disapprovals.  
      (1)   The county shall disapprove an erosion and sedimentation control
plan if implementation of the plan would result in a violation of rules adopted
by the Environmental Management Commission to protect riparian buffers along
surface waters.
      (2)   The county may disapprove an erosion and sedimentation control plan
or disapprove a transfer of a plan under division (K) of this section upon
finding that an applicant or a parent, subsidiary, or other affiliate of the
applicant:
         (a)   Is conducting or has conducted land-disturbing activity without
an approved plan, or has received notice of violation of a plan previously
approved by the Commission or a local government pursuant to this chapter and
has not complied with the notice within the time specified in the notice.
         (b)   Has failed to pay a civil penalty assessed pursuant to this
chapter or a local ordinance adopted pursuant to this chapter by the time the
payment is due.
         (c)   Has been convicted of a misdemeanor pursuant to G.S. § 113A-64
(b) or any criminal provision of a local ordinance adopted pursuant to this
chapter.
         (d)   Has failed to substantially comply with state rules or local
ordinances and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.
      (3)   In the event that an erosion and sedimentation control plan or a
transfer of a plan is disapproved by the county pursuant to division (J) of
this section, the local government shall so notify the Director of the Division
of Energy, Mineral, and Land Resources within ten days of the disapproval. The
county shall advise the applicant or the proposed transferee and the Director
in writing as to the specific reasons that the plan was disapproved.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 152.17(A) of this chapter, the applicant
may appeal the county's disapproval of the plan directly to the Commission.
      (4)   For purposes of this division, an applicant’s record or the
proposed transferee’s record may be considered for only the two years prior to
the application date.
   (O)   Transfer of plans. The county administering an erosion and
sedimentation control program may transfer an erosion and sedimentation control
plan approved pursuant to this section, without the consent of the plan holder,
to a successor-owner of the property on which the permitted activity is
occurring or will occur as provided in this division.
      (1)   The county may transfer a plan if all of the following conditions
are met:
         (a)   The successor-owner of the property submits to the local
government a written request for the transfer of the plan and an authorized
statement of financial responsibility and documentation of property ownership.
         (b)   The county finds all of the following:
            1.   The plan holder is one of the following:
               a.   A natural person who is deceased;
               b.   A partnership, limited liability corporation, corporation,
or any other business association that has been dissolved;
               c.   A person who has been lawfully and finally divested of
title to the property on which the permitted activity is occurring or will
occur;
               d.   A person who has sold the property on which the permitted
activity is occurring or will occur;
            2.   The successor-owner holds title to the property on which the
permitted activity is occurring or will occur;
            3.   The successor-owner is the sole claimant of the right to
engage in the permitted activity;
            4.   There will be no substantial change in the permitted activity.
      (2)   The plan holder shall comply with all terms and conditions of the
plan until such time as the plan is transferred.
      (3)   The successor-owner shall comply with all terms and conditions of
the plan once the plan has been transferred.
      (4)   Notwithstanding changes to law made after the original issuance of
the plan, the county may not impose new or different terms and conditions in
the plan without the prior express consent of the successor-owner. Nothing in
this division shall prevent the county from requiring a revised plan pursuant
to G.S. § 113A-54.1(b).
   (P)   Notice of activity initiation.  No person may initiate a land-
disturbing activity before notifying the agency that issued the plan approval
of the date that land-disturbing activity will begin.
   (Q)   Preconstruction conference. If a plan approval is required under this
chapter, the person conducting the land-disturbing activity, or an agent of
that party, shall contact the County Natural Resources Division of Development
Services at least 48 hours before commencement of the land-disturbing activity.
The purpose of the preconstruction conference is to arrange an on-site meeting
with the Natural Resources Division of Development Services to review and
discuss the approved plan and the proposed land-disturbing activity.
   (R)   Display of plan approval.  A plan approval issued under this chapter
shall be prominently displayed until all construction is complete, all
temporary measures have been removed, all permanent sedimentation and erosion
control measures are installed, and the site has been stabilized. A copy of the
approved plan shall be kept on file at the job site.
   (S)   Required revisions.  After approving a plan, if the county, either
upon review of such plan or on inspection of the job site, determines that a
significant risk of accelerated erosion or off-site sedimentation exists, the
county shall require a revised plan. Pending the preparation of the revised
plan, work shall cease or shall continue under conditions outlined by the
appropriate authority. If, following commencement of a land-disturbing activity
pursuant to an approved plan, the county determines that the plan is inadequate
to meet the requirements of this chapter, the county may require any revision
of the plan that is necessary to comply with this chapter.
   (T)   Amendment to a plan.  Applications for amendment of a plan in written
and/or graphic form may be made at any time under the same conditions as the
original application. Until such time as an amendment is approved by the
county, the land-disturbing activity shall not proceed except in accordance
with the plan as originally approved.
   (U)   Failure to file a plan. Any person engaged in land-disturbing activity
who fails to file a plan in accordance with this chapter, or who conducts a
land-disturbing activity except in accordance with provisions of an approved
plan, shall be deemed in violation of this chapter.
   (V)   Self-inspections.  
      (1)   The landowner, the financially responsible party, or the
landowner’s or the financially responsible party’s agent shall perform an
inspection of the area covered by the plan after each phase of the plan has
been completed, and after establishment of temporary ground cover in accordance
with G.S. § 113A-57(2). In addition, weekly and rain-event self-inspections are
required by federal regulations that are implemented through the NPDES
Construction General Permit No. NCG 010000.
         (a)   The person who performs the inspection shall maintain and make
available a record of the inspection at the site of the land-disturbing
activity.
            1.   The record shall set out any significant deviation from the
approved erosion control plan, identify any measures that may be required to
correct the deviation, and document the completion of those measures.
            2.   The record shall be maintained until permanent ground cover
has been established as required by the approved erosion and sedimentation
control plan.
         (b)   The inspections required by this division shall be in addition
to inspections required by G.S. § 113A-61.1.
      (2)   Where inspections are required by this division or G.S. § 113A-54.1
(e), the following apply:
         (a)   The inspection shall be performed during or after each of the
following phases of the plan:
            1.   Initial installation of erosion and sediment control measures;
            2.   Clearing and grubbing of existing ground cover;
            3.   Completion of any grading that requires ground cover;
            4.   Completion of all land-disturbing activity, construction, or
development, including permanent ground cover establishment and removal of all
temporary measures; and
            5.   Transfer of ownership or control of the tract of land where
the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved and work has
begun. The new owner or person in control shall conduct and document
inspections until the project is permanently stabilized as set forth in
division (R) of this section.
         (b)   Documentation of self-inspections performed under division (V)(2
(a)) of this section shall include:
            1.   Visual verification of ground stabilization and other erosion
control measures and practices as called for in the approved plan;
            2.   Verification by measurement of settling basins, temporary
construction entrances, energy dissipators, and traps;
            3.   The name, address, organization affiliation, telephone number,
and signature of the person conducting the inspection, and the date of the
inspection shall be included, whether on a copy of the approved erosion and
sedimentation control plan or an inspection report. A template for an example
of an inspection and monitoring report is provided on the DEMLR website at:
https://deq.nc.gov/about/divisions/energy-mineral-land-resources/erosion-
sediment-control/forms. Any relevant licenses and certifications may also be
included. Any documentation of inspections that occur on a copy of the approved
erosion and sedimentation control plan shall occur on a single copy of the
plan, and that plan shall be made available on the site.
            4.   A record of any significant deviation from any erosion or
sedimentation control measure from that on the approved plan. For the purpose
of this rule, a SIGNIFICANT DEVIATION means an omission, alternation, or
relocation of an erosion or sedimentation control measure that prevents it from
performing as intended. The record shall include measures required to correct
the significant deviation, along with documentation of when those measures were
taken. Deviations from the approved plan may also be recommended to enhance the
intended performance of the sedimentation and erosion control measures.
      (3)   Except as may be required under federal law, rule or regulation, no
periodic self-inspections or rain gauge installation is required on individual
residential lots where less than one acre is being disturbed on each lot.
   (W)   Plan cancellations. Plans for which land-disturbing activity has not
commenced within two years from the initial plan approval are void.
(Ord. passed 1-22-2007; Ord. passed 12-18-2023; Ord. passed 8-4-2025)
§ 152.07 BASIC CONTROL OBJECTIVES.
   An erosion and sedimentation control plan may be disapproved if the plan
fails to address the following control objectives.
   (A)   Identify critical areas.  On-site areas that are subject to severe
erosion, and off-site areas that are especially vulnerable to damage from
erosion and/or sedimentation, are to be identified and receive special
attention.
   (B)   Limit time of exposure.  All land-disturbing activities are to be
planned and conducted to limit exposure to the shortest time specified in G.S.
§ 113A-57, the rules of the aforementioned chapter, or as directed by the
approving authority.
   (C)   Limit exposed areas.  All land-disturbing activity is to be planned
and conducted to minimize the size of the area to be exposed at any one time.
   (D)   Control surface water.  Surface water runoff originating upgrade of
exposed areas should be controlled to reduce erosion and sediment loss during
the period of exposure.
   (E)   Control sedimentation. All land-disturbing activity is to be planned
and conducted to prevent off-site sedimentation damage.
   (F)   Manage stormwater runoff. Plans shall be designed so that any increase
in velocity of stormwater runoff resulting from a land-disturbing activity will
not result in accelerated erosion of the receiving stormwater conveyance or at
the point of discharge. Plans shall include measures to prevent accelerated
erosion within the project boundary and at the point of discharge.
(Ord. passed 1-22-2007; Ord. 2012-21, passed 10-1-2012; Ord. passed 12-18-2023)
§ 152.08 DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (B)(2) and (C)(1) of this section,
erosion and sedimentation control measures, structures, and devices shall be
planned, designed, and constructed to provide protection from the calculated
maximum peak rate of runoff from the ten-year storm. Runoff rates shall be
calculated using the procedures in the latest edition of the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA), Natural Resources Conservation Service’s
National Engineering Field Handbook or other acceptable calculation procedures.
   (B)   HQW zones. In high quality water (HWQ) zones, the following design
standards shall apply.
      (1)   Limit on uncovered area. Uncovered areas in HQW zones shall be
limited at any time to a maximum total area of 20 acres within the boundaries
of the tract. Only the portion of the land-disturbing activity within a HQW
zone shall be governed by this section. Larger areas may be uncovered within
the boundaries of the tract with the written approval of the Director, upon
providing engineering justification with a construction sequence that considers
phasing, limiting exposure, self-inspection reports submitted weekly, and a
more conservative design than the 25-year storm.
      (2)   Maximum peak rate of runoff protection. Erosion and sedimentation
control measures, structures, and devices within HQW zones shall be planned,
designed, and constructed to provide protection from the runoff of the 25-year
storm that produces the maximum peak rate of runoff, as calculated according to
procedures in the United States Department of Agriculture Natural Resources
Conservation Service’s National Engineering Field Handbook, or according to
procedures adopted by any other agency of this state or the United States or
any generally recognized organization or association.
      (3)   Sediment basin design.  
         (a)   Sediment basins within HQW zones shall be designed and
constructed according to the following criteria:
            1.   Use a surface withdrawal mechanism, except when the basin
drainage area is less than one acre;
            2.   Have a minimum of 1,800 cubic feet of storage area per acre of
disturbed area;
            3.   Have a minimum surface area of 325 square feet per cfs of the
25-year storm (Q25) peak flow;
            4.   Have a minimum dewatering time of 48 hours;
            5.   Incorporate three baffles, unless the basin is less than 20
feet in length, in which case two baffles shall be sufficient.
         (b)   Upon a written request of the applicant, the Director may allow
alternative design and control measures in lieu of meeting the conditions
required in division (B)(3)(a)2. through 5. of this section, if the applicant
demonstrates that meeting all of those conditions will result in design or
operational hardships, and that the alternative measures will provide an equal
or more effective level of erosion and sediment control on the site.
Alternative measures may include quicker application of ground cover, use of
sediment flocculants, and use of enhanced ground cover practices.
      (4)   Grade. Newly constructed open channels in HQW zones shall be
designed and constructed with side slopes no steeper than two horizontal to one
vertical, if a vegetative cover is used for stabilization, unless soil
conditions permit a steeper slope or where the slopes are stabilized by using
mechanical devices, structural devices, or other forms of ditch liners proven
as being effective in restraining accelerated erosion. In any event, the angle
for side slopes shall be sufficient to restrain accelerated erosion.
   (C)   Design and performance standards for land-disturbing activities of 20
acres or greater. In addition to any other requirements of state, federal, and
local law, land-disturbing activity of 20 acres or more within Lincoln County
or the City of Lincolnton shall meet all of the following additional design
standards for sedimentation and erosion control.
      (1)   Sediment basins shall be planned, designed, and constructed to
provide protection from the runoff of the 25-year storm that produces the
maximum peak rate of runoff, as calculated according to procedures set out in
the latest edition of the United States Department of Agriculture Natural
Resources Conservation Service’s Engineering Field Handbook, found through
nrcs.usda.gov, or according to procedures adopted by any other agency of the
state or the United States.
      (2)   Construction entrances shall be planned, designed and constructed
at a minimum length of 100 feet.
      (3)   Sediment fence (silt fencing) used along all watercourses shall
planned, designed and constructed as double-row, high-hazard or super-silt
fence.
(Ord. passed 1-22-2007; Ord. 2012-21, passed 10-1-2012; Ord. passed 12-18-2023)
§ 152.09 STORM WATER OUTLET PROTECTION.
   (A)   Intent. Stream banks and channels downstream from any land-disturbing
activity shall be protected from increased degradation by accelerated erosion
caused by increased velocity of runoff from the land-disturbing activity.
   (B)   Performance standard.  
      (1)   Persons shall conduct land-disturbing activity so that the post-
construction velocity of the ten-year-storm runoff in the receiving watercourse
to the discharge point does not exceed the greater of:
         (a)   The velocity established by the Maximum Permissible Velocities
Table set out within this division; or
         (b)   The velocity of the ten-year-storm runoff in the receiving
watercourse prior to development.
      (2)   If the condition of division (B)(1)(a) or (b) of this section
cannot be met, then the receiving watercourse to and including the discharge
point shall be designed and constructed to withstand the expected velocity
anywhere the velocity exceeds the “prior to development” velocity by 10%.
   MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE VELOCITIES TABLE
         The following is a table of the maximum permissible velocities for
storm water discharges in feet per second (F.P.S.) and meters per second
(M.P.S.).
Material F.P.S. M.P.S
Material                               F.P.S. M.P.S
Fine sand (noncolloidal)               2.5    0.8
Sandy loam (noncolloidal)              2.5    0.8
Silt loam (noncolloidal)               3.0    0.9
Ordinary firm loam                     3.5    1.1
Fine gravel                            5.0    1.5
Stiff clay (very colloidal)            5.0    1.5
Graded, loam to cobbles (noncolloidal) 5.0    1.5
Graded, silt to cobbles (Colloidal)    5.5    1.7
Alluvial silts (noncolloidal)          3.5    1.1
Alluvial silts (colloidal)             5.0    1.5
Coarse gravel (noncolloidal)           6.0    1.8
Cobbles and shingles                   5.5    1.7
Shales and hard pans                   6.0    1.8
 
         Source: Adapted from recommendations by Special Committee on
Irrigation Research, American Society of Civil Engineers, 1926, for channels
with straight alignment. For sinuous channels, multiply the allowable velocity
by 0.95 for slightly sinuous, by 0.9 for moderately sinuous channels, and by
0.8 for highly sinuous channels.
   (C)   Acceptable management measures. Measures applied alone or in
combination to satisfy the intent of this section are acceptable if there are
no objectionable secondary consequences. The county recognizes that the
management of storm water runoff to minimize or control downstream channel and
bank erosion is a developing technology. Innovative techniques and ideas will
be considered and may be used when shown to have the potential to produce
successful results. Some alternatives, while not exhaustive, are to:
      (1)   Avoid increases in surface runoff volume and velocity by including
measures to promote infiltration to compensate for increased runoff from areas
rendered impervious;
      (2)   Avoid increases in storm water discharge velocities by using
vegetated or roughened swales and waterways in place of closed drains and high
velocity paved sections:
      (3)   Provide energy dissipators at outlets of storm drainage facilities
to reduce flow velocities to the point of discharge;
      (4)   Protect watercourses subject to accelerated erosion by improving
cross sections and/or providing erosion-resistant lining; and
      (5)   Upgrade or replace the receiving device structure or watercourse
such that it will receive and conduct the flow to a point where it is no longer
subject to degradation from the increased rate of flow or increased velocity.
   (D)   Exceptions.  This rule shall not apply where it can be demonstrated to
the county that storm water discharge velocities will not create an erosion
problem in the receiving watercourse.
(Ord. passed 12-18-2023)
§ 152.10 BORROW AND WASTE AREAS.
   If the same person conducts the land-disturbing activity and any related
borrow or waste activity, the related borrow or waste activity shall constitute
part of the land-disturbing activity, unless the borrow or waste activity is
regulated under the Mining Act of 1971, G.S. Chapter 74, Article 7, or is a
landfill regulated by the Division of Waste Management. If the land-disturbing
activity and any related borrow or waste activity are not conducted by the same
person, they shall be considered by the approving authority as separate land-
disturbing activities.
(Ord. passed 12-18-2023)
§ 152.11 ACCESS AND HAUL ROADS.
   Temporary access and haul roads, other than public roads, constructed or
used in connection with any land-disturbing activity shall be considered a part
of that activity.
(Ord. passed 12-18-2023)
§ 152.12 OPERATIONS IN LAKES OR NATURAL WATERCOURSES..
   Land-disturbing activity in connection with construction in, on, over, or
under a lake or natural watercourse shall minimize the extent and duration of
disruption of the stream channel. Where relocation of a stream forms an
essential part of the proposed activity, the relocation shall minimize changes
in the stream flow characteristics.
(Ord. passed 12-18-2023)
§ 152.13 RESPONSIBILITY FOR MAINTENANCE.
   During the development of a site, the person conducting the land-disturbing
activity shall install and maintain all temporary and permanent erosion and
sedimentation control measures as required by the approved plan or any
provision of this chapter, the Act, or any order adopted pursuant to this
chapter or the Act. After site development, the landowner or person in
possession or control of the land shall install and/or maintain all necessary
permanent erosion and sediment control measures, except those measures
installed within a road or street right-of-way or easement accepted for
maintenance by a governmental agency.
(Ord. passed 12-18-2023)
§ 152.14 ADDITIONAL MEASURES.
   Whenever the county determines that accelerated erosion and sedimentation
continues despite the installation of protective practices, it shall direct the
person conducting the land-disturbing activity to take additional protective
action necessary to achieve compliance with the conditions specified in the Act
or its rules.
(Ord. passed 12-18-2023)
§ 152.15 FEES.
   The county has established a fee schedule for the review and approval of
plans. The fees required to be paid under this chapter shall be determined by
the then-current county fee schedule. All fees shall be due and payable at the
submittal of a plan.
(Ord. passed 12-18-2023)
§ 152.16 ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW BOARD.
   (A)   Creation. There has previously been established and created, and is
hereby re-established, an Environmental Review Board that is charged with the
duties as provided for in this chapter. The Environmental Review Board shall
consist of the following members:
      (1)   One person appointed by the City of Lincolnton;
      (2)   The President of the County Home Builders Association, or his or
her designee;
      (3)   The Chairperson of the County Soil and Water Conservation District,
or his or her designee;
      (4)   The Chairperson of the County Natural Resource Committee, or his or
her designee;
      (5)   Two persons appointed by the Board of Commissioners:
         (a)   One being professional environmental biologist; and
         (b)   The other being a professional engineer registered under the
provision of G.S. Chapter 89C.
   (B)   Appointments. The Environmental Review Board members appointed by the
Board of Commissioners shall serve a term of three years and until their
successors are appointed and duly qualified. A member may be reappointed for up
to two consecutive three-year terms.
   (C)   Fees. The Environmental Review Board shall make fee recommendations to
the Board of Commissioners for all fees enforced hereunder.
   (D)   Other duties and responsibilities. The Environmental Review Board
shall hear and decide appeals from any decision or determination made by the
Erosion Control Specialist in the enforcement of this chapter and other duties
as directed by the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 1-22-2007; Ord. passed 12-18-2023)
§ 152.17 PLAN APPEALS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) herein, the appeal of a disapproval
or approval with modifications of a plan shall governed by the following
provisions.
      (1)   The disapproval or modification of any proposed plan by the County
Natural Resources Division of Development Services shall entitle the person
submitting the plan to a public hearing, if that person submits written demand
for a hearing within 15 days after receipt of written notice of disapproval or
modifications.
      (2)   A hearing held pursuant to this section shall be conducted by the
County Environmental Review Board within 30 days after the date of the appeal
or request for a hearing.
      (3)   The County Environmental Review Board will render its final
decision on any plan within ten days of the hearing.
      (4)   If the County Environmental Review Board upholds the disapproval or
modification of a proposed plan following the hearing, the person submitting
the plan shall then be entitled to appeal that decision to the Commission as
provided in G.S. § 113A-61(c) and 15A NCAC 4B .0118(d).
   (B)   In the event that a plan is disapproved pursuant to §
152.06(N) of this chapter, the applicant may appeal the county's disapproval of
the plan directly to the Commission.
(Ord. passed 1-22-2007; Ord. passed 12-18-2023; Ord. passed 8-4-2025)
§ 152.18 INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   Inspection.  Agents, officials, or other qualified persons authorized
by the county will periodically inspect land-disturbing activities to ensure
compliance with the Act, this chapter, or rules or orders adopted or issued
pursuant to this chapter, and to determine whether the measures required in the
plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation resulting from
land-disturbing activity. Notice of the right to inspect shall be included in
the certificate of approval of each plan.
   (B)   Willful resistance, delay or obstruction. No person shall willfully
resist, delay, or obstruct an authorized representative, employee, or agent of
the county, while that person is inspecting or attempting to inspect a land-
disturbing activity under this section.
   (C)   Notice of violation.  If the county determines that a person engaged
in land-disturbing activity has failed to comply with the Act, this chapter, or
rules or orders adopted or issued pursuant to this chapter, a notice of
violation shall be served upon that person. The notice may be served by any
means authorized under G.S. § 1A-l, Rule 4. The notice shall specify a date by
which the person must comply with the Act, or this chapter, or rules or orders
adopted pursuant to this chapter, and inform the person of the actions that
need to be taken to comply with the Act, this chapter, or rules or orders
adopted pursuant to this chapter. Any person who fails to comply within the
time specified is subject to additional civil and criminal penalties for a
continuing violation as provided in G.S. § 113A-64 and this chapter. If the
person engaged in the land-disturbing activity has not received a previous
notice of violation under this section, the county shall offer assistance in
developing corrective measures. Assistance may be provided by referral to a
technical assistance program on behalf of the approving authority, referral to
a cooperative extension program, or by the provision of written materials such
as Department guidance documents. The notice of violation may be served in the
manner prescribed for service of process by G.S. § 1A-l, Rule 4, and shall
include information on how to obtain assistance in developing corrective
measures.
   (D)   Investigation.  The county shall have the power to conduct such
investigation as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out its duties as
prescribed in this chapter, and whoever presents appropriate credentials for
this purpose may enter, at reasonable times, any property, public or private,
for the purpose of investigating and inspecting the sites of any land-
disturbing activity.
   (E)   Statements and reports. The county shall also have the power to
require written statements, or filing of reports under oath, with respect to
pertinent questions relating to land-disturbing activity.
   (F)   Violation. Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs or is alleged
to have occurred, any person may file a written complaint. Any written
complaint, stating fully the cause and basis thereof, shall be filed with the
Natural Resources Division of Development Services, which shall properly record
the complaint, investigate and take action as provided by this chapter.
   (G)   Certificate of occupancy.  
      (1)   With regard to the development of any tract that is subject to this
chapter, the County Department of Development Services shall not issue a
certificate of occupancy where any of the following conditions exist:
         (a)   There is a violation of this chapter with respect to the tract;
         (b)   If there remains due and payable to the county civil penalties
that have been levied against the person conducting the land-disturbing
activity for violation(s) of this chapter. If a penalty is under appeal, the
Erosion Control Specialist may require the amount of the fine, and any other
amount that the person would be required to pay under this chapter if the
person loses the appeal, be placed in a refundable account or surety prior to
issuing the certificate of occupancy;
         (c)   The requirements of the plan have not been completed and the
building for which a certificate of occupancy is requested is the only building
then under construction on the tract;
         (d)   On the tract, which includes multiple buildings on a single
parcel, the requirements of the plan have not been completed and the building
for which a certificate of occupancy is requested is the last building then
under construction on the tract; and/or
         (e)   On a tract, which includes multiple parcels created pursuant to
the applicable subdivision regulations, the requirements of the plan have not
been completed with respect to the parcel for which the certificate of
occupancy is requested.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this division, the Building and
Land Development Department may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy
where division (G)(1)(c), (d), or (e) above apply, and where the person
conducting the land-disturbing activity is making substantial progress towards
completing the requirements of the plan.
      (3)   The county may issue a stop-work order and/or suspension of
building permits if a land-disturbing activity is being conducted in violation
of this chapter or of any rule adopted or order issued pursuant to this
chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-22-2007; Ord. passed 12-18-2023; Ord. passed 8-4-2025)
§ 152.19 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   (A)   Violation of local program. Whenever the county has reasonable cause
to believe that any person is violating or threatening to violate any
ordinance, rule, regulation or order adopted or issued by the county, or any
term, condition, or provision of an approved plan, it may, either before or
after the institution of any other action or proceeding authorized by this
chapter, institute a civil action, in the name of the county, for injunctive
relief to restrain the violation or threatened violation. The County Attorney
shall bring the action in the County Superior Court.
   (B)   Abatement of violation. Upon its determination that an alleged
violation is occurring or is threatened, a court shall enter any order or
judgment that is necessary to abate the violation, to ensure that restoration
is performed, or to prevent the threatened violation. The institution of an
action for injunctive relief under this section shall not relieve any party to
the proceedings from any civil or criminal penalty prescribed for violations of
this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-22-2007; Ord. passed 12-18-2023)
§ 152.20 RESTORATION OF AFTER NONCOMPLIANCE.
   The county may require a person who engaged in a land-disturbing activity
and failed to retain sediment generated by the activity, as required by G.S. §
113A-57(3), to restore the waters and land affected by the failure so as to
minimize the detrimental effects of the resulting pollution by sedimentation.
This authority is in addition to any other civil or criminal penalty or
injunctive relief authorized under this chapter.
(Ord. passed 1-22-2007; Ord. passed 12-18-2023)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Civil penalties.
      (1)   Civil penalty for a violation.  Any person who violates any of the
provisions of this chapter, or any rule or order adopted or issued pursuant to
this chapter, or who initiates or continues a land-disturbing activity for
which a plan is required except in accordance with the terms, conditions, and
provisions of an approved plan, is subject to a civil penalty. The maximum
civil penalty amount that the county may assess per violation is $5,000. A
civil penalty may be assessed from the date of the violation. Each day of a
continuing violation shall constitute a separate violation. When the person has
not been assessed any civil penalty under this division for any previous
violation, and that person abated continuing environmental damage resulting
from the violation within 180 days from the date of the notice of violation,
the maximum cumulative total civil penalty assessed under this division for all
violations associated with the land-disturbing activity for which the erosion
and sedimentation control plan is required is $25,000.
      (2)   Repeat violations.  Repeat violators may be charged by a multiple
of the base penalty determined herein. The penalty for a repeat violator may be
doubled for each previous time that the repeat violator has been notified of a
violation of this chapter, or any other soil erosion and sedimentation control
ordinance within the state, within two years prior to the current violation.
However, in no case may the penalty exceed the maximum allowed by this chapter.
      (3)   Civil penalty assessment factors.  The County Natural Resources
Division of Development Services shall determine the amount of the civil
penalty based upon the following factors:
         (a)   The degree and extent of harm caused by the violation;
         (b)   The cost of rectifying the damage;
         (c)   The amount of money the violator saved by noncompliance;
         (d)   Whether the violation was committed willfully; and
         (e)   The prior record of the violator in complying of failing to
comply with this chapter.
      (4)   Notice of civil penalty assessment.  The County Natural Resources
Division of Development Services shall provide notice of the civil penalty
amount and the basis for assessment to the person assessed. The notice of
assessment shall be served by any means authorized under G.S. § 1A-1, Rule 4. A
notice of assessment by the county shall direct the violator to either pay the
assessment, contest the assessment within 30 days by filing a petition for a
hearing with the county (based upon the procedures herein), or file a request
with the County Erosion Control Division of Development Services for remission
of the assessment within 30 days of receipt of the notice of assessment. A
remission request must be accompanied by a waiver of the right to a contested
case hearing pursuant to G.S. Chapter 150B, and a stipulation of the facts on
which the assessment was based.
      (5)   Final decision. The final decision on contested assessments shall
be made by the County Environmental Review Board in accordance with this
chapter.
      (6)   Appeal of final decision.  Appeal of the final decision of the
County Environmental Review Board shall be to the County Superior Court. Such
appeals must be made within 30 days of the final decision of the County
Environmental Review Board.
      (7)   Remission of civil penalties. A request for remission of a civil
penalty imposed under G.S. § 113A-64 may be filed with the county Environmental
Review Board within 30 days of receipt of the notice of assessment. A remission
request must be accompanied by a waiver of the right to a contested case
hearing pursuant to G.S. Chapter 150B, and a stipulation of the facts on which
the assessment was based. The following factors shall be considered in
determining whether a civil penalty remission request will be approved:
         (a)   Whether one or more of the civil penalty assessment factors in
G.S. § 113A-64(a)(3) were wrongly applied to the detriment of the petitioner;
         (b)   Whether the petitioner promptly abated continuing environmental
damage resulting from the violation;
         (c)   Whether the violation was inadvertent or a result of an
accident;
         (d)   Whether the petitioner had been assessed civil penalties for any
previous violations;
         (e)   Whether payment of the civil penalty will prevent payment for
necessary remedial actions or would otherwise create a significant financial
hardship;
         (f)   The assessed property tax valuation of the petitioner’s property
upon which the violation occurred, excluding the value of any structures
located on the property.
      (8)   Collection.  If payment is not received within 30 days after it is
due, the county may institute a civil action to recover the amount of the
assessment. The civil action may be brought in the superior court of the county
where the violation occurred, or where the violator’s residence or principal
place of business is located. Such civil actions must be filed within three
years of the date the assessment was due. An assessment that is not contested
and a remission that is not requested is due when the violator is served with a
notice of assessment. An assessment that is contested or a remission that is
requested is due at the conclusion of the administrative and judicial review of
the assessment.
      (9)   Credit of civil penalties. The clear proceeds of civil penalties
collected by the county under this division shall be remitted to the Civil
Penalty and Forfeiture Fund in accordance with G.S. § 115C-457.2. Penalties
collected by the county may be diminished only by the actual costs of
collection. The collection cost percentage to be used shall be established and
approved by the State Office of State Budget and Management on an annual basis,
based upon the computation of actual collection costs by the county for the
prior fiscal year.
   (B)   Criminal penalties. Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any
provision of this chapter, or any rule or order adopted or issued by the
Commission or a local government, or who knowingly or willfully initiates or
continues a land-disturbing activity for which a plan is required except in
accordance with the terms, conditions, and provisions of an approved plan,
shall be guilty of a Class 2 misdemeanor, which may include a fine not to
exceed $5,000 as provided in G.S. § 113A-64.
(Ord. passed 1-22-2007; Ord. passed 12-18-2023; Ord. passed 8-4-2025)
CHAPTER 153: HISTORIC PROPERTIES
Section
General Provisions
   
153.001   Purpose
Historic Preservation Commission
   
153.015   Creation
   
153.016   Qualification of members
   
153.017   Tenure
   
153.018   Attendance at meetings
   
153.019   Meetings
   
153.020   Rules of procedure
   
153.021   Commission powers
Designation of Historic Properties
   
153.035   Adoption of an ordinance of designation
   
153.036   Inventory
   
153.037   Designation Committee
   
153.038   Guideline required
   
153.039   Designation reports
   
153.040   Submission of designation reports
   
153.041   Notification procedures
   
153.042   Consideration of the report
   
153.043   Review by the Department of Cultural Resources
   
153.044   Submission to Board of Commissioners
   
153.045   Public hearing
   
153.046   Adoption of a designation ordinance
   
153.047   Actions subsequent to approval
   
153.048   Denied applications
Certificate of Appropriateness
   
153.060   Certificate required
   
153.061   Delay in demolition of historic properties
   
153.062   Certain changes not prohibited
   
153.063   Required procedures
Review Criteria
   
153.075   Intent
   
153.076   Form and appearance
Conditions to Certain Approvals
   
153.090   Authentic restoration or reconstruction
General Regulations
   
153.105   Authority to acquire historic properties
   
153.106   Ownership of property
   
153.107   Receipt and expenditure of funds
   
153.108   Staff and technical services
   
153.109   Conflict with other laws
   
153.110   Remedies
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 153.001 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The historical heritage of the county is one of its most valued and
important assets. Conservation of historic properties will stabilize and
increase the values in their areas and strengthen the overall economy of the
county and state.
   (B)   By means of listing, regulation, and acquisition of historic
properties, the county seeks, within its zoning jurisdiction:
      (1)   To safeguard its heritage by preserving any property therein that
embodies important elements of its cultural, social, economic, political, or
architectural history; and
      (2)   To promote the use and conservation of that property for the
education, pleasure, and enrichment of the residents of the county and the
state as a whole.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992)
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION
§ 153.015 CREATION.
   There is hereby established, by authority of G.S. § 160D-303, the Historic
Preservation Commission, or the Commission, to consist of nine members
appointed by the Board of Commissioners. The Commission shall serve without
monetary compensation. In establishing the Commission and making appointments
to it, the Board of Commissioners shall seek the advice of the state or local
historical agencies, societies, or organizations as it may deem necessary.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 153.016 QUALIFICATION OF MEMBERS.
   All members of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be residents of
the territory subject to the zoning jurisdiction of the county, and a majority
of the members shall have demonstrated special interest, experience, or
education in history, architecture, archaeology, or related fields.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 153.017 TENURE.
   Members of the Historic Preservation Commission shall serve overlapping
terms whereby not more than three terms expire in any one year. Initially,
terms may be set by the Board of Commissioners to be one year to three years in
length. After 1-1-1993, all terms shall be three years in length. A member may
be reappointed for a second consecutive term, but after two consecutive terms a
member shall be ineligible for reappointment until one calendar year has
elapsed from the date of termination of his or her second term. A member may be
appointed to fulfill the unexpired portion of either a first or second term.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 153.018 ATTENDANCE AT MEETINGS.
   Any member of the Historic Preservation Commission who misses more than
three consecutive regular meetings or more than one-half the regular meetings
in a calendar year shall lose his or her status as a member of the Commission
and shall be replaced or reappointed by the Board of Commissions pursuant to §
153.015. Absence due to sickness, death in the family, or other emergencies of
like nature shall be recognized as approved absences and shall not affect the
members status on the Commission, except that in the event of a long illness,
or any other such cause for prolonged absence, the member shall be replaced.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 153.019 MEETINGS.
   The Historic Preservation Commission shall establish a meeting time, and
shall meet at least bimonthly (every two months) and more often as it shall
determine and require. All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the
public in accord with state law. Reasonable notice of the time and place
thereof shall be given to the public.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 153.020 RULES OF PROCEDURE.
   The Historic Preservation Commission shall adopt rules of procedure for the
conduct of its business, and an annual report shall be prepared and submitted
by January 1 of each year to the Board of Commissioners. The report shall
include a comprehensive and detailed review of the activities, problems, and
actions of the Commission as well as any budget request or recommendations. The
Commission shall keep a record of its members’ attendance, and of its
resolutions, findings, and recommendations, which record shall be a public
record.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 153.021 COMMISSION POWERS.
   The Historic Preservation Commission is authorized and empowered to
undertake any actions reasonably necessary to the discharge and conduct of its
duties and responsibilities as outlined in this chapter and G.S. § 160D-942,
including, but not limited to, the following:
   (A)   Undertake an inventory of properties of historical, architectural,
and/or cultural significance;
   (B)   Recommend to the Board of Commissioners, areas to be designated by
ordinance as “Historic Districts” and individual structures, buildings, sites,
areas, or objects to be designated by ordinance as “landmarks”;
   (C)   Acquire by any lawful means the fee or any lesser included interest,
including options to purchase, to properties within established districts or to
any such properties designated as landmarks to hold, manage, preserve, restore,
and improve such properties, and to exchange or dispose of the property by
public or private sale, lease or otherwise, subject to covenants or other
legally binding restrictions that will secure appropriate rights of public
access and promote the preservation of the property;
   (D)   Restore, preserve, and operate the historic properties;
   (E)   Recommend to the Board of Commissioners that designation of any area
as a historic district or part thereof, or designation of any building,
structure, site, area, or object as a landmark be revoked or removed;
   (F)   Conduct an educational program on historic properties and districts
within its jurisdiction;
   (G)   Cooperate with the state, federal, and local governments in pursuance
of the purposes of this chapter, and the General Statutes. The Board of
Commissioners, or the Commission when authorized by the Board of Commissioners,
may contract with the State of North Carolina or the United States of America,
or with any agency of either, or with any other organization provided the terms
are not inconsistent with state or federal law;
   (H)   Prepare and recommend the official adoption of a preservation element
as part of the local government’s comprehensive plan;
   (I)   Review and act upon proposals for alterations, demolitions, or new
construction within historic districts, or for the alteration or demolition of
designated landmarks, pursuant to this part;
   (J)   Negotiate at any time with the owner of a building, structure, site,
area, or object for its acquisition or its preservation, when such action is
reasonably necessary or appropriate.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES
§ 153.035 ADOPTION OF AN ORDINANCE OF DESIGNATION.
   (A)   Upon compliance with the procedures set out in §
153.038, the Board of Commissioners may adopt and, from time to time, amend or
repeal an ordinance designating one or more historic properties.
   (B)   For each building, structure, site, area, or object designated as a
historic property, the ordinance shall require that the waiting period set
forth in §
153.061 be observed prior to its demolition. For each designated historic
property, the ordinance may also provide for a suitable sign to be placed upon
the property, that the property has been so designated. If the owner objects,
the sign shall be placed on a nearby public right-of-way.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992)
§ 153.036 INVENTORY.
   As a guide for the identification and evaluation of landmarks, the
Commission shall undertake, at the earliest possible time and consistent with
the resources available to it, an inventory of properties of historical,
architectural, prehistorical, and cultural significance within its
jurisdiction. The inventories and any additions or revisions thereof shall be
submitted as expeditiously as possible to the Division of Archives and History.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992)
§ 153.037 DESIGNATION COMMITTEE.
   (A)   A Designation Committee shall be established from the membership of
the Commission to review the inventory and recommend to the full Commission,
from time to time, the designation of historic properties.
   (B)   This Committee shall also review applications for historic property
designation submitted by property owners. It shall be available to meet with
applicants for designation at an early stage in the process of preparing the
application in order to advise them informally concerning the Commission's
standards for reports, the criteria for designation, the boundaries of the
property to be designated, and other relevant matters.
   (C)   The Committee, collectively and individually, shall refrain from any
indication of approval or disapproval, but shall not, for that reason, be
barred from reasonable discussion of the applicant's proposals. No advice or
opinion given, or reported as having been given, by any member of the Committee
at such informal meeting(s) shall in any way be official or binding upon the
Commission.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992)
§ 153.038 GUIDELINE REQUIRED.
   No ordinance designating a historic building, structure, site, area, or
object as a landmark, nor any amendment thereto, may be adopted, nor may any
property be accepted or acquired by the Commission or the Board of
Commissioners, until the Commission has prepared and adopted rules of
procedure, and prepared and adopted principles and guidelines for altering,
restoring, moving, or demolishing properties designated as landmarks.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992)
§ 153.039 DESIGNATION REPORTS.
   (A)   Designation reports prepared by the Commission. If the Commission
accepts the recommendation of the Designation Committee that a property be
considered for designation, the Commission shall make or cause to be made an
investigation and report meeting the minimum standards contained in Section
12.4.
   (B)   Designation reports prepared by an owner. To receive consideration for
designation of a property as historic, a property owner must prepare an
application meeting the minimum standards contained in Section 12.4.
Applications prepared by owners will be judged by the same criteria as those
prepared by the Commission. Owner applications shall be made on forms provided
by the Commission. Designation reports, whether prepared by the Commission or
submitted as applications by an owner, shall include the following:
      (1)   The name of the property, both common and historic names if they
can be determined;
      (2)   The name and address of the current property owner;
      (3)   The location of the property and a justification if the land
proposed to be designated historic. If located in an urban area, the street
address shall be used; if located in a rural area, the approximate location in
relation to state routes should be used;
      (4)   The date of construction and of any later alterations, if any;
      (5)   An assessment of the significance of the site or structure proposed
to be designated. If outbuildings or other appurtenant features will be
designated, the report should contain a description of these elements;
      (6)   An architectural or archaeological description of the area of the
site or structure proposed to be designated. If outbuildings or other
appurtenant features will be designated, the report should contain a
description of these elements;
      (7)   A historical discussion of the site or structure within its type,
period, and locality;
      (8)   An overall photograph that clearly depicts the property proposed to
be designated and supplementary photographs showing facades, details, and
siting; and
      (9)   A map showing the location of the property, including any
outbuildings and appurtenant features.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992)
§ 153.040 SUBMISSION OF DESIGNATION REPORTS.
   A designation report prepared by or for the Commission may be considered at
any meeting of the Commission, provided the notification requirements contained
in §
153.041 are met. An application for designation prepared by the property owner
and meeting all of the standards contained in §
153.039 must be received at least 30 calendar days prior to the next meeting of
the Commission to be considered at that meeting.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992)
§ 153.041 NOTIFICATION PROCEDURES.
   When a designation report is prepared by the Commission and is to be
considered at a Commission meeting, the Chairperson shall notify by certified
mail, mailed out not less than seven calendar days prior to the meeting at
which the matter is to be heard, the owners of the property, and the owners of
abutting property.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992)
§ 153.042 CONSIDERATION OF THE REPORT.
   Once the designation report has been prepared, either by the Commission or
by the owner, and once the notification required by §
153.041 has been met, the Commission shall consider the report. The Commission
may accept it, amend it, reject it, or recommend further study. Prior to the
final action on a designation report, the Commission shall indicate the extent
to which the property meets the criteria for designation contained in G.S. §
160D-944, as amended.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 153.043 REVIEW BY THE DEPARTMENT OF CULTURAL RESOURCES.
   (A)   A report accepted by the Historic Preservation Commission shall be
submitted to the State Department of Cultural Resources, Division of Archives
and History, for comments pursuant to G.S. § 160D-944, as amended.
   (B)   The Historic Preservation Commission shall make or cause to be made an
investigation and report on the historic, architectural, educational,
prehistorical, or cultural significance of each building, structure, site,
area, or object proposed for designation or acquisition. The report of the
inventory and assessment shall be submitted to the Department of Cultural
Resources for the review.
   (C)   The Department of Cultural Resources shall make an analysis of
recommendations concerning the report of the Commission within 30 days after
the report and written request for the analysis have been received by the
Department. If the Department fails to submit its analysis and recommendations
to the Historic Preservation Commission within 30 days after the written
request for analysis has been received, the Commission or the Board of
Commissioners shall be relieved of any responsibility to consider the comments.
   (D)   After the expiration of the 30-day comment period given the Division
of Archives and History, the Commission may recommend to the Board of
Commissioners that the property be designated as an historic property subject
to the requirements of G.S. § 160A-400.4, as amended.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 153.044 SUBMISSION TO BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS.
   The Commission shall submit a copy of the report, and a proposed ordinance
of designation, to the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992)
§ 153.045 PUBLIC HEARING.
   When a proposed ordinance of designation is submitted, the Commission shall
hold a legislative hearing to determine if it will recommend the property for
designation as a historic landmark. If the Commission recommends the property
for designation as a historic landmark, based on the property being deemed and
found by the Commission to be of special significance in terms of its
historical, prehistorical, architectural, or cultural importance, and to
possess integrity of design, setting, workmanship, materials, feeling, and/or
association, then the Commission shall request that the Board of Commissioners
hold a separate legislative hearing on the proposed adoption of the designation
ordinance, at its earliest convenience.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 6-19-2023)
§ 153.046 ADOPTION OF A DESIGNATION ORDINANCE.
   Following the legislative hearing, the Board of Commissioners may adopt the
ordinance as proposed, adopt the ordinance with amendments, or reject the
ordinance.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 6-19-2023)
§ 153.047 ACTIONS SUBSEQUENT TO APPROVAL.
   Upon adoption of the ordinance:
   (A)   The owner(s) and occupants shall be given written notice of the
designation insofar as reasonable diligence permits;
   (B)   One copy of the ordinance and all amendments thereto shall be filed by
the Commission in the office of the County Register of Deeds. Each historic
property shall be indexed according to the name of the owner in the grantee and
grantor indexes, and the Commission shall pay a fee for filing and indexing;
   (C)   In the case of property lying within the zoning jurisdiction of a
city, a second copy shall be kept on file in the office of the city or town
clerk and be made available for public inspection at any reasonable time;
   (D)   A copy of the ordinance and any amendments thereto shall be given to
the city or county building inspector;
   (E)   The fact that a building, structure, site, area, or object has to be
designated a historic property shall be clearly indicated on all tax maps
maintained by the city or county for the period as the designation remains in
effect; and
   (F)   It shall be the duty of the Commission to give notice thereof to the
County Tax Supervisor, who shall consider the designation and any recorded
restriction on the property in appraising it for tax purposes.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992)
§ 153.048 DENIED APPLICATIONS.
   If an application for historic property designation is not approved, a copy
of the minutes of the meeting shall be mailed forthwith to the owner.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992)
CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS
§ 153.060 CERTIFICATE REQUIRED.
   (A)   From and after the designation of a historic property, no exterior
portion of any building or other structure (including masonry walls, fences,
light fixtures, steps and pavement, or other appurtenant features), nor above-
ground utility structure nor any type of outdoor advertising sign shall be
erected, altered, restored, moved, or demolished on the historic property until
after an application for a certificate of appropriateness as to exterior
features has been submitted to and approved by the Historic Preservation
Commission. The county shall require such a certificate to be issued by the
Commission prior to the issuance of a building permit or other permit granted
for the purposes of constructing, altering, moving, or demolishing structures,
which certificate may be issued subject to reasonable conditions necessary to
carry out the purposes of this section. A certificate of appropriateness shall
be required whether or not a building or other permit is required.
      (1)   For purposes of this section, EXTERIOR FEATURES shall include the
architectural style, general design, and general arrangement of the exterior of
a building or other structure, including the kind and texture of the building
material, the size and scale of the building, and the type and style of all
windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and other appurtenant fixtures. In the
case of outdoor advertising signs, EXTERIOR FEATURES shall be construed to mean
the style, material, size, and location of all the signs. The EXTERIOR FEATURES
may, in the discretion of the local governing board, include historic signs,
color, and significant landscape, archaeological, and natural features of the
area.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B) below, the Commission shall have
no jurisdiction over interior arrangement and shall take no action under this
section except to prevent the construction, reconstruction, alteration,
restoration, moving, or demolition of buildings, structures, appurtenant
fixtures, or outdoor advertising signs which would be incongruous with the
special character of the historic property.
   (B)   Interior spaces. Notwithstanding division (A) above, jurisdiction of
the Commission over interior spaces shall be limited to specific interior
features of architectural, artistic, or historical significance in publicly
owned landmarks; and of privately owned historic landmarks for which consent
for interior review has been given by the owner. The consent of an owner for
interior review shall bind future owners and/or successors in title, provided
the consent has been filed in the office of the Register of Deeds of the county
in which the property is located and indexed according to the name of the owner
of the property in the grantee and grantor indexes. The landmark designation
shall specify the interior features to be reviewed and the specific nature of
the Commission’s jurisdiction over the interior.
   (C)   Rules and standards. Prior to any action to enforce this chapter, the
Commission shall prepare and adopt rules of procedure, and may prepare and
adopt principles and guidelines not inconsistent with this section for new
construction, alterations, additions, moving, and demolition. Prior to issuance
or denial of a certificate of appropriateness, the Commission shall take any
steps as may be reasonably required in this chapter and/or rules of procedure
to inform the owners of any property likely to be materially affected by the
application, and shall give the applicant and the owners an opportunity to be
heard. In cases where the Commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public
hearing concerning the application. All meetings of the Commission shall be
open to the public, in accordance with G.S. Chapter 143, Article 33C.
   (D)   Time for review. All applications for certificates of appropriateness
shall be reviewed and acted upon within a reasonable time, not to exceed 180
days from the date the application for a certificate of appropriateness is
filed, as defined by this chapter or the Commission’s rules of procedure. As
part of its review procedure, the Commission may view the premises and seek the
advice of the Division of Archives and History or any other expert advice as it
may deem necessary under the circumstances.
   (E)   Appeals.
      (1)   Appeals of administrative decisions allowed by regulation may be
made to the Commission.
      (2)   All decisions of the Commission in granting or denying a
Certificate of Appropriateness may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment in
the nature of certiorari within times prescribed for appeals of administrative
decisions in G.S. § 160D-405(d). To the extent applicable, the provisions of
G.S. § 160D-1402 apply to appeals in the nature of certiorari to the Board of
Adjustment.
      (3)   Appeals from the Board of Adjustment may be made pursuant to G.S. §
160D-1402.
      (4)   Petitions for judicial review shall be taken within times
prescribed for appeal of quasi-judicial decisions in G.S. § 160D-1405. Appeals
in any such case shall be heard by the Lincoln County Superior Court.
   (F)   Public buildings. All of the provisions of this section are hereby
made applicable to construction, alteration, moving, and demolition by the
state, its political subdivisions, agencies, and instrumentalities, provided,
however, they shall not apply to interiors of buildings or structures owned by
the state. The state and its agencies shall have a right of appeal to the State
Historical Commission or any successor agency assuming its responsibilities
under G.S. § 121-12(a) from any decision of a local Historic Preservation
Commission. The Commission shall render its decision within 30 days from the
date that the notice of appeal by the state is received by it. The current
edition of the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation and
Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings shall be the sole principles
and guidelines used in reviewing applications of the state for certificates of
appropriateness. The decision of the Commission shall be final and binding upon
both the state and the Historic Preservation Commission.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 153.061 DELAY IN DEMOLITION OF HISTORIC PROPERTIES.
   (A)   An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the
demolition, destruction, or relocation of a designated landmark may not be
denied, except as provided in division (C) below. However, the effective date
of such a certificate may be delayed for a period of up to 365 days from the
date of approval. The maximum period of delay authorized by this section shall
be reduced by the Commission where it finds that the owner would suffer extreme
hardship or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use of or return from the
property by virtue of the delay. During the period the Historic Preservation
Commission shall negotiate with the owner and with any other parties in an
effort to find a means of preserving the building site. If the Commission has
voted to recommend designation of a property as a landmark and final
designation has not been made by the local governing board, the demolition or
destruction of any building, site, or structure located on the property of the
proposed historic property may be delayed by the Commission or planning agency
for a period of up to 180 days or until the local governing board takes final
action on the designation, whichever occurs first.
   (B)   The governing board may enact an ordinance to prevent the demolition
by neglect of any designated historic property (landmark). The ordinance shall
provide appropriate safeguards to protect property owners from undue economic
hardship.
   (C)   An application for a certificate of appropriateness authorizing the
demolition or destruction of a building, site, or structure determined by the
State Historic Preservation office as having statewide significance as defined
in the criteria of the National Register of Historic Places may be denied,
except where the Commission finds that the owner would suffer extreme hardship
or be permanently deprived of all beneficial use or return by virtue of the
denial.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 153.062 CERTAIN CHANGES NOT PROHIBITED.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the ordinary
maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on a historic
property that does not involve a change in design, material, or outer
appearance thereof, nor to prevent the construction, reconstruction,
alteration, restoration, demolition, or removal of any such feature when a
building inspector or similar official certifies to the Commission that the
action is required for the public safety because of an unsafe or dangerous
condition. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent a property owner from
making any use of his or her property not prohibited by other statutes,
ordinances, or regulations.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992)
§ 153.063 REQUIRED PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Application submitted to appropriate administrative official. An
application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be obtained from and,
when completed, filed with the appropriate administrative official.
Applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be considered by the
Commission at its next regular meeting, provided they have been filed, complete
in form and content, at least 21 calendar days before the regularly scheduled
meeting of the Commission; otherwise, consideration shall be deferred until the
following meeting.
   (B)   Contents of application. The Commission shall, by uniform rule in its
rules of procedure, require data as are reasonably necessary to determine the
nature of the application. An application for a certificate of appropriateness
shall not be considered complete until all required data have been submitted.
   (C)   Notification of Historic Preservation Commission. Upon receipt of an
application, the official shall notify the Commission members at least seven
calendar days before the regularly scheduled meeting.
   (D)   Notification of affected property owners. Prior to issuance or denial
of a certificate of appropriateness, the Commission shall take the steps as may
be reasonably required in this chapter and/or rules of procedure to inform the
owners of any property likely to be materially affected by the application and
shall give the applicant and the owners an opportunity to be heard.
   (E)   Public hearing. In cases where the Commission deems it necessary, it
may hold a public hearing concerning the application.
   (F)   Commission action on application.
      (1)   The Commission shall take action on the application and in doing so
shall apply the review criteria, contained in §§
153.075 and
153.076.
      (2)   The Commission's action on the application shall be approval,
approval with modifications, or disapproval.
      (3)   Prior to final action on an application, the Commission, using the
guidelines in §§
153.075 and
153.076, shall make findings of fact indicating the extent to which the
application is or is not in compliance with the review criteria.
   (G)   Reasons for Commission's action to appear in minutes. The Commission
shall cause to be entered into the minutes of its meeting the reasons for its
actions, whether it be approval, approval with modifications, or denial.
   (H)   Time limits. If the Commission fails to take final action upon any
application within 60 days after the complete application is submitted to the
Commission, the application shall be deemed to be approved.
   (I)   Submission of new application. If the Commission determines that a
certificate of appropriateness should not be issued, a new application
affecting the same property may be submitted only if substantial change is made
in plans for the proposed construction, reconstruction, alteration,
restoration, or moving.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
REVIEW CRITERIA
§ 153.075 INTENT.
   It is the intention of these regulations to ensure, insofar as possible,
that changes in designated properties shall be in harmony with reasons for
designation.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992)
§ 153.076 FORM AND APPEARANCE.
   (A)   Generally. The following criteria shall be considered, when relevant,
by the Commission in reviewing applications for a certificate of
appropriateness.
   (B)   List of criteria.
      (1)   Lot coverage, defined as the percentage of lot area covered by
primary structures;
      (2)   Setback, defined as the distance from the lot lines to the building
(s);
      (3)   Building height;
      (4)   Spacing of buildings, defined as the distance between adjacent
buildings;
      (5)   Building materials;
      (6)   Proportion, shape, positioning, location, pattern, and sizes of any
elements of fenestration;
      (7)   Surface textures;
      (8)   Roof shapes, forms, and materials;
      (9)   Use of local or regional architectural traditions;
      (10)   General form and proportions of buildings and structures, and
relationship of any additions to the main structure;
      (11)   Expression of architectural detailing, such as lintels, cornices,
brick bond, and foundation materials;
      (12)   Orientation of the building to the street;
      (13)   Scale, determined by the size of the units of construction and
architectural details in relation to the size of humans and also by the
relationship of the building mass to adjoining open space and nearby buildings
and structures;
      (14)   Proportion of width to height of the total building facade;
      (15)   Effect of trees and other landscape elements;
      (16)   Appurtenant fixtures and other features such as lighting;
      (17)   Structural condition and soundness;
      (18)   Walls, physical ingredients, such as brick, stone, or wood walls,
wrought-iron fences, evergreen landscape masses, building facades, or
combinations of these;
      (19)   Color;
      (20)   Ground cover or paving; and
      (21)   Maintenance of pedestrian scale and orientation as well as
provision for safe pedestrian movement.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992)
CONDITIONS TO CERTAIN APPROVALS
§ 153.090 AUTHENTIC RESTORATION OR RECONSTRUCTION.
   In the event that the Historic Preservation Commission, in reviewing an
owner’s proposed find that a building or structure for which a building permit
is required is to be an authentic restoration or reconstruction of a building
or structure which existed at the same location but does not meet zoning
requirements, the building or structure may be authorized to be restored or
reconstructed at the same location where the original building or structure was
located, provided the Board of Adjustment authorizes the restoration or
reconstruction and no use other than that permitted in the district in which it
is located is made of the property. The conditions as may be set by the
Historic Preservation Commission and the Board of Adjustment shall be
conditions for the issuance of the building permit.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 153.105 AUTHORITY TO ACQUIRE HISTORIC PROPERTIES.
   Within the limits of its jurisdiction, the Historic Preservation Commission
(and with the approval of the local governing board) may acquire property
designated as historic property, and may pay therefore out of any funds which
may be appropriated for that purpose. The county, pursuant to G.S. § 160D-942
(3), has the authority to acquire, maintain, manage, repair, restore, or
dispose of any buildings or structure designated as a historic property in any
order adopted pursuant to this chapter. In the event the property is acquired
under this section but is not used for some other governmental purpose, it
shall be deemed to be a MUSEUM under the provisions of G.S. § 160A-488,
notwithstanding the fact that the property may be or remain in private use, so
long as the property is made reasonable accessible to and open for visitation
by the general public.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 153.106 OWNERSHIP OF PROPERTY.
   All lands, buildings, structures, sites, areas, or objects acquired by funds
appropriated by the local government shall be acquired in the name of the local
government, unless otherwise provided by the Board of Commissioners. So long as
owned by the local government, historic properties and landmarks may be
maintained by or under the supervision and control of the local government.
However, all lands, buildings, or structures acquired by the Historic
Preservation Commission from funds other than those appropriated by the local
government may be acquired and held in the name of the Historic Preservation
Commission, the local government, or both in accordance with the General
Statutes of North Carolina as they may apply and as approved by the Board of
Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
§ 153.107 RECEIPT AND EXPENDITURE OF FUNDS.
   The Commission, within the limits of funds appropriated for its use, may
expend funds for the operation of the Commission affairs and for the
acquisition, restoration, operation, and management of historic buildings,
structures, sites, areas, or objects designated as historic sites, or of land
on which historic buildings or structures are located or to which they may be
removed.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992)
§ 153.108 STAFF AND TECHNICAL SERVICES.
   The Board of Commissioners will make provisions for the use of staff
personnel, clerical or other as may be needed from time to time, and for the
provision of procurement of technical services as it deems appropriate based
upon the presented information.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992)
§ 153.109 CONFLICT WITH OTHER LAWS.
   Whenever this chapter requires a longer waiting period or imposes other
higher standards with respect to a designated historic property than are
established under any other statute, charter provision, regulation, or
ordinance, this chapter shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other
statute, charter provision, ordinance, or regulation require a longer waiting
period or impose other higher standards, such other charter provision,
ordinance, or regulation shall govern.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992)
§ 153.110 REMEDIES.
   In case any building, structure, site, area, or object designated a historic
property is about to be demolished whether as the result of deliberate neglect
or otherwise, materially altered, remodeled, or removed, except in compliance
with this chapter, the Board of Commissioners or Historic Preservation
Commission may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the
unlawful demolition, material alteration, remodeling, or removal, to restrain,
correct, or abate the violation, or to prevent any illegal act of conduct with
respect to the historic property.
(Ord. passed 9-8-1992; Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
CHAPTER 154: WATERSHED PROTECTION
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Adoption by reference
§ 154.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The county’s watershed protections regulations as set forth in the Lincoln
County Unified Development Ordinances, as amended, are hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Section
   
155.01   Adoption by reference
§ 155.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The county’s subdivision regulations as set forth in the Lincoln County
Unified Development Ordinances, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
CHAPTER 156: ZONING CODE
Section
   
156.01   Adoption by reference
§ 156.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The county’s zoning regulations as set forth in the Lincoln County Unified
Development Ordinances, as amended, are hereby adopted by reference and
incorporated herein as if set out in full.
(Ord. passed 3-21-2022)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
      Table
         
I.   FRANCHISES
TABLE I: FRANCHISES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
-        11-6-2000   Cable franchise granted to Charter Communications, LLC
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
G.S. Cite Code Section
G.S. Cite                               Code Section
1A-1, Rule 4                            152.18,
                                        152.99
7A-250                                  151.44
Ch. 14, Art. 55                         92.12.6
                                        10.99,
                                        30.05,
                                        50.05 -
                                        50.07,
                                        52.11 -
                                        52.13,
                                        52.21 -
                                        52.25,
                                        52.30 -
                                        52.33,
                                        52.35 -
                                        52.37,
                                        52.80 -
                                        52.84,
14-4                                    52.99,
                                        70.05,
                                        70.07,
                                        70.08,
                                        71.04,
                                        91.02,
                                        92.06 -
                                        92.10,
                                        92.13,
                                        92.19,
                                        92.20,
                                        93.07,
                                        93.09,
                                        93.99,
                                        115.01
14-4(b)20                               71.99
14-71                                   113.08
14-190.14                               114.01
14-288.1                                37.067
14-288.20A                              32.067
14-362.2                                92.11.2
14-409.39(2)                            32.067
14-409.45 – 14-409.47                 110.03
14-414                                  95.007,
                                        95.043
19A-32.1                                92.15
20-4.01(12b)                         71.02
20-79.4                                 70.08
25-3-506                                113.06
42-42                                   95.082
53A-442                                 92.04
55-420(8)                               113.21
62A-5 et seq.                           30.04
62A-40 et seq.                          30.04
Ch. 63, Art. 4                          150.031
Ch. 66, Art. 45                         113.03,
                                        113.99
66-387(2)                               113.21
66-387(4)                               113.21
66-391                                  113.22
66-392                                  113.23
                                        113.03,
                                        113.05,
66-396                                  113.07,
                                        113.08,
                                        113.22,
                                        113.23
66-396(b)x                              113.08
66-406(1)                               113.21
66-410                                  113.24
66-413                                  113.24
66-421                                  113.25
66-422                                  113.25
66-429                                  113.25
67-4.1 et seq.                          92.11.7
67-30                                   92.05
67-30 et seq.                        92.03
Ch. 74, Art. 7                          152.04,
                                        152.10
75A-14.1                                130.01
75A-18                                  130.01
Ch. 89C                                 152.16
95-173 – 95-218                       95.077
105-277.1                               52.93
105-277.2 – 105-277.7                 150.007
105-277.2(1)                            150.007
105-277.2(2)                            150.007
105-277.2(3)                            150.007
106-403                                 92.13
106-735 – 106-744                     150.003
106-740                                 150.010
106-744(e)                              150.005
113A-1 et seq.                          152.06
113A-54.1(b)                            152.06
113A-54.1(e)                            152.06
113A-56(a)                              152.04
113A-57                                 152.07
113A-57(2)                              152.06
113A-57(3)                              152.20
113A-61(c)                              152.17
113A-61.1                               152.06
                                        152.03,
113A-64                                 152.18,
                                        152.99
113A-64(a)(3)                           152.99
113A-64(b)                              152.06
115C-457.2                              152.99
121-12(a)                               153.060
121-35                                  150.007
Ch. 130A                                92.10
Ch. 130A, Art. 6                        Ch. 92
Ch. 130A, Art. 9                        151.05
130A-185                                92.10
130A-190                                92.10,
                                        92.15
130A-196                                92.10
130A-197                                92.10
130A-198                                92.10
130A-290                                52.10,
                                        52.35
130A-290(a)(6)                          151.05
130A-290(a)(35)                         151.05
130A-290(a)(36)                         151.05
130A-294(a)(5c)                         52.38
30A-309, Pt. 2B                         52.13
130A-309.10(f)                          52.25
131E-156                                112.02
131E-157                                112.07
131E-158                                112.02,
                                        112.06
131E-159                                112.06
131E-161                                112.02
Ch. 132                                 92.16
132-1                                   32.035
136-18                                  92.13
136-141 – 136-155                     91.18
Ch. 139                                 152.03
Ch. 143, Art. 9                         94.01,
                                        94.02
Ch. 143, Art. 21, Pt. 6                 151.01
Ch. 143, Art. 21A                       150.060
Ch. 143, Art. 33C                       153.060
143-139                                 95.134
143-140                                 95.007,
                                        95.023
143-141                                 95.007,
                                        95.023
143-143.15                              151.56
143-213(18)                             51.002
143-215.1                               51.002,
                                        51.051
143.215.1(b)                            51.051
143-215.3(a)(14)                        51.002
143-215.6B                              51.121
143-518(a)(5)                           112.01
Ch. 150                                 152.99
Ch. 153A                                51.024,
                                        150.003
153A-49                                 10.19,
                                        10.20
                                        10.99,
153A-121                                92.12.2,
                                        110.03,
                                        151.01
153A-121(a)                             32.067
                                        10.99,
                                        50.05 -
                                        50.07,
153A-123                                52.99,
                                        91.99,
                                        93.99,
                                        110.03,
                                        150.058
                                        91.20,
                                        91.22 -
                                        91.26,
                                        91.38,
153A-123(b1)                            91.39,
                                        110.25,
                                        110.32,
                                        110.33,
                                        110.41,
                                        110.42
153A-123(d)                             91.99
153A-123(e)                             52.99
153A-129                                110.03
153A-133                                91.18,
                                        110.03
153A-136(a)(3)                          52.34
153A-136(a)(4)                          52.34
153A-238                                93.01
153A-239.1                              93.10
153A-275                                51.001
153A-292                                52.93
153A-293                                52.93
Ch. 160A, Art. 10 (§§ 160A-216 et seq.91.42
160A-174(a)                             32.067
160A-312                                51.001
160A-460                                92.03
160A-488                                153.105
Ch. 160D, Art. 11                       94.01
160D-303                                153.015
160D-405                                150.082
160D-405(d)                             153.060
160D-923                                151.01
160D-942                                153.021
160D-942(3)                             153.105
160D-944                                153.042,
                                        153.043
160D-1115                               110.12
160D-1118 - 160D-1124                   95.132
160D-1127                               95.134
160D-1201(b)                            91.35
160D-1203                               91.39
160D-1203(5)                            91.41
160D-1203(7)                            91.42
160D-1208(d)                            91.39
160D-1208(e)                            91.39
160D-1401                               150.040
160D-1402                               153.060
160D-1405                               153.060
166A-19.15                              32.031,
                                        32.034
166A-19.22                              32.003
166A-19.31                              32.066
                                        
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        6-18-2007   30.01
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
-        - -         150.055 –
                     150.062
-        - -         51.024
                     91.01 –
-        - -         91.04,
                     91.99
                     95.001 –
                     95.007,
                     95.020 –
                     95.026,
                     95.040 –
                     95.046,
                     95.060,
                     95.061,
                     95.075 –
-        - -         95.082,
                     95.095 –
                     95.099,
                     95.110,
                     95.125 –
                     95.133,
                     95.145 –
                     95.149,
                     95.160 –
                     95.163,
                     95.999
-        12-13-1966  130.01
-        4-7-1970    115.01
-        12-4-1972   150.075 –
                     150.081
                     110.25 –
-        3-5-1979    110.42,
                     110.99
-        7-7-1980    114.01
-        6-3-1985    150.077
-        10-19-1987  150.999
-        12-21-1987  30.05
-        2-20-1989   31.01 –
                     31.06
                     91.15 –
-        1-8-1990    91.28,
                     91.99
-        10-8-1990   30.04
-        11-19-1990  150.082
                     113.01 –
-        8-5-1990    113.10,
                     113.99
-        5-4-1992    70.01 –
                     70.12
                     153.001,
                     153.015 –
                     153.021,
                     153.035 –
                     153.048,
-        9-8-1992    153.060 –
                     153.063,
                     153.075,
                     153.076,
                     153.090,
                     153.105 –
                     153.110
-        10-4-1993   30.99
                     51.001,
                     51.002,
                     51.015 –
                     51.024,
                     51.035 –
                     51.038,
                     51.050,
                     51.051,
                     51.065 –
-        8-22-1994   51.077,
                     51.090 –
                     51.092,
                     51.105,
                     51.120 –
                     51.122,
                     51.135,
                     51.150 –
                     51.152,
                     51.999
-        11-6-2000   TSO, Table I
                     50.25 –
-        4-2-2001    50.36,
                     50.99
                     93.01 –
-        4-16-2001   93.11,
                     93.99
                     150.030 –
-        11-5-2001   150.042,
                     150.999
-        10-21-2002  91.27,
                     91.99
-        10-6-2003   112.01 –
                     112.17
-        12-4-2006   91.04,
                     91.99
                     152.01 –
                     152.08,
-        1-22-2007   152.16 –
                     152.20,
                     152.99
-        10-15-2007  150.001 –
                     150.017
                     50.01 –
-        6-4-2007    50.11,
                     50.99
                     151.01 –
                     151.05,
                     151.20 –
                     151.26,
                     151.40 –
-        8-6-2007    151.44,
                     151.55 –
                     151.59,
                     151.70 –
                     151.72,
                     151.99
                     110.01 –
2008-01  7-21-2008   110.13,
                     10.99
2008-06  - -2008     10.99
2009-05  8-3-2009    Adopting Ordinance
                     93.10 -
2010-18  12-16-2010  93.11,
                     93.99
                     152.05,
2012-21  10-1-2012   152.07,
                     152.08
2012-24  11-5-2012   Repealing 30.02
                     90.01 -
-        11-5-2012   90.06,
                     90.99
-        11-19-2012  30.06
-        12-3-2012   30.06
                     96.01 -
-        11-18-2013  96.09,
                     96.99
-        4-21-2014   113.20 -
                     113.25
                     91.01 -
                     91.04,
-        6-6-2014    91.15 -
                     91.28,
                     91.99
                     52.01,
                     52.10 -
                     52.13,
                     52.20 -
                     52.25,
-        9-18-2017   52.30 -
                     52.38,
                     52.80 -
                     52.84,
                     52.93 -
                     52.95,
                     52.99
                     71.01 -
2018-01  12-3-2018   71.04,
                     71.99
                     71.01 -
2019-2   5-6-2019    71.04,
                     71.99
                     92.01 -
                     92.10,
-        6-21-2021   92.13 -
                     92.18,
                     92.99
                     32.001 -
                     32.003,
                     32.031 -
-        3-21-2022   32.037,
                     32.066 -
                     32.070,
                     32.106 -
                     32.109
                     10.99,
                     30.05,
                     30.99,
                     50.05 -
                     50.07,
                     50.27,
                     50.29 -
                     50.32,
                     50.34 -
                     50.36,
                     50.99,
                     51.002,
                     51.015 -
                     51.017,
                     51.020,
                     51.021,
                     51.023,
                     51.024,
                     51.050,
                     51.065,
                     51.066,
                     51.069 -
                     51.073,
                     51.075,
                     51.077,
                     51.105,
                     51.121,
                     51.152,
                     52.11 -
                     52.13,
                     52.21 -
                     52.25,
                     52.30 -
                     52.33,
                     52.35 -
                     52.37,
                     52.80 -
                     52.84,
                     70.03,
                     70.05,
                     70.07,
                     70.08,
                     71.04,
                     71.99,
                     90.05,
                     90.06,
                     91.02,
                     91.20 -
                     91.27,
                     91.35,
                     91.38,
                     91.39,
                     91.41,
                     91.42,
                     91.44,
                     91.99,
                     92.05 -
                     92.10,
                     92.13,
-        3-21-2022   93.04 -
                     93.07,
                     93.09,
                     95.132,
                     110.02,
                     110.06 -
                     110.10,
                     110.12,
                     110.25,
                     110.32,
                     110.34,
                     110.41,
                     110.42,
                     110.99,
                     112.02,
                     112.03,
                     112.12,
                     112.14,
                     113.03,
                     113.05,
                     113.07,
                     113.08,
                     113.22 -
                     113.25,
                     113.99,
                     114.01,
                     115.01,
                     130.01,
                     150.033,
                     150.034,
                     150.036,
                     150.037,
                     150.040,
                     150.058,
                     150.060,
                     150.061,
                     150.077,
                     150.079,
                     150.080,
                     150.082,
                     151.01,
                     151.23,
                     151.43,
                     151.55 -
                     151.59,
                     151.99,
                     153.015 -
                     153.021,
                     153.042,
                     153.043,
                     153.060,
                     153.061,
                     153.063,
                     153.090,
                     153.105,
                     153.106,
                     153.110,
                     154.01,
                     155.01,
                     156.01
-        9-19-2022   96.03
-        12-19-2022  91.50 -
                     91.52
-        12-19-2022  113.25
-        6-19-2023   94.01,
                     94.02
-        6-19-2023   153.045,
                     153.046
-        9-11-2023   93.01,
                     93.07
-        9-19-2022   96.03
-        12-19-2022  91.50 -
                     91.52
-        12-19-2022  113.25
-        6-19-2023   94.01,
                     94.02
-        6-19-2023   153.045,
                     153.046
-        9-11-2023   93.01,
                     93.07
                     91.38,
-        11-6-2023   91.39,
                     91.44
                     95.001 -
                     95.007,
                     95.020 -
                     95.026,
                     95.040 -
                     95.046,
                     95.060,
                     95.061,
                     95.075 -
-        11-6-2023   95.082,
                     95.095 -
                     95.099,
                     95.110,
                     95.125 -
                     95.134,
                     95.145 -
                     95.149,
                     95.160 -
                     95.163,
                     95.999
                     152.01 -
-        12-18-2023  152.20,
                     152.99
-        1-22-2024   30.03
                     70.01,
                     70.03,
-        6-16-2025   70.04,
                     70.06,
                     70.07,
                     70.10
-        8-4-2025    111.01 -
                     111.04
                     152.06,
-        8-4-2025    152.17,
                     152.18,
                     152.99
                     92.01,
                     92.03 -
                     92.10,
                     92.11.1 -
                     92.11.9,
-        9-15-2025   92.13,
                     92.15,
                     92.16,
                     92.18 -
                     92.23,
                     92.99
-        1-5-2026    92.12.1 -
                     92.12.8
                    
 
