MARTIN COUNTY,
NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Current through Ord. passed 12-10-2025
Adopted: October 8, 2014
Effective: October 8, 2014
Published in 2014 by Order of the Board of Commissioners
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
Martin County Officials
_____________________________
Elmo "Butch" Lilley, Chairman
Tommy Bowen, Vice Chairman
Ronnie Smith
Dempsey Bond, Jr.
Joe R. Ayers
County Commissioners
_____________________________
David Bone
County Manager
_____________________________
J. Melvin Bowen
County Attorney
_____________________________
Marion B. Thompson
County Clerk
Martin County Officials
_____________________________
Tommy Bowen, Chairman
Ronnie Smith, Vice Chairman
Elmo "Butch" Lilley
Bob Hyman
Dempsey Bond, Jr.
County Commissioners
_____________________________
David Bone
County Manager
_____________________________
J. Melvin Bowen
County Attorney
_____________________________
Marion B. Thompson
County Clerk
ADOPTING ORDINANCES
ORDINANCE NO. FY 2015-02
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING AND ENACTING A NEW CODE FOR THE COUNTY OF MARTIN, NORTH
CAROLINA; PROVIDING FOR THE REPEAL OF CERTAIN ORDINANCES NOT INCLUDED THEREIN;
PROVIDING A PENALTY FOR THE VIOLATION THEREOF; PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER OF
AMENDING SUCH CODE; AND PROVIDING WHEN SUCH CODE AND THIS ORDINANCE SHALL
BECOME EFFECTIVE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS:
Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, Martin County, North
Carolina," published by Municipal Code Corporation, consisting of chapters 1
through 24, each inclusive, is adopted.
Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or
before June 11, 2014, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued
in force by reference therein, are repealed.
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed
to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent
ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance.
Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted
of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or
regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished in
accordance with code Section 1-6. Each act of violation and each day upon which
any such violation shall continue or occur shall constitute a separate offense.
The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly
provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such
penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty
prescribed above, the county may pursue other remedies such as abatement of
nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in such form as to
indicate the intention of the county to make the same a part of the Code shall
be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code
includes the additions and amendments.
Section 6. Ordinances adopted after June 11, 2014, that amend or refer to
ordinances that have been codified in the Code, shall be construed as if they
amend or refer to like provisions of the Code.
Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective immediately.
Passed and adopted by the Martin County Board of Commissioners this 8th day of
October , 2014. Tommy Bowen Chair
ATTEST: Marion B. Thompson County Clerk
  
1st Reading: September 10, 2014
2nd Reading: October 8, 2014
Board Action: Unanimously Approved & Adopted
  
Certificate of Adoption
I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at
the regular meeting of the Board of Commissioners, held on the 8th  day of
October , 2014. Marion B. Thompson County Clerk
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE
The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine
what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement.
Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code
Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and
permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered
"Omitted."
In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code
of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's
historical evolution.
Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No.
Ord. No.              Date Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No.
Supp. No. 1
Ord. of 10-8-14(1)    10- 8-2014   Included         1
FY 2015-02            10- 8-2014   Included         1
Ord. of 12-1-2014(1)  12- 1-2014   Included         1
Ord. of 12-1-2014(2)  12- 1-2014   Included         1
Supp. No. 2
Ord. of 4-8-2015(1)   4- 8-2015    Included         2
Ord. of 5-13-2015(1)  5-13-2015    Included         2
Ord. of 5-13-2015(2)  5-13-2015    Included         2
Supp. No. 3
Ord. of 9-13-2017(1)  9-13-2017    Included         3
Supp. No. 4
Ord. of 08-08-2018(1) 8- 8-2018    Included         4
Ord. of 09-12-2018(1) 9-12-2018    Included         4
Supp. No. 5
Ord. of 09-11-2019(1) 9-11-2019    Included         5
Supp. No. 6
Ord. of 09-09-2020(1) 9-9-2020     Include          6
S-1
- -                   8- 9-2023    Include          S-1
- -                   - -          Include          S-1
- -                   - -          Include          S-1
- -                   9-13-2023    Include          S-1
- -                   12-10-2025   Include          S-1
 
PART I
SESSION LAWS 1
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA
SESSION 2011
SESSION LAW 2012-111
HOUSE BILL 1122
AN ACT TO VALIDATE CERTAIN LEVIES AND COLLECTION OF FIRE DISTRICT TAXES IN
MARTIN COUNTY AND TO ALLOW MARTIN COUNTY TO ABOLISH BY RESOLUTION ITS CHAPTER
69 FIRE PROTECTION DISTRICTS UPON ESTABLISHMENT OF FIRE PROTECTION SERVICE
DISTRICTS UNDER CHAPTER 153A OF THE GENERAL STATUTES.
The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:
SECTION 1. All collections of fire protection district revenues under Article
3A of Chapter 69 of the General Statutes by Martin County since 1956 are valid
and lawful, without regard to which fire protection district (and corresponding
fire tax rate) those revenues were collected from, and without regard to which
fire department those revenues were allocated.
SECTION 2. Subject to the provisions of G.S. 105-378, the levies of fire
protection district taxes by Martin County since 1956 that remain uncollected
are valid and lawful, and the lien for such taxes remains, without regard to
which fire protection district (and corresponding fire tax rate) those levies
attached, and without regard to which fire department revenues (when collected)
are to be allocated.
SECTION 3. Pending action by Martin County to establish fire protection service
districts under Part 1 of Article 16 of Chapter 153A of the General Statutes,
the boundaries of the fire protection districts in Martin County under Article
3A of Chapter 69 of the General Statutes are as defined by a district map
prepared to delineate revised district boundaries and approved prior to July 1,
2012, by the Board of Commissioners of Martin County.
SECTION 4. Upon establishment of fire protection service districts in Martin
County under Part 1 of Article 16 of Chapter 153A of the General Statutes with
a limitation on the maximum rate under G.S. 153A-309.2, the Board of
Commissioners of Martin County by resolution may abolish the corresponding fire
protection districts in Martin County under Article 3A of Chapter 69 of the
General Statutes as of the effective date of the creation of the new districts.
SECTION 5. This act is effective when it becomes law.
In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 28th day of
June, 2012.
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA
SESSION 2007
SESSION LAW 2008-50
HOUSE BILL 2464
AN ACT TO PROHIBIT HUNTING FROM THE RIGHT-OF-WAY IN MARTIN COUNTY.
The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:
SECTION 1. The following acts are repealed:
(1)   Chapter 257 of the 1973 Session Laws, as amended by Chapter 89 of the
1977 Session Laws;
(2)   Chapter 1002 of the 1973 Session Laws;
(3)   Chapter 1154 of the 1979 Session Laws; and
(4)   Section 1 of Chapter 810 of the 1989 Session Laws.
SECTION 2. It is unlawful to hunt with or discharge a firearm on, from, or
across the right-of-way of any highway or public road.
SECTION 3. It is unlawful to possess a loaded firearm outside the passenger
compartment of a vehicle while on the roadway or highway right-of-way, unless
the person is the owner or lessee of the land abutting the right-of-way or has
on his person the written permission of the owner or lessee of the land
abutting the right-of-way to hunt on the land, dated within the last 12 months,
or the person has a concealed carry permit and is only carrying a loaded,
concealed weapon.
SECTION 4. Violation of this act is a Class 3 misdemeanor.
SECTION 5. This act is enforceable by law enforcement officers of the Wildlife
Resources Commission, by sheriffs and deputy sheriffs, and by peace officers
with general subject matter jurisdiction.
SECTION 6. This act applies only to Martin County.
SECTION 7. This act becomes effective October 1, 2008, and applies to offenses
occurring on or after that date.
In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 3rd day of July,
2008.
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA
SESSION 2005
SESSION LAW 2006-127
HOUSE BILL 350
AN ACT To Authorize Martin County To Levy An Additional Three Percent Room
Occupancy And Tourism Development Tax And To Make Other Administrative Changes.
The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:
SECTION 1. S.L. 1991-80 reads as rewritten:
"Section 1. Occupancy Tax.- (a) Authorization and scope. Scope. - The Martin
County Board of Commissioners may by resolution, after not less than 10 days'
public notice and after a public hearing held pursuant thereto, levy a room
occupancy tax of up to three percent (3%) of the gross receipts derived from
the rental of any room, lodging, or similar accommodation furnished by a hotel,
motel, inn, tourist camp, or similar place within the county that is subject to
sales tax imposed by the State under G.S. 105-164.4(a)(3). This tax is in
addition to any State or local sales tax. This tax does not apply to
accommodations furnished by nonprofit charitable, educational, or religious
organizations, when furnished in furtherance of their nonprofit purpose, by
summer camps, or by businesses that offer to rent no more than five units.
(a1) Authorization of Additional Tax. - In addition to the tax authorized by
subsection (a) of this section, the Martin County Board of Commissioners may
levy an additional room occupancy tax of up to three percent (3%) of the gross
receipts derived from the rental of accommodations taxable under subsection (a)
of this section. The levy, collection, administration, and repeal of the tax
authorized by this subsection must be in accordance with the provisions of this
section. Martin County may not levy a tax under this subsection unless it also
levies the tax authorized under subsection (a) of this section.
(b) Collection. Every operator of a business subject to the tax levied under
this section shall, on and after the effective date of the levy of the tax,
collect the tax. This tax shall be collected as part of the charge for
furnishing a taxable accommodation. The tax shall be stated and charged
separately from the sales records, and shall be paid by the purchaser to the
operator of the business as trustee for and on account of the county. The tax
shall be added to the sales price and shall be passed on to the purchaser
instead of being borne by the operator of the business. The county shall
design, print, and furnish to all appropriate businesses and persons in the
county the necessary forms for filing returns and instructions to ensure the
full collection of the tax.
(c) Administration. The county shall administer a tax levied under this
section. A tax levied under this section is due and payable to the county
finance officer in monthly installments on or before the fifteenth day of the
month following the month in which the tax accrues. Every person, firm,
corporation, or association liable for the tax shall, on or before the
fifteenth day of each month, prepare and render a return on a form prescribed
by the county. The return shall state the total gross receipts derived in the
preceding month from rentals upon which the tax is levied.
A return filed with the county finance officer under this section is not a
public record as defined by G.S. 132-1 and may not be disclosed except as
required by law. - A tax levied under this section shall be levied,
administered, collected, and repealed as provided in G.S. 153A-155. The
penalties provided in G.S. 153A-155 apply to a tax levied under this section.
(d) Penalties. A person, firm, corporation, or association who fails or refuses
to file the return required by this section shall be subject to and pay a
penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) for each day's omission. In case of failure or
refusal to file the return or pay the tax for a period of 30 days after the
time required for filing the return or for paying the tax, there shall be an
additional tax, as a penalty, of five percent (5%) of the tax due in addition
to any other penalty, with an additional tax of five percent (5%) for each
additional month or fraction thereof until the tax is paid. The board of
commissioners may, for good cause shown, compromise or forgive the additional
tax penalties imposed by this subsection.
Any person who willfully attempts in any manner to evade a tax imposed under
this section or who willfully fails to pay the tax or make and file a return
shall, in addition to all other penalties provided by law, be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand
dollars ($1,000), imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both.
(e) Distribution and use Use of tax revenue. Tax Revenue. - Martin County
shall, on a monthly quarterly basis, remit the net proceeds of the occupancy
tax to the Martin County Travel and Tourism Development Authority. The
Authority may spend funds remitted to it under this subsection only to further
the development of travel and tourism and cultural, recreational, and historic
activities in Martin County through advertising and promotion, to sponsor
tourist-oriented events and activities in Martin County, and to finance
tourist-related capital activities and projects in Martin County. As used in
this subsection, "net proceeds" means gross The Authority shall use at least
two-thirds of the funds remitted to it under this subsection to promote travel
and tourism in Martin County and shall use the remainder for tourism-related
expenditures.
The following definitions apply in this act:
(1) Net proceeds. - Gross proceeds less the cost to the county of administering
and collecting the tax, which may tax, as determined by the finance officer,
not to exceed three percent (3%) of the first five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000) of gross proceeds. proceeds collected each year and one percent (1%)
of the remaining gross receipts collected each year.
(2) Promote travel and tourism. - To advertise or market an area or activity,
publish and distribute pamphlets and other materials, conduct market research,
or engage in similar promotional activities that attract tourists or business
travelers to the area. The term includes administrative expenses incurred in
engaging in the listed activities.
(3) Tourism-related expenditures. - Expenditures that, in the judgment of the
Tourism Development Authority, are designed to increase the use of lodging
facilities, meeting facilities, or convention facilities in a county or to
attract tourists or business travelers to the county. The term includes
tourism-related capital expenditures.
(f) Effective date of levy. A tax levied under this section shall become
effective on the date specified in the resolution levying the tax. That date
must be the first day of a calendar month, however, and may not be earlier than
the first day of the second month after the date the resolution is adopted.
(g) Repeal. A tax levied under this section may be repealed by a resolution
adopted by the Martin County Board of Commissioners. Repeal of a tax levied
under this section shall become effective on the first day of a month and may
not become effective until the end of the fiscal year in which the repeal
resolution was adopted. Repeal of a tax levied under this section does not
affect a liability for a tax that was attached before the effective date of the
repeal, nor does it affect a right to a refund of a tax that accrued before the
effective date of the repeal.
"Sec. 2. Martin County Travel and Tourism Development Authority. - (a)
Appointment and membership. Membership. - When the board of commissioners
adopts a resolution levying a room occupancy tax under this act, it shall also
adopt a resolution creating the Martin County Travel and Tourism Development
Authority, which shall be a public authority under the Local Government Budget
and Fiscal Control Act. The resolution shall provide that the Authority shall
be composed of the following 12 members:
(1)   A Martin County Commissioner appointed by the Martin County Board of
Commissioners.
(2)   Two owners or operators of restaurants, motels, hotels, or other taxable
accommodations in Martin County that have at least five units, nominated by
representatives of this industry, both to be appointed by the Martin County
Board of Commissioners.
(3)   One member selected by the Martin County Chamber of Commerce to be
appointed by the Martin County Board of Commissioners.
(4)   One member appointed by the Martin County Board of Commissioners selected
from the Martin County Economic Development Commission.
(5)   Five members, one appointed by each member of the Martin County Board of
Commissioners.
(6)   One member appointed by the Martin County Board of Commissioners selected
from the Martin County Historical Society.
(7)   One member appointed by the Martin County Board of Commissioners selected
from the Robersonville Downtown Merchants Association.
The appointees shall be made from throughout the County by the Martin County
Board of Commissioners. At least one-third of the members must be individuals
affiliated with businesses that collect the tax in the county and at least one-
half of the members must be individuals currently active in the promotion of
travel and tourism in the county. All members of the Authority shall serve
without compensation. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original
appointments. Members appointed to fill vacancies shall serve for the remainder
of the unexpired term. The Authority shall elect each year from its membership
a Chair. No member may serve as Chair more than two one-year terms in
succession. The Authority shall meet at the call of the Chair or of any three
members and shall adopt rules of procedure to govern its meetings. The Finance
Officer for Martin County shall be the ex officio finance officer of the
Authority.
(b) Terms of office. - Members of the Authority shall serve three-year terms
except that the Martin County Commissioner appointed pursuant to subdivision
(a)(1) shall be appointed yearly by the chairman of the board of commissioners
and initial appointees shall serve the following terms:
(1)   The Martin County Commissioner appointed pursuant to subdivision (a)(1):
one year.
(2)   One representative of the motel and restaurant industry appointed
pursuant to subdivision (a)(2): one year.
(3)   One representative of the motel and restaurant industry appointed
pursuant to subdivision (a)(2): three years.
(4)   The representative of the Martin County Chamber of Commerce appointed
pursuant to subdivision (a)(3): three years.
(5)   The representative of the Martin County Economic Development Commission
appointed pursuant to subdivision (a)(4): two years.
(6)   Three members appointed by Martin County Commissioners pursuant to
subdivision (a)(5): one year.
(7)   Two representatives appointed by Martin County Commissioners pursuant to
subdivision (a)(5): three years.
(8)   The representative of the Martin County Historical Society appointed
pursuant to subdivision (a)(6): two years.
(9)   The representative of the Robersonville Downtown Merchants Association
appointed pursuant to subdivision (a)(7): three years.
(c)]Limitation on terms. - No member of the Authority shall serve more than two
consecutive three-year terms.
(d) Powers and duties. The Authority may contract with any person, firm, or
agency to assist it in carrying out the purposes for which the tax proceeds
levied by this act may be expended. Duties. - The Authority shall expend the
net proceeds of the tax levied under this act for the purposes provided in this
act. The Authority shall promote travel, tourism, and conventions in the
county, sponsor tourist-related events and activities in the county, and
finance tourist-related capital projects in the county. The board of county
commissioners may from time to time determine an appropriate percentage not to
exceed five percent (5%) of net proceeds that may be expended for
administrative services.
(e) Reports. - The Authority shall report quarterly and at the close of the
fiscal year to the board of commissioners on its receipts and expenditures for
the preceding quarter and for the year in such detail as the board may require.
(f) Notwithstanding the provisions of this act, the board of commissioners may
abolish the Martin County Travel and Tourism Authority and itself function and
carry out the duties of the Authority provided in this act.
"Sec. 3. This act is effective upon ratification."
SECTION 2. G.S. 153A-155(g) reads as rewritten:
"(g) This section applies only to Alleghany, Anson, Brunswick, Buncombe,
Cabarrus, Camden, Carteret, Craven, Cumberland, Currituck, Dare, Davie, Duplin,
Durham, Franklin, Granville, Halifax, Madison, Martin, Montgomery, Nash, New
Hanover, Pasquotank, Pender, Person, Randolph, Richmond, Rockingham, Rowan,
Scotland, Stanly, Transylvania, Tyrrell, Vance, and Washington Counties, to
Watauga County District U, and to the Township of Averasboro in Harnett
County."
SECTION 3. This act is effective when it becomes law.
In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 19th day of
July, 2006.
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA
SESSION 1997
SESSION LAW 1998-145
HOUSE BILL 1613
AN ACT ABOLISHING THE OFFICE OF CORONER IN MARTIN AND ROCKINGHAM COUNTIES.
The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:
Section 1. The office of coroner in Martin and Rockingham Counties is
abolished.
Section 2. Chapter 152 of the General Statutes is not applicable to Martin and
Rockingham Counties.
Section 3. This act becomes effective as to Martin County upon the expiration
of the term of the current coroner in Martin County.
Section 4. This act becomes effective as to Rockingham County when it becomes
law.
In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 15th day of
September, 1998.
GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF NORTH CAROLINA
1989 SESSION
CHAPTER 810
HOUSE BILL 2131
AN ACT TO PROHIBIT THE DISCHARGE OF A FIREARM FROM CERTAIN ROADS IN MARTIN
COUNTY AND TO REGULATE THE DISCHARGE OF A RIFLE OF GREATER THAN .22 CALIBERS IN
MARTIN COUNTY.
The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:
Section 1. [Repealed by SESSION LAW 2008-50]
Sec. 2. It is unlawful to discharge a rifle of greater than .22 calibers,
except from an elevated position in which the rifle is a minimum of eight feet
above ground level.
Sec. 3. Violation of this act constitutes a misdemeanor punishable for a first
conviction by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than
seventy-five dollars ($75.00), and punishable for a second or subsequent
conviction by a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by
imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both, in the discretion of the court.
Sec. 4. This act is enforceable by law enforcement officers of the Wildlife
Resources Commission, by sheriffs and deputy sheriffs, and by peace officers
with general subject matter jurisdiction.
Sec. 5. This act applies only to Martin County.
Sec. 6. This act shall become effective October 1, 1990, and shall apply to
offenses occurring on or after that date.
In the General Assembly read three times and ratified this the 20th day of
June, 1990.
NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL ASSEMBLY
1979 SESSION
CHAPTER 1135
HOUSE BILL 1626
AN ACT TO PERMIT CERTAIN COUNTIES, CITIES AND TOWNS TO ENTER INTO LONG-TERM
CONTRACTS FOR DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE.
Whereas, the Boards of County Commissioners of the counties listed in Section 6
of this act, and the Councils of many of the cities and towns located in such
counties, have become increasingly concerned about the costs of collection and
disposal of solid waste generated by private businesses and homes. The labor
and transportation costs to pick up solid waste and transport them to an
incinerator or landfill are skyrocketing. Land costs for landfills, as with all
land costs, are rising rapidly. Indications are that labor, transportation and
land costs will continue to spiral. Environmental regulations relating to
disposal of solid waste, although certainly beneficial to our citizens, add
substantial cost to the process of solid waste disposal. Material additional
expenditures must be incurred in the immediate future to prevent leaching in
many landfills. Public opposition to landfills is growing; and
Whereas, the Boards of County Commissioners in the counties listed in Section 6
of this act, and the councils of many of the cities and towns located in such
counties, have been advised that one new and very significant innovation in
solid waste disposal is the "waste to energy" technology and equipment which
has already been implemented in several areas of the United States. This
technology and equipment converts solid waste (garbage) into energy in the form
of steam. A waste to energy system is usually owned and operated either by a
governmental unit that can utilize the steam energy or by a private person,
firm or corporation that harnesses the steam for use in a manufacturing
process; and
Whereas, the disposition of solid waste is a public purpose and is a vitally
important public service; and
Whereas, the utilization of the new waste to energy technology would be
economically and socially beneficial to the counties, cities, and towns and to
the people of North Carolina; and
Whereas, a very substantial capital investment is required by a private person,
firm or corporation to purchase and install a waste to energy system; and
Whereas, a private person, firm or corporation will not expend the large
amounts of capital required to purchase and install a waste to energy system
unless the private person, firm or corporation can be assured of an adequate
long-term supply of solid waste from a municipality for the waste to energy
system under the terms of an enforceable long-term contract; Now, therefore,
The General Assembly of North Carolina enacts:
Section 1. The Boards of County Commissioners on behalf of counties and city
councils on behalf of cities and towns are hereby authorized to enter into
contracts with any private person, firm or corporation to dispose of by sale or
otherwise, solid waste generated within their geographic boundaries or brought
into their geographic boundaries. Without intending to limit the provisions
which may be included in such contracts, the contracts may specifically include
provisions for:
(1)   payment by the county, city or town of a fee or other charge to the
private person, firm or corporation to accept and dispose of the solid waste;
(2)   periodic increases or adjustments in the fees or other charges to be paid
by the counties, cities or towns to the private person, firm or corporation;
(3)   warranties from the counties, cities or towns with respect to the
quantity of the solid waste it will deliver and transfer to the private person,
firm or corporation and warranties relating to the content or quality of the
solid waste;
(4)   legal and equitable title to the solid waste passing to the private
person, firm or corporation upon delivery of the solid waste to the private
person, firm or corporation; and
(5)   a long term of duration up to a period of 60 years.
Sec. 2. As used in this act, the term "solid waste" shall include but not be
limited to trash, debris, garbage, litter, discarded cans or receptacles or any
other type of waste or garbage material whatsoever.
Sec. 3. Counties, cities and towns may enter into long-term contracts as
described in Section 1 of this act notwithstanding the provisions of G.S. 153A-
136 limiting a franchise granted by a Board of County Commissioners for the
collection and disposal of solid waste to a term of no more than seven years
and notwithstanding the provisions of G.S. 160A-319 limiting a franchise
granted by a city for the collection and disposal of solid waste to a term of
no more than 60 years.
Sec. 4. The Department of Human Resources must approve all contracts entered
into pursuant to this act before such contract may become effective.
Sec. 5. Approval of any contract under this act by the Board of County
Commissioners or City Council shall be governed by G.S. 153A-46 as to counties
or by G.S. 160A-76 as to cities and towns.
Sec. 6. This act shall apply only to Beaufort County, Craven County, Edgecombe
County, Hyde County, Lenoir County, Martin County, Pamlico County, Pitt County,
Washington County, Wilson County, and to any and all incorporated cities and
towns situated within the foregoing counties.
Sec. 7. This act shall become effective July 1, 1980.
In the General Assembly read three times and ratified, this the 19th day of
June, 1980.
 
Notes
  Editor's note(s)—Following is a limited selection of session laws, adopted by
1 the North Carolina General Assembly, pertaining to or otherwise affecting
  Martin County. Striking through or underlining of text in this part is as found
  in the legislation adopted by the state legislature.
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS 1
 
Notes
  State law reference(s)—Authority of county to adopt and issue code of
1 ordinances, G.S. 153A-49; pleading and proving county ordinances, G.S. 153A-
  50.
Sec. 1-1. Designation and citation of Code.
   The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections
shall constitute and be designated "Code of Ordinances, Martin County, North
Carolina," and may be so cited also as the "Martin County Code."
Sec. 1-2. Rules of construction and definitions.
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed
by the governing body, the following definitions and rules shall be observed
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
county board of commissioners:
   Board, board of commissioners. The term "board" or "board of commissioners"
generally shall refer to the county board of commissioners, unless the context
implies that a different board is being referenced.
   Boards, committees, commissions, officers, employees, departments. Any
reference to county boards, committees, commissions, officers, employees, or
departments shall be construed to mean the respective entities or personnel of
Martin County.
   Code. The term "this Code" means the Code of Ordinances, Martin County, as
designated in section
1-1.
   Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to
be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be conducted, the
day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted in
computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be done shall be
counted unless it is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference(s)—Computation of time, G.S. 1-593, 1a-1, Rule 6(a).
   County. The term "county" means the County of Martin, North Carolina.
   Delegation of authority. Whenever a section or provision appears to require
the head of a department or some other county officer or employee to do some
act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize the head of the
department or other officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize
subordinates to perform the required act or duty, unless the terms of the
provision or section specify otherwise.
   Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be
applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations,
as well as to males.
   G.S. The initials "G.S." appearing in the text or in the state law
references or other notes refer to the General Statutes of North Carolina, as
amended.
   Highway. The term "highway" includes any street, alley, highway, avenue,
public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and
causeway in the county, dedicated or devoted to public use.
   Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three or more
officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
   Month. The term "month" means a calendar month.
   Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and
any word importing the plural number shall include the singular.
   N.C. Admin. Code, NCAC. These refer to the North Carolina Administrative
Code.
   Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all
cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in
such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms
"affirm" and "affirmed."
   Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read
"or" if the sense requires it.
   Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part
owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant, or
tenant by the entirety of the whole or part of such building or land.
   Person. The term "person" extends and applies to associations, corporations,
firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to
individuals.
   Preceding, following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before
and next after, respectively.
   Shall. The term "shall" always means mandatory and never means permissive.
   Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of the street between the
curb, or the lateral link of the roadway and adjacent property line, intended
for use by pedestrians.
   Signature, subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" include a
mark when a person cannot write.
   State. The term "state" means the State of North Carolina.
   Street. The term "street" means the entire width between property or right-
of-way lines of every way or place of whatever nature, when any part thereof is
open to the use of the public as a matter of right for the purposes of
vehicular traffic. The terms "highway" and "street" shall be used synonymously.
   Tenant, occupant. The terms "tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building
or land, include any person who occupies the whole or part of such building or
land, whether alone or with others.
   Written; in writing. The terms "written" and "in writing" shall be construed
to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing
or otherwise.
   Year. The term "year" means a calendar year or a fiscal year, depending upon
the circumstances.
Sec. 1-3. Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances.
   The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as those
of ordinances adopted prior to the adoption of this Code and included herein,
shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments.
Sec. 1-4. Catchlines of sections; history notes and references.
   (a)   The catchlines of the several sections of this Code are intended as
mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed
or taken to be titles of such sections nor as any part of the section, nor,
unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such
sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted.
   (b)   The history notes following sections and the references and notes
scattered throughout the Code are not part of the Code but are merely for the
benefit of the user of the Code.
Sec. 1-5. Severability of parts of Code.
   It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of commissioners that
the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are
severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this
Code shall be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the judgment or
decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or
invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences,
paragraphs and sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted by the
board of commissioners without the incorporation in this Code of any such
unconstitutional or invalid phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section.
Sec. 1-6. General penalty; continuing violations; ordinance enforcement.
   (a)   Unless otherwise specifically provided, violation of any provision of
this Code or any other county ordinance shall subject the offender to the
remedies hereinafter provided; except, that where the General Statutes of North
Carolina provide specific civil remedies for violations of provisions of this
Code adopted pursuant to such statutes, such remedies available to the county
for enforcement of this Code shall be in addition to the remedies hereinafter
stated; provided that no criminal penalties shall be applicable unless
hereinafter stated in this section as being applicable to specific chapters or
provisions of this Code.
   (b)   Unless otherwise specifically identified, violations of any provision
of the chapters and sections of this Code shall be a misdemeanor and punishable
as provided by G.S. 14-4.
   (c)   In addition to any civil or criminal penalties set out in this
section, any provision of this Code or any other county ordinance may be
enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issuing from a court of competent
jurisdiction. In such case, the general court of justice shall have
jurisdiction to issue such orders as may be appropriate, and it shall not be a
defense to the application of the county for equitable relief that there is an
adequate remedy at law.
   (d)   In addition to any civil or criminal penalties set out in this
section, any provision of this Code or any other county ordinance that makes
unlawful a condition existing upon or use made of real property may be enforced
by injunction and order of abatement, and the general court of justice shall
have jurisdiction to issue such orders. When a violation of such a provision
occurs, the county may apply to the appropriate division of the general court
of justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and order of abatement
commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition upon or cease the
unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed in all respects by
the laws and rules governing civil proceedings, including the Rules of Civil
Procedure in general and Rule 65 in particular.
   (e)   In addition to an injunction, the court may enter an order of
abatement as a part of the judgment in the cause. An order of abatement may
direct that:
      (1)   Buildings or other structures on the property be closed, demolished
or removed;
      (2)   Fixtures, furniture or other movable property be removed from
buildings on the property;
      (3)   Grass and weeds be cut;
      (4)   Improvements or repairs be made; or
      (5)   Any other action be taken that is necessary to bring the property
into compliance with this Code or such ordinance.
If the defendant fails or refuses to comply with an injunction or with an order
of abatement within the time allowed by the court, he may be cited for
contempt, and the county may execute the order of abatement. The county shall
have a lien on the property for the cost of executing an order of abatement in
the nature of a mechanic's and materialman's lien. The defendant may secure
cancellation of an order of abatement by paying all costs of the proceedings
and posting a bond for compliance with the order. The bond shall be given with
sureties approved by the clerk of superior court in an amount approved by the
judge before whom the matter is heard and shall be conditioned on the
defendant's full compliance with the terms of the order of abatement within a
time fixed by the judge. Cancellation of an order of abatement shall not
suspend or cancel an injunction issued in conjunction therewith.
   (f)   The provisions of this Code and any other county ordinances may be
enforced by one, all or a combination of the remedies authorized and prescribed
by this section, except that any provision the violation of which incurs a
civil penalty shall not be enforced by criminal penalties.
   (g)   Except as otherwise specifically provided, each day's continuing
violation of any provision of this Code or any other county ordinance shall be
a separate and distinct offense.
   (h)   Upon determination of a violation of any section of this Code, the
penalty for which is a civil penalty, the county shall cause a warning citation
to be issued to the violator, setting out the nature of the violation, the
section violated, the date of the violation and an order to immediately cease
the violation or, if the violation is in the nature of an infraction for which
an order of abatement would be appropriate in a civil proceeding, stating a
reasonable period of time in which the violation must be abated. The warning
citation shall specify that a second citation shall incur a civil penalty.
   (i)   Upon failure of the violator to obey the warning citation, a civil
citation shall be issued by the appropriate official of the county and either
served directly on the violator or his duly designated agent, or registered
agent if a corporation, in person or posted in the United States mail service
by first class mail addressed to the last known address of the violator as
contained in the records of the county, or obtained from the violator at the
time of issuance of the warning citation. The violator shall be deemed to have
been served upon the mailing of such citation. The citation shall direct the
violator to appear before the county treasurer, located in the county hall,
within 15 days of the date of the citation or alternatively to pay the citation
by mail. The violation for which the citation is issued must have been
corrected by the time the citation is paid, otherwise, further citations shall
be issued. Citations may be issued for each day the offense continues until the
prohibited activity is ceased or abated. If the violator fails to respond to a
citation within 15 days of its issuance and pay the penalty prescribed therein,
the county may institute a civil action in the nature of debt in the
appropriate division of the general court of justice for the collection of the
penalty.
Sec. 1-7. Amendments to Code; amendatory language.
   (a)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or
in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering
system hereof and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances
repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed
portions may be excluded from this Code by omission from reprinted pages. The
subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of
repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such
time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted
as a new code by the board of commissioners.
   (b)   Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by
amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
Code in the following language: "That section of the Code of Ordinances, Martin
County, North Carolina, is hereby amended to read as follows:…. " The new
provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (c)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added,
the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, Martin
County, North Carolina, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered
_____, such section to read as follows:…." The new provisions shall then be set
out in full as desired.
   (d)   All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed
must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the
case may be.
Sec. 1-8. Supplementation of Code.
   (a)   By contract or by county personnel, supplements to this Code shall be
prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all
substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the board of
commissioners during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made
thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they
will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which
have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so
prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through
the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
   (b)   In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which
have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from
reprinted pages.
   (c)   When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the
person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make
formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included
in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a
unified code. For example, the codifier may:
      (1)   Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions.
      (2)   Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections
and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes
in such catchlines, headings and titles.
      (3)   Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be
inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change
existing section or other subdivision numbers.
      (4)   Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to
"this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or
to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the
sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance
incorporated into the Code).
      (5)   Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the
original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance
material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
Sec. 1-9. Ordinances not affected by Code.
   (a)   Nothing in this Code, or the ordinance adopting this Code, shall
affect:
      (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective
date of the ordinance adopting this Code;
      (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money for the county, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the county
or any evidence of the county's indebtedness, or any contract or obligations
assumed by the county;
      (3)   The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the county not in
conflict with the provisions of the Code;
      (4)   Any ordinance or resolution fixing salaries of officers or
employees of the county, unless superseded;
      (5)   Any appropriation ordinance or resolution;
      (6)   Any right of franchise granted by the county to any person, firm or
corporation;
      (7)   Any ordinance or resolution dedicating, naming, establishing,
locating, relocating, closing, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any
street or public way in the county;
      (8)   Any ordinance or resolution establishing and prescribing the street
grades of any county roads or streets;
      (9)   Any ordinance or resolution providing for local improvements or
assessing taxes therefor;
      (10)   Any ordinance or resolution dedicating or accepting any plat or
subdivision in the county, or providing regulations for the same;
      (11)   Any ordinance or resolution regulating the erection, alteration,
repair, demolition, moving or removal of buildings or other structures;
      (12)   Ordinances or resolutions prescribing traffic regulations for
specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking
prohibitions, one-way traffic, limitations on loads of vehicles or loading
zones, not inconsistent with this Code;
      (13)   Any ordinance or resolution fixing utility rates and charges, or
any valid comprehensive fee schedule;
      (14)   Any ordinance of agreement with another political subdivision;
      (15)   Any ordinance concerning issuance of tax anticipation notes;
      (16)   Any ordinance in effect which establishes a requirement or
procedure to obtain a county permit or license to conduct any commercial
activity, construct or alter a building or structure, or otherwise obtain
county permission or sanction, or undergo inspection, as a precondition;
      (17)   Any ordinance in effect at time of adoption of this Code that
imposes a tax;
      (18)   Any ordinance, resolution or order of the governing body accepting
the designation by a state or federal entity to administer or enforce state or
federal laws, regulations, or orders;
      (19)   Any ordinance establishing water conservation regulations.
   (b)   Any other ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, which is not of a
general and permanent nature; or which is referred to elsewhere in this Code as
continuing in effect; and all such ordinances and resolutions are hereby
recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set
out at length in this Code. Such ordinances and resolutions are on file in the
clerk's office.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION 1
 
Notes
  State law reference(s)—Administration of county government generally, G.S.
  153A-76 et seq.; general ordinance-making power, G.S. 153A-121; corporate
  powers, G.S. 153A-11; establishing and abolishing townships, G.S. 153A-19;
1 Local Government Finance Act, G.S. 159-1 et seq.; board of commissioners to
  direct county fiscal policy, G.S. 153A-101; commissioners to fix fees, G.S.
  153A-102; county powers regarding employment and personnel, G.S. 153A-94;
  powers and duties of county manager, G.S. 153A-82; county board may adopt and
  provide personnel rules and regulations, G.S. 153A-94.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 2-1. Form of government.
   The county operates under the council-manager form of government, with all
legislative powers granted to county governing bodies under state law.
Secs. 2-2—2-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. LEGISLATIVE BODY
Sec. 2-21. Board of commissioners.
   (a)   A five-member board of commissioners constitutes the governing body of
the county.
   (b)   The board shall establish rules of procedure under which the board
conducts its business for the county.
   (c)   The board shall adopt a code of ethics to establish guidelines for
ethical standards of conduct for board members.
Secs. 2-22—2-45. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Secs. 2-46—2-63. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 2-64—2-84. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. HUMAN RELATIONS COMMISSION
Sec. 2-85. Finding of desirability of human relations commission.
   The county hereby finds and declares that it is desirable that a human
relations commission be established and maintained in the county.
(Ord. No. 1989-1, § 1, 1-18-1989)
Sec. 2-86. Establishment of human relations commission duties.
   There is hereby established a commission to be known as the Martin County
Human Relations Commission. It shall be the duty of the commission in general:
      (1)   To encourage understanding and good will between all citizens
regardless of race, sex, religion, creed, nationality, or economic status, and
thus promote the general welfare of our county;
      (2)   To report to and to recommend to the board of commissioners
measures designed to promote the welfare of the community;
      (3)   To identify concerns within the community which could jeopardize
the welfare of our county;
      (4)   To act as an impartial public forum to the end that there will be
better communications between all segments of our county;
      (5)   To promote peace, understanding, respect, good will and harmony
among all citizens.
(Ord. No. 1989-1, § 2, 1-18-1989)
Sec. 2-87. Authority of human relations commission.
   (a)   The county human relations commission may promote public interest in
its recommendations in such a manner as to lessen any tensions and promote good
will among all citizens.
   (b)   The commission may sponsor meetings or forums intended to lead all
citizens to a clearer understanding of the true meaning of responsible
citizenship in our county, of the obligations inherent in being a good citizen,
and of the need for mutual understanding and respect by all citizens for each
other.
   (c)   The commission shall have the authority to create and devise plans for
recommendations to the board of commissioners.
   (d)   The commission may receive funding, if any is required, from the
county.
(Ord. No. 1989-1, § 3, 1-18-1989)
Sec. 2-88. Membership, terms of office, etc.
   (a)   The commission shall consist of 11 members. The members will be
appointed by the county board of commissioners. While representation of all of
the various segments of the community is not required, diversity of membership
is desirable.
   (b)   Members will be appointed for three-year terms. In the event any
members shall fail to attend three consecutive meetings (without just cause),
the same shall constitute an involuntary resignation by said member. The
commission shall promptly notify the county commissioners of all resignations
(whether voluntary or involuntary) and other vacancies on the commission, and
such vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term by the county
commissioners. No person shall serve more than two three-year consecutive
terms. Notwithstanding any of the language set out above, all members shall
serve at the pleasure of the board of commissioners. Members of the commission
shall receive no compensation for their services.
(Ord. No. 1989-1, § 4, 1-18-1989)
Sec. 2-89. Organization, officers, bylaws, meeting, quorum, votes.
   (a)   The commission shall meet for the purpose of organization as soon as
reasonably possible after its creation. The commission shall elect its own
officers which shall include a chairperson, a vice-chairperson, and a
secretary, and shall propose bylaws for the transaction of its business subject
to approval of such bylaws by the county board of commissioners. A copy of
bylaws shall be filed with the clerk of the board of commissioners for
inspection by interested parties and shall constitute public records.
   (b)   The commission shall hold meetings as provided by the bylaws, or when
called by the chairperson, vice-chairperson or any three members of the
commission at any time upon 12 hours' written or telephone notice to all of its
members. All meetings shall be open to the general public except those
authorized by law to be in executive session (e.g., those considering action
necessary to deal with a riot or civil disorder or with conditions that
indicate that a riot or civil disorder is imminent). It shall keep minutes of
its meetings, in which shall be recorded all action taken in its public
meetings that it considers. Such minutes shall be public records. The
commission can invite and receive suggestions from the public concerning any
and all matters within the scope of its duties.
   (c)   A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of the commission.
No proxies shall be allowed.
(Ord. No. 1989-1, § 5, 1-18-1989)
Sec. 2-90. Reports.
   The commission may cause a comprehensive annual report to be prepared
describing the objectives, programs, activities and accomplishments of the
commission. This report shall be prepared as of June 30 of each year for the
previous year and shall be submitted to the board of commissioners by September
1 of each year. The form and content of the report shall be determined by the
commission, subject to the right of the county commissioners at any time to
require a report containing any information on any subject in any format it may
reasonably designate. Special reports and recommendations can be made to (or
requested by) the county commissioners as the need arises in the judgment of
the commission or at the specific request of the county commissioners.
(Ord. No. 1989-1, § 6, 1-18-1989)
Secs. 2-91—2-108. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. COUNTY PLANNING BOARD
Sec. 2-109. Re-establishing the county planning board.
   A county planning board was established by county ordinance in 1971 for the
specific purpose of organizing and administering land use surrounding the
county airport such that proper clear air space was maintained, but said board
has not functioned nor been organized for a number of years. It appears to be
advantageous to the welfare of the county that the comprehensive and continuous
planning program be further defined and enabled. The board of commissioners
needs the active assistance and constant cooperation of many civic-minded
citizens in its efforts to serve the best interests of the people and to direct
physical development of the county.
(Ord. No. 1991-2, § 1, 6-3-1991)
Sec. 2-110. Powers and duties.
   It shall be the function and duty of the planning board to make
comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future
developments and prepare such plans for physical, and economic growth, as will
best promote the public health, safety, convenience or the general welfare as
well as efficiency and economy in the development of the county. In general,
the planning board shall have the power and duty to:
      (1)   Make studies of the area within its jurisdictions and surrounding
areas.
      (2)   Determine objectives to be sought in the development of the county.
      (3)   Prepare and adopt plans for achieving objectives.
      (4)   Develop and recommend policies, ordinances, administrative
procedures, and other means for carrying out plans in a coordinated and
efficient manner.
      (5)   Advise the board of commissioners concerning the use and amendment
of means for carrying out plans.
      (6)   Exercise any functions in the administration and enforcement of
various means for carrying out plans that the board of commissioners may direct
(i.e., zoning, subdivision development regulations, etc.).
      (7)   Perform any other related duties that the board of commissioners
may direct.
      (8)   The planning board shall review upon request and make
recommendations to the board of commissioners upon the extent, location and
design of all public structures and facilities, on the acquisition of public
properties, on the opening, abandonment, widening, extension, narrowing or
other change to streets and other public ways, and on the construction,
extension, expansion or abandonment of utilities whether publicly or privately
owned.
      (9)   The planning board may consult with the county manager, with the
county soil and water conservation district and with the economic development
commission as necessary on issues of mutual concern. The planning board may
coordinate planning activities with adjoining jurisdictions, to include
coordination through and cooperation with the Mid-East Commission.
      (10)   The planning board may conduct such public hearings as may be
required to gather information necessary for the drafting, establishment, and
maintenance of the comprehensive land use plan.
      (11)   The planning board shall have power to promote public interest in
and an understanding of its recommendations and to that end it may publish and
distribute copies of its recommendations and may employ such other means of
publicity and education as it may deem necessary.
      (12)   Members of the planning board may attend planning conferences or
meetings of planning institutes or hearings upon pending planning legislation,
and the county may pay, from within the planning board's budget, the reasonable
traveling expenses incidental to such attendance.
(Ord. No. 1991-2, § 2, 6-3-1991)
Sec. 2-111. Membership and vacancies.
   (a)   The planning board shall consist of ten members who reside within the
county (one member from each township).
   (b)   Members shall be appointed for terms of three years. Vacancies
occurring for reasons other than expiration of terms shall be filled for the
period of the unexpired term. Vacancies shall be filled by the board of county
commissioners.
   (c)   Faithful attendance at the meetings of the board is considered a
prerequisite for the maintenance of membership on the board. Failure to attend
three consecutive meetings shall be deemed adequate cause for summary removal
from the planning board by the board of commissioners.
   (d)   The county manager or designee shall serve as a non-voting
representative of the board of commissioners to the planning board. He will
attend planning board meetings and shall be allowed to participate in all
discussions and deliberations of the board. At the request of the planning
board, he shall obtain or prepare any needed materials such as maps, draft
documents, and conduct needed analyses or studies to be used by the planning
board in conducting its assigned duties.
(Ord. No. 1991-2, § 3, 6-3-1991)
Sec. 2-112. Organization, rules, meetings and records.
   Within 30 days after appointment, the planning board shall meet and review
its bylaws adjusting the terms of its chairperson and vice-chairperson.
Thereafter, the term of the chairperson and vice-chairperson shall be one year,
with eligibility for reelection for one additional term. No one person shall
serve as chairperson for more than two consecutive terms. The board may adopt
rules for transaction of its business and shall keep a record of its members'
attendance and of its discussions, findings, and recommendations. All records
shall be a public record. All of its meetings shall be open to the public. A
quorum shall consist of six members for the purpose of taking any official
action required by this division. All members of the board shall have voting
power on all matters of business. However, any member who is a party at
interest to matters under consideration by the board shall declare such
interest prior to a vote of the board on the question, and shall abstain from
voting on the question. After declaration of interest, this provision shall not
prohibit such members from participation in discussions of the board on such
matters prior to the vote.
(Ord. No. 1991-2, § 4, 6-3-1991)
Sec. 2-113. Annual report of activities and analysis of expenditures and budget
request for ensuing fiscal year.
   The planning board may annually submit to the board of commissioners and
county manager, a written report of its activities, an analysis of the
expenditures to date for the current fiscal year, and its requested budget of
funds needed for operation during the ensuing fiscal year. The planning board
is authorized to appoint such committees, and to authorize such expenditures,
as it may see fit, subject to limitations of funds provided for the planning
board by the board of commissioners and within the framework of the county's
procurement and fiscal management procedures.
(Ord. No. 1991-2, § 5, 6-3-1991)
Sec. 2-114. Staff support.
   The board of commissioners may authorize and fund employees, and the county
manager may appoint and/or assign employees, to provide staff support to the
planning board. Any position approved by the board of commissioners shall be
appointed by the county manager under the provisions of county personnel
policies.
(Ord. No. 1991-2, § 6, 6-3-1991)
Chapter 4
ANIMALS 1
 
Notes
  State law reference(s)—Vaccination of dogs and cats, G.S. 130A-185; rabies
1 vaccination tags, G.S. 130A-190; time of rabies vaccination, 10A N.C. Admin.
  Code 41G.0101; county may define and prohibit abuse of animals, G.S. 153A-
  127.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 4-1. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Animal means every living creature, domestic or non-domestic, but does not
include humans.
   Animal shelter means any premises designated by the county manager for the
purpose of impounding and caring for all animals.
   At large means any animal when it is off the property of its owner or keeper
and not under physical restraint.
   Exposed to rabies means that an animal shall be deemed to have been exposed
to rabies if it has been bitten by, or been in the presence of, any animal
known or suspected to have been infected with rabies.
   Impoundment means any animal in custody of a person or animal shelter duly
authorized by the county manager.
   Keeper means a person having custody of an animal or who keeps or harbors an
animal or who knowingly permits an animal to remain on or about any premises
occupied or controlled by such person.
   Nuisance. An animal or group of animals shall be considered a nuisance if
it:
      (1)   Damages, soils, or defiles private or public property;
      (2)   Interferes with, molests, or attacks persons or other animals;
      (3)   Is repeatedly at large;
      (4)   Causes unsanitary, dangerous or offensive conditions including
excessive fouling of the air by odors;
      (5)   Chases, snaps at, harasses, or impedes pedestrians, bicyclists, or
vehicles;
      (6)   By virtue of number or type is offensive or dangerous to the public
health, safety, or welfare;
      (7)   Is diseased or dangerous to the public health.
   Owner means a person having the right of property in an animal.
   Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, organization, or
institution commonly recognized by law as a unit.
   Restrained means any animal that is within the real property limits of its
owner, or secured by a leash or lead, or confined.
   Stray means any (domestic) animal not under restraint and found off of the
property of its owner or keeper.
   Suspected of having rabies means an animal which is unvaccinated against
rabies or has bitten a person.
   Veterinary hospital means any establishment maintained and operated by a
licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of diseases and
injuries of animals.
   Vicious animal means an animal that constitutes a physical threat to humans
or other domestic animals.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § I, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § I, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-2. Agency authority and responsibility.
   (a)   Authority is hereby transferred from the county manager to the Martin
County sheriff's office to establish and maintain an animal control program, to
employ animal control officers and such other employees as shall be determined
necessary by the board of commissioners, and to appoint and compensate animal
control officers and such other employees in accordance with policies of Martin
County sheriff's office.
   (b)   The employees of the animal control program shall:
      (1)   Have the responsibility as a law enforcement agency to enforce all
laws of the state and all ordinances of the county pertaining to animals and
shall cooperate with all law enforcement officers within the county in
fulfilling this duty.
      (2)   Enforce and carry out all laws of the state and all ordinances of
the county pertaining to rabies control.
      (3)   Be responsible for the investigation of all reported animal bites,
for the quarantine of any dog or cat involved and suspected of having rabies,
for a period of not less than ten days, and for reporting to the Martin-
Tyrrell-Washington district health director as soon as practicable the
occurrence of any such animal bite and the condition of any quarantined animal.
      (4)   Be responsible for the operation of the animal shelter.
      (5)   Be responsible for the seizure and impoundment, where deemed
necessary, of any dog or other animal in the county involved in a violation of
this or any other county ordinance or state law.
      (6)   Investigate cruelty or abuse with regard to animals.
      (7)   Make such canvasses of the county, including the homes in the
county, as necessary for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with this
chapter or state statute.
      (8)   Keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of:
         a.   Seizure, impoundment, and disposition of all animals coming into
the custody of the animal control program.
         b.   Bite cases, violations and complaints, and investigation of same.
         c.   All monies belonging to the county which were derived from fees,
penalties, sales of animals, or other sources.
         d.   Any other matters deemed necessary by the county sheriff and/or
health director.
      (9)   Be empowered to issue notices of violation of this chapter in such
form as the county sheriff and/or health director may prescribe.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § II, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § II, 10-2-1989; Ord. of 4-
8-2015(1))
Sec. 4-3. Cruelty to animals.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, torture, torment,
deprive of necessary sustenance, cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill,
wound, injure, poison, abandon or subject to conditions detrimental to its
health or general welfare any animal, or to cause or procure such action. The
terms "torture" and "torment" shall be held to include every act, omission or
neglect whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused or
permitted; but such terms shall not be construed to prohibit lawful shooting of
birds, deer and other game for human food; nor to prohibit the animal control
department or its agents or veterinarians from destroying dangerous, unwanted
or injured animals in a humane manner; nor to prohibit the lawful use of
animals in scientific research.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to fail to provide his
animal or animals with proper shelter and protection from the weather,
sufficient and wholesome food and water to keep his animal or animals in good
health and comfort, the opportunity for vigorous daily exercise, veterinary
care when needed to prevent suffering, and humane care and treatment.
   (b-1)   Tether.
      (1)   Fixed. Tethered dogs must be attached to a swiveled ground anchor
by a coated cable wire not shorter than 15 feet. Chain and ropes are not
acceptable types of tethers. All tethers must have swivels attached at both
ends to prevent twisting. The tether must be arranged so as to be free from any
obstacles that may limit the moveable length of the tether. Shelter and water
must be present and always be in reach of the tethered dog. If the dog cannot
reach the shelter or water due to tangled or shortened tether, the owner will
be considered in violation of the article. Tethers must be attached to a safe
and secure collar. The tether wire may not be used as a collar.
      (2)   Running. A strong runner wire (minimum of 15 feet) which is firmly
secured to fixed anchor points; post, tree, or fences are acceptable. The
tether is attached to a runner wire and must have a swivel to prevent
entanglement. Shelter and water must be present and always in reach of a
tethered dog. If the dog cannot reach the shelter or water due to tangled or
shortened tethers, the owner will be considered in violation of the article.
Tethers must be attached to a safe and secured collar. The tether wire may not
be used as a collar.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any equine owner to fail to provide the
minimum standard of care for equines which consists of the following:
      (1)   All equines should have access to appropriate shelter from very
hot, very cold, or very wet environments. Trees and natural weather barriers
may, in some cases, be considered adequate shelter. If appropriate natural
weather barriers are not available, a three-sided run-in shed with a roof
should be provided. All shelter should be free of standing water, accumulated
waste, sharp objects and debris, and provide protection from inclement weather
conditions such as prevailing wind, sleet, rain, and temperature extremes.
      (2)   It is the responsibility of the owner/custodian to ensure that each
equine has access to adequate shelter.
      (3)   Enclosed areas should be constructed or modified to allow for
adequate air flow. Whenever possible, extreme temperature, humidity, and air
stagnation should be avoided.
      (4)   Equines shall have access to fresh clean water at all times.
      (5)   All fencing shall be well-maintained and in good repair at all
times.
   Any offender of this section may be subject to civil penalties as set out in
the animal services fee schedule and/or criminal charges as set out in G.S. 14-
360 et. seq.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § III, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § III, 10-2-1989; Ord. of
12-1-2014(1) ; Ord. of 4-8-2015(1) ; Ord. of 5-13-2015(1) )
Sec. 4-4. Confinement, muzzling, and control of vicious or dangerous domestic
animals.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any vicious, fierce or
dangerous domestic animal within the county unless it is confined within a
secure building or enclosure, or it is securely muzzled and under restraint by
means of a leash, chain or rope and firmly under control at all times.
   (b)   Any vicious/public nuisance animal without any recognizable
identification may be destroyed after the animal control officer has been
unsuccessful in his attempt to catch, trap or tranquilize (within a closed
area) the animal. Any dog or cat left at the animal shelter may be impounded or
euthanized at the discretion of the animal control officer.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § IV, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § IV, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-5. Animals creating nuisance prohibited.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or keeper to permit an animal or
animals to create a nuisance, or to maintain a nuisance created by an animal or
animals. Compliance shall be required as follows:
      (1)   When an animal control officer, law enforcement officer, or person
duly authorized by the county sheriff observes a violation, the owner or keeper
will be provided written notification of such violation and be given 48 hours
from time of notification to abate the nuisance.
      (2)   Upon a receipt of a written detailed and signed complaint being
made to the county sheriff by any person or persons that any other person is
maintaining a nuisance as defined in this article, the county sheriff shall
cause the owner or keeper of the animal or animals in question to be notified
that a complaint has been received, and shall cause the situation complained of
to be investigated and a report and findings thereon to be reduced to writing.
      (3)   If the written findings indicate that the complaint is justified,
then the county sheriff or person duly authorized by the county sheriff, shall
cause the owner or keeper of the animal or animals in question to be so
notified in writing, and ordered to abate such nuisance within 48 hours by
whatever means may be necessary. In the event the owner or keeper of the animal
or animals is unknown and cannot be ascertained, the notice and order, along
with a general description of the animal or animals shall be posted for 48
hours at the animal shelter. If after 48 hours the owner or keeper of the
animal or animals remains unknown, the animals may be impounded or humanely
destroyed.
   (b)   Every female dog or cat, while in heat, shall be confined in a
building or secure enclosure in such manner that she will not be in contact
with another dog or cat, nor create a nuisance by attracting other animals;
provided, this section shall not be construed to prohibit the intentional
breeding of animals within an enclosed area on the premises of the owner of an
animal being bred.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for a person to fail or refuse to abate the
nuisance as required by this article.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § V, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § V, 10-2-1989; Ord. of 4-8-
2015(1))
Sec. 4-6. Noisy animals.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or have within the county
an animal that habitually or repeatedly makes excessive noises that tend to
disturb or frighten its citizens.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § VI, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § VI, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-7. Luring, enticing, seizing, molesting, or teasing an animal.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to entice or lure any animal out of an
enclosure or off the property of its owner or keeper, or to seize, molest or
tease any animal while the animal is held or controlled by its owner or keeper
or while the animal is on the property of its owner or keeper.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § VII, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § VII, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-8. Dog and cat identification tag.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat owner to fail to provide his
dog or cat, which is four months of age or older, with an identification tag on
which is inscribed the dog's or cat's owner's name, address, and telephone
number.
   (b)   It shall also be unlawful for any dog or cat owner to fail to provide
his dog or cat with a collar or harness to which a current identification tag
described under this section is securely attached. The collar or harness, with
the attached identification tag, must be worn at all times, except during the
times the animal is performing at shows, obedience trials, tracking tests,
field trials, schools or other events sanctioned and supervised by a recognized
organization, or is engaged in hunting or some other activity in which a collar
might endanger its safety.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § VIII, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § VIII, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-9. Compliance with state rabies laws; supplement to state rabies law.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any animal owner or other person to fail to
comply with the state laws relating to the control of rabies.
   (b)   It is the purpose of this chapter to supplement the state laws by
providing a procedure for the enforcement of state laws relating to rabies
control, in addition to the criminal penalties provided by state law.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § IX, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § IX, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-10. Vaccination of dogs, cats, and other pets.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for an owner or keeper to fail to provide current
vaccination against rabies (hydrophobia) for any dog or cat four months of age
or older. Should it be deemed necessary by the health director that other pets
be vaccinated in order to prevent a threatened epidemic or to control an
existing epidemic, it shall be unlawful for an owner or keeper to fail to
provide current vaccination against rabies for that pet.
   (b)   A rabies vaccination shall be deemed current for a dog or cat if the
first two doses of vaccine are administered 12 months apart and each subsequent
booster dose of vaccine administered as per the vaccine manufacturer's
recommended schedule.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § X, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § X, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-11. Vaccination tag and certificate.
   (a)   Upon complying with the provisions of section
4-10, there shall be issued to the owner or keeper of the dog or cat vaccinated
a rabies tag, stamped with a number and the year for which issued, and a rabies
vaccination certificate.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat owner or keeper to fail to
provide the dog or cat with a collar or harness to which a current rabies tag
issued under this section is securely attached. The collar or harness, with
attached tag, must be worn at all times unless under circumstances as stated in
section
4-8(b).
   (c)   In addition to all other penalties as prescribed by law, a dog or cat
is subject to impoundment in accordance with the provisions of this article if
the dog or cat is found not to be wearing a currently valid rabies tag.
   (d)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use for any animal a rabies
vaccination tag issued for an animal other than the one using the tag.
   (e)   All dogs or cats shipped or otherwise brought into this county, except
for exhibition purposes where the dogs or cats are confined and not permitted
to run at large, shall be securely confined and vaccinated within one week
after entry, and shall remain confined two additional weeks after vaccination
unless accompanied by a certificate issued by a licensed veterinarian showing
that said dog or cat is apparently free from rabies and has not been exposed to
same and that said dog or cat has received a proper dose of rabies vaccine not
more than six months prior to the date of issuing the certificate.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XI, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XI, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-12. Notice to the county sheriff and health director when person bitten;
confinement of animal.
   (a)   When a person has been bitten by an animal having rabies or suspected
of having rabies, it shall be the duty of such person, or his parent or
guardian if such person is a minor, and the person owning such animal or having
the same in his possession or under his control, to notify the county sheriff
or person duly authorized by the county sheriff and the health director
immediately and give their names and addresses and the owner or person having
such animal in his possession or under his control shall immediately securely
confine it for ten days at the expense of the owner in such place as may be
designated by the county sheriff or health director. It shall be the duty of
every physician, after his first professional attendance upon a person bitten
by any animal having rabies or suspected of having rabies, to report to the
health director the name, age and sex of the person so bitten, and precise
location of the bite wound, within 24 hours after first having knowledge that
the person was bitten. If the owner of or a person who has in his possession or
under his control an animal having rabies or suspected of having rabies refuses
to confine the animal as required by this article or by G.S. 130A-196, the
county sheriff or the health director may order seizure of the animal and its
confinement for ten days in such place as the county sheriff or health director
designates.
   (b)   Law enforcement agencies investigating animal bites shall report such
bites immediately to the county sheriff or person duly authorized by the county
sheriff and health director and give the names and addresses of persons bitten
and owner of animal.
   (c)   Animals confined per subsection (a) of this section shall not be
released from confinement except by permission from the county sheriff or
health director.
   (d)   Animals confined per subsection (a) of this section shall be confined
at the expense of the owner or keeper.
   (e)   In the case of an animal whose owner or keeper is not known, this
animal shall be kept for the supervised confinement period required by this
article at the animal shelter or in such place as the county sheriff or health
director designates.
   (f)   Badly wounded, diseased, or suffering animals which are suspected of
having rabies may be humanely destroyed immediately and the head forwarded for
examination.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XII, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XII, 10-2-1989; Ord. of
4-8-2015(1))
Sec. 4-13. Destruction or confinement of animal bitten by a known or suspected
rabid animal.
   Animals not vaccinated against rabies which are bitten by a (known/
suspected) rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed, unless the owner or
keeper agrees to strict isolation of the animal at a veterinary hospital for a
period of six months at the owner's or keeper's expense. If the animal has a
current rabies vaccination, it shall be revaccinated and returned to the owner
or keeper.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XIII, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XIII, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-14. Area-wide emergency quarantine.
   (a)   When reports indicate a positive diagnosis of rabies to the extent
that lives of persons are endangered, the health director may declare an area-
wide quarantine for such period as he deems necessary. Upon invoking of such
emergency quarantine, no dog or cat may be taken or shipped from the county
without written permission of the health director or county sheriff. During
such quarantine, the health director, the county sheriff, and/or persons duly
authorized by the health director and/or county sheriff, may seize and impound
any dog or cat found running at large in the county. During the quarantine
period the health director in coordination with the county sheriff shall be
empowered to provide for a program of mass immunization by the establishment of
temporary emergency rabies vaccination facilities strategically located
throughout the county.
   (b)   In the event there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring
during the period of quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended at
the discretion of the health director.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XIV, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XIV, 10-2-1989; Ord. of
4-8-2015(1))
Sec. 4-15. Postmortem diagnosis.
   (a)   If an animal dies while under observation for rabies, the head of such
animal shall be submitted to the laboratory section of the state division of
health services for rabies diagnosis.
   (b)   The carcass of any animal suspected of dying of rabies shall be
surrendered to the county animal control shelter. The head of such animal shall
be shipped to the laboratory section of the state division of health services
for rabies diagnosis.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XV, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XV, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-16. Unlawful killing or releasing of certain animals.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to kill or release any animal under
observation for rabies, or any animal under observation for biting a human, or
to remove such animal from the county without written permission from the
health director or county sheriff. A licensed veterinarian, the health
director, the county sheriff, or persons duly authorized by the county sheriff,
may authorize any animal to be killed for rabies diagnosis.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XVI, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XVI, 10-2-1989; Ord. of
4-8-2015(1))
Sec. 4-17. Failure to surrender animal for confinement or destruction.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to surrender any
animal for confinement or destruction as required in this article, when demand
is made therefor, by the health director or the county sheriff.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XVII, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XVII, 10-2-1989; Ord.
of 4-8-2015(1) )
Sec. 4-18. Impoundment.
   (a)   Any animal which appears to be lost, stray or unwanted, or not wearing
a currently valid dog identification tag and a currently valid rabies
vaccination tag, as required by state law or this article, or not under
restraint in violation of this article, may be seized, impounded, and confined
in a humane manner in an animal shelter.
   (b)   Impoundment of such an animal shall not relieve the owner or keeper
thereof from any penalty which may be imposed for violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XVIII, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XVIII, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-19. Notice to owner or keeper.
   Upon impounding an animal, notice of such impoundment shall be posted for a
minimum of 72 hours, beginning with the time the animal enters the animal
shelter, or until the animal is disposed of. Reasonable effort shall be made to
identify the owner or keeper and inform such owner or keeper of the conditions
whereby the animal may be redeemed. Notice shall be posted at the county animal
control shelter.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XIX, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XIX, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-20. Redemption by owner or keeper; generally.
   (a)   The owner or keeper of an animal impounded under this article may
redeem the animal and regain possession thereof within 72 hours after notice of
impoundment is posted as required by this article by complying with all
applicable provisions of this article and paying any applicable fees as
determined by the board of commissioners.
   (b)   No animal owner or keeper may be permitted to adopt his own animal
under the provisions of this article, but he must comply with the provisions of
this article in order to reclaim an animal that has been impounded pursuant to
state law or this article.
   (c)   The provisions of this section shall have no application with respect
to animals surrendered by the owner or keeper to the county animal control
section for immediate adoption or destruction as provided for in section
4-23.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XX, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XX, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-21. Destruction or adoption of unredeemed animal; generally.
   (a)   If an impounded animal is not redeemed by the owner or keeper within
the period prescribed in section
4-20, it may be destroyed in a humane manner or shall become the property of
the animal shelter and offered for adoption to a responsible adult who is
willing to comply with this article and with policies promulgated by the board
of commissioners.
   (b)   No animal which has been impounded by reason of its being a stray,
unclaimed by its owner or keeper, shall be allowed to be adopted from the
animal shelter during a period of emergency rabies quarantine invoked pursuant
to this article, except by special authorization of the health director.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XXI, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XXI, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-22. Procedure with respect to redemption or adoption of unvaccinated dog
or cat.
   (a)   Unless proof of a current rabies vaccination can be furnished, every
person who either adopts or redeems a dog or cat at the animal shelter will be
given a "Proof of Rabies Vaccination Notice" at the time of the redemption or
adoption. This notice will be stamped with a date stating the maximum time
limit allowed to take the dog or cat to the veterinarian of such person's
choice for rabies vaccination. The time limit for dogs and cats four months and
older will be 72 hours, with Sundays and holidays excluded. For puppies and
kittens under four months, the time limit will vary according to their age.
   (b)   The "Proof of Rabies Vaccination Notice" will be completed by the
veterinarian and returned to the the county government center by the animal
owner or keeper.
   (c)   Payment for rabies vaccination provided for in this section will be
the responsibility of the person redeeming or adopting the animal.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XXII, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XXII, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-23. Immediate placement for adoption or destruction of owner-surrendered
animals.
   (a)   Any animal surrendered by its owner to the the county animal control
shelter may be immediately placed for adoption or humanely destroyed when:
      (1)   The owner directs in writing that the animal be placed for adoption
if possible. If not adopted within a reasonable length of time, the animal may
be humanely destroyed;
      (2)   The owner states in writing that he is in fact the legal owner of
said animal;
      (3)   The owner agrees that he will indemnify and hold the the county
animal control shelter harmless from any loss or damage it may sustain,
including attorney's fees, by reason of the destruction or placement for
adoption of said animal; and
      (4)   The owner transfers ownership of said animal to the county and
releases the county from any and all future claims with respect to said animal.
   (b)   Upon receiving said assurances, the county animal control shelter may
rely on the same and place said animal for adoption, or destroy said animal, as
it sees fit. The waiting periods provided in section
4-19 and section
4-20 shall not apply to immediate adoption or destruction as provided for in
this section.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XXIII, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XXIII, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-24. Destruction of wounded, diseased, or unweaned animals.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, any animal seized and
impounded which is badly wounded, diseased (not a rabies suspect), or unweaned
and has no identification shall be destroyed immediately in a humane manner. If
the animal has identification, the county animal control section shall attempt
to notify the owner or keeper before disposing of such animal. If the owner or
keeper cannot be reached readily, and the animal is suffering, the county
animal control shelter may destroy the animal at its discretion in a humane
manner.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XXIV, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XXIV, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-25. Destruction of animals which cannot be seized by reasonable means.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an animal which cannot
be seized by reasonable means may be humanely destroyed by order of the county
sherrif or person duly authorized by the county sheriff.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XXV, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XXV, 10-2-1989; Ord. of
4-8-2015(1) )
Sec. 4-26. Injuring animals, notice required.
   It shall be unlawful for any person injuring an animal to fail to notify
immediately the owner or keeper of said animal, or an animal control agency, or
a local humane society.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XXVI, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XXVI, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-27. Keeping stray animals; requirements, failure to surrender.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person in the county knowingly and
intentionally to harbor, feed, keep in possession by confinement, or otherwise
allow to remain on his property any animal which does not belong to him, unless
he has, within 72 hours from the time such animal came into his possession,
notified the county sheriff or person duly authorized by the county sheriff.
Upon receiving such notice, the county sheriff or person duly authorized by the
county sheriff shall take such animal and place it in the animal shelter and
shall deal with it as provided by the board of commissioners.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to surrender any such
stray animal to the county sheriff or person duly authorized by the county
sheriff upon demand.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XXVII, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XXVII, 10-2-1989; Ord.
of 4-8-2015(1) )
Sec. 4-28. Non-domestic animals prohibited.
   No person shall possess or harbor any non-domestic animal or animals which
are dangerous to persons or property or which have the potential of being
dangerous to persons or property. This section shall not apply to bona fide
circuses, petting zoos, and other traveling commercial animal exhibitions of
limited duration.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XXVIII, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XXVIII, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-29. Collecting dogs and cats for resale; permit required.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to collect any dog or cat for the
purpose of resale unless a permit for the same shall have been obtained from
the county sheriff in accordance with the provisions of this section and unless
such permit shall remain unsuspended and unrevoked.
   (b)   The board of commissioners shall promulgate regulations and an
applicable fee schedule for the issuance of permits and shall include
requirements for humane care and transportation of all cats and dogs and for
the compliance with the provisions of this article and applicable laws. The
board of commissioners may amend such regulations from time to time as deemed
desirable for public health and welfare and for the protection of collected
dogs and cats.
   (c)   The county sheriff may revoke any permit if the person holding the
permit refuses or fails to comply with this article, the regulations
promulgated by the board of commissioners, or any law governing the protection
and keeping of animals.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XXIX, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XXIX, 10-2-1989; Ord.
of 4-8-2015(1) )
Sec. 4-30. Interference with enforcement.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder or molest the
employees of the county animal control department or person duly authorized by
this article, or to seek to release any animal in the custody of such persons,
except as otherwise specifically provided.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XXX, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XXX, 10-2-1989)
Sec. 4-31. Penalty for violation.
   (a)   The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor
and any person convicted of such violation shall be punishable as provided in
G.S. 14-4. Each day's violation of this article is a separate offense. Payment
of a fine imposed in criminal proceedings pursuant to this subsection does not
relieve a person of his liability for fees imposed under this article.
   (b)   In addition, enforcement of this article may be by appropriate
equitable remedy, injunction or order of abatement issuing from a court of
competent jurisdiction pursuant to G.S. 153A-23(d) and (e).
   (c)   In addition to and not in lieu of the criminal penalties and other
sanctions provided in this article, a violation of this article may also
subject the offender to the civil penalties hereinafter set forth.
      (1)   Such civil penalties may be recovered in a civil action in the
nature of debt or may be collected in such other amounts as prescribed herein
within the prescribed time following the issuance of notice for such violation.
      (2)   Such notice shall, among other things:
         a.   State upon its face the amount of the penalty if such penalty is
paid within 72 hours from and after the issuance of the notice and the late fee
in an amount as determined by the board of commissioners from time to time, if
paid more than 72 hours after its issuance.
         b.   Notify such offender that a failure to pay the penalties within
the prescribed time shall subject such offender to a civil action in the nature
of debt for the stated penalty plus an additional penalty in an amount as
determined by the board of commissioners from time to time, together with the
cost of the action to be taxed by the court.
         c.   Further provide that such offender may answer the said notice by
mailing said notice and stated penalty to the county sheriff, the county
government center at the appropriate address, and that upon payment, such case
or claim and right of action will be deemed compromised and settled.
         d.   State that such penalties must be paid within 72 hours from
issuance of such notice. Such notice shall further state that if such notice of
violation is not paid within said 72-hour period, court action by the filing of
a civil complaint for collection of such penalty may be taken.
      (3)   The county sheriff is authorized to accept such payments in full
and final settlement of the claim or claims, right or rights of action which
may be enforced by such penalty by civil action in the nature of debt.
Acceptance shall be deemed a full and final release of any and all such claims,
or rights of action arising out of such contended violation or violations.
      (4)   The civil penalty for violation of this article is to be an amount
as determined by the board of commissioners from time to time. Said penalty
shall be paid within 72 hours from and after the issuance of the notice
referred to above.
      (5)   The notice of violation referred to herein may be delivered to the
person violating the provisions of this article in person, or may be mailed by
registered or certified mail to said person at his last known address.
      (6)   In addition to the penalty prescribed in subsection (c)(4) of this
section, a penalty in an amount as determined by the board of commissioners
from time to time, shall be imposed in all those cases in which the above
penalty has not been paid within the authorized 72-hour period. Should it
become necessary to institute a civil action to collect any penalty hereunder,
then the violation shall also be subject to an additional penalty in an amount
as determined by the board of commissioners from time to time.
      (7)   All penalties paid to the county sheriff or as may be recovered in
a civil action in the nature of debt, as herein provided, shall be paid into
the animal control department monies of the county budget.
(Ord. No. 1988-1, § XXXI, 1-13-1988; Ord. No. 1989-3, § XXXI, 10-2-1989; Ord.
of 4-8-2015(1))
Sec. 4-32. Animal control board of appeals.
   (a)   There is hereby created a board of appeals to have an exercise the
following powers:
      (1)   To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision,
or determination made by the enforcement officer in the enforcement of this
city;
      (2)   To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this section
upon which such board of appeals under such regulations may be required to
pass; and
      (3)   To hear and decide specific variances.
   (b)   The board of appeals shall consist of five members (one commissioner,
one veterinarian, and three at-large) appointed by the Martin County
Commissioners, and three alternate members—one commissioner alternate, one
veterinarian alternate, and one at-large alternate member appointed by the
Martin County Commissioners. Each shall serve for a term of three years until a
successor is duly appointed and qualified. Of the members first, appointed, one
shall be appointed for a term of one year, two for a term of two years, and two
for a term of three years. Members shall be removable by the appointing
authority for cause, upon written charges, after a public hearing.
   (c)   The board of appeals shall adopt rules for its governance in harmony
with the provisions of this section. Meetings of the board of appeals shall be
held at the call of the chairperson and at such other times as the board of
appeals may determine. The chairperson or, in the absence of the chairperson,
the acting chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All hearings of the board of appeals shall be public. The board of
appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member
upon each question; or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which
shall immediately be filed in the office of the enforcement officer and on due
cause shown.
   (d)   The board of appeals shall make written findings of facts and
conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal
conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order,
requirements, decision, or determination which comes before it under the
provisions of this section.
   (e)   The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board of
appeals shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the enforcement officer or decide in favor of the applicant on
any matter upon which it is required to pass under this section, or to effect
variation to this section.
   (f)   The board of county commissioners shall adopt a policy, which may be
amended from time to time, governing the appointment of animal control board of
appeals members and any additional processes necessary to carry out appeals in
a fair and equitable manner.
(Ord. of 08-08-2018(1), § IX)
Secs. 4-33—4-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. DANGEROUS DOGS
Sec. 4-51. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Attack by a dog means any assault or battery by a dog upon a person or
domestic animal, to include biting, felling or toppling, tearing of clothing,
provoking flight to escape attack, or any other act which could reasonably
cause physical injury to the person or domestic animal.
   Bite by a dog means any seizing, gripping or grasping, no matter how slight
or momentary, by a dog between its jaws of the body parts of a person or
domestic animal, so as to cause physical injury to such person or domestic
animal. This does not include playful behavior by a puppy that is welcome and
not likely to cause any injury, fear or harm to the person or animal.
   Dangerous dog means any of the following dogs:
      (1)   A dog that without provocation has killed or inflicted severe
injury on a person;
      (2)   A dog that has been determined, as provided herein, to be
potentially dangerous;
      (3)   A dog that is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the
purpose of dog fighting, or a dog trained for dog fighting.
   Dog means a domesticated animal (canis familiaris) of the Canidae family;
provided, that no wild species of the Canidae family, such as a wolf, fox, or
coyote, shall be considered a domesticated animal, even though raised by humans
in domestic surroundings.
   Guard dog means a dog trained by a skilled trainer to recognized security
industry or other reasonable standards and presently used under the control of
trained handlers to protect persons and property.
   Law enforcement dog means a dog, trained for police work to recognized law
enforcement standards and presently used by and under the control of a law
enforcement officer to carry out the law enforcement officer's official duties.
   Lawful hunt means a hunt for lawful game conducted on private or public
property with the consent of the owner or custodian of the property by a person
with a valid license (if required) during the lawful season for the game
concerned using dogs customarily employed and suitable for such game.
   Owner means any person or legal entity that has a possessory property right
in a dog, including the harborer or keeper of a dog with the consent of the
owner or of a dog that has been abandoned by or escaped the custody of its
owner.
   Owner's real property means any real property owned or leased by the owner
of the dog, not including any public right-of-way or a common area of a
condominium, apartment complex, or townhouse development.
   Potentially dangerous dog means a dog that has been determined, as provided
herein, to have:
      (1)   Inflicted a bite on a person that resulted in broken bones or
disfiguring lacerations or required cosmetic surgery or hospitalization;
      (2)   Killed or inflicted severe injury upon a domestic animal when not
on the real property of the owner of the dog; or
      (3)   Attacked a person or approached a person when unrestrained and not
on the owner's property in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent
attitude of attack.
   Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or
disfiguring lacerations or requires cosmetic surgery or hospitalization.
   Territorial jurisdiction of the county means all territory within the
boundaries of the County of Martin, North Carolina, except the incorporated
area of a municipality, unless such municipality has consented to the
application and enforcement of this article in such areas.
   Vicious dog means a dangerous dog, as defined herein, that after having once
committed an act making it a dangerous dog or having been determined hereunder
to be a dangerous dog, commits a subsequent attack on a person or domestic
animal.
(Ord. No. 2008-5, § I, 6-11-2008)
Sec. 4-52. Application of article; exceptions.
   The provisions of this article do not apply to:
      (1)   A law enforcement dog or guard dog being used by a law enforcement
officer or bona fide professional security guard to carry out the law
enforcement officer's or security guard's official duties or professional
responsibilities;
      (2)   A dog being used in a lawful hunt;
      (3)   A dog where the injury or damage inflicted by the dog was sustained
by a domestic animal while the dog was working as a hunting dog, herding dog,
or predator control dog on the property of, or under the control of, its owner,
keeper or harborer, and the damage or injury was to a species or type of
domestic animal appropriate to the work of the dog; or
      (4)   A dog where the injury inflicted by the dog was sustained by a
person who, at the time of the injury, was tormenting, abusing, or assaulting
the dog, had tormented, abused, or assaulted the dog, or was committing or
attempting to commit a crime.
(Ord. No. 2008-5, § II, 6-11-2008)
Sec. 4-53. Reporting requirements.
   (a)   Events to be reported. The following events shall be reported to the
animal control department within three business days after the event has
occurred:
      (1)   Any attack or biting by a dog upon any person or domestic animal;
or
      (2)   The transfer, gift, sale, or other conveyance of ownership or
possession of a potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious dog, its
confinement in a veterinary facility, its removal from the territorial
jurisdiction of the county, or its death.
   (b)   Report required. The following persons are required to report:
      (1)   An owner, keeper or harborer of a dangerous or vicious dog or a dog
that has attacked or bitten a person or domestic animal;
      (2)   A victim of or person witnessing such an attack or biting;
      (3)   A veterinarian treating a domestic animal for such an attack or
biting; or
      (4)   A health care professional treating a person for such an attack or
biting.
   (c)   Report data required. The data required in the report and the format
thereof shall be as set forth in administrative procedures promulgated by the
animal control director.
(Ord. No. 2008-5, § III, 6-11-2008)
Sec. 4-54. Determination that a dog is dangerous, potentially dangerous or
vicious.
   (a)   Generally. Upon a complaint, or when he has reasonable suspicion that
a dog is potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious, the animal control
director or his designee shall make a determination whether or not such dog is
dangerous, potentially dangerous or vicious. Any determination that a dog is
potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious shall be made in writing which
summarizes the available evidence and which shall be delivered or mailed
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner. If the determination is
made that the suspect dog is dangerous, potentially dangerous, or vicious, the
written determination shall order compliance with the appropriate provisions of
this article and the director may impose reasonable conditions to maintain the
public health and safety. The director or his designee shall assess appropriate
civil penalties if he determines that violations of this article have been
established and may elect to pursue other remedies authorized by law.
   (b)   Appeals from determinations.
      (1)   Any party having a direct interest in the matter and aggrieved by
any determination as provided in this article may, within three business days
of receiving such determination, appeal such determination in writing, to the
animal control board. The ruling of the animal control board shall be final,
subject only to such appeal or certiorari proceeding as may be provided by law
to the superior court for the county, filed within ten days of the date of the
final determination by the animal control board.
      (2)   Any determination of the animal control director may be appealed to
the animal control board by filing written objections with the chairperson of
the animal control board within three days after such determination. The animal
control board shall schedule a hearing on such appeal within ten days of the
filing of the written objections. The animal control board shall render its
decision as expeditiously as possible after the hearing. It shall deliver said
decision, to the parties and any person appearing at the hearing and requesting
notice thereof, by certified mail, return receipt requested, and file it
concurrently with the animal control director and the office of the county
attorney. Any decision of the animal control board concerning any appeal
provided for in this chapter shall be the final determination subject only to
such appeal or certiorari proceeding as may be provided by law to the superior
court for Martin County, filed within ten days of the date of the final
determination by the animal control board.
      (3)   Any appeal hearing before the animal control board shall be
conducted as follows:
         a.   The hearing shall be subject to the Open Meetings Law, and the
notice required thereunder shall be posted and given as applicable;
         b.   The parties may appear pro se or be represented by an attorney;
         c.   Any person adversely affected by the appeal may appear and
participate fully in the proceeding;
         d.   Participants may make any statements, present any evidence, or
offer any witnesses on their behalf, on any relevant issue;
         e.   Participants shall be entitled to the right of cross examination;
         f.   The hearing shall be quasi-judicial in nature and all testimony
shall be under oath;
         g.   Any participant shall be entitled to transcribe the proceeding at
his own cost;
         h.   The animal control board may affirm, deny, or affirm with
conditions the determination appealed from. Any conditions imposed by the
animal control board shall be reasonable, shall be relevant to the issues in
the matter, and shall have the effect of promoting the public health, safety
and welfare;
         i.   The animal control board shall announce its decision at an open
meeting and render it in writing, as expeditiously as possible, at, or
following the hearing. Its decision shall contain findings of fact and
conclusions in support of its decision.
(Ord. No. 2008-5, § IV, 6-11-2008)
Sec. 4-55. Registration required.
   (a)   Generally. Any person owning, keeping, or harboring a dog determined,
as set forth in section
4-54, to be dangerous, potentially dangerous, or vicious, shall register such
dog with the animal control department within five days of such determination,
or may, in lieu of any hearing, register such dog voluntarily, where such
voluntary registration shall constitute an admission and determination that the
dog is dangerous, potentially dangerous, or vicious.
   (b)   Relief from civil penalty. Voluntary registration of a dangerous,
potentially dangerous, or vicious dog by the owner, keeper or harborer thereof,
prior to a determination that a dog is dangerous or vicious, or within five
days:
      (1)   Of an event establishing reasonable cause to believe that a dog is
potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious; or
      (2)   Of the acquisition of a potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious
dog, whichever later occurs.
Shall relieve such person from assessment of a civil penalty for any violation
of this article occurring between such date, event or acquisition and the date
of registration.
   (c)   Permanent identification mark required. Each dog registered, as set
forth in subsection (a) of this section, shall be assigned a registration
number by the animal control department, which shall be affixed to the dog by
permanent chip implant, tattoo or some other permanent means by or at the
expense of the owner, keeper or harborer of the dog. No person shall remove
such identification mark once it is assigned and affixed.
(Ord. No. 2008-5, § V, 6-11-2008)
Sec. 4-56. Permit required.
   (a)   Generally. After registration of a potentially dangerous, dangerous or
vicious dog, or after a determination that such dog is potentially dangerous,
dangerous or vicious, no person shall own, keep or harbor such dog thereafter
within the territorial jurisdiction of this chapter without applying for and
obtaining a permit from the animal control department.
   (b)   Issuance of permit. The animal control department shall issue a permit
for a potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious dog only upon submission of a
complete, verified application, payment of the permit fee, and a finding by the
director or his designee that required arrangements for housing of the dog and
other public health and safety provisions are in effect, and that each dog, for
which a permit is issued, does not pose an unreasonable threat to the public
health, safety and general welfare, if the permittee shall comply with the
provisions of this article and the conditions of the permit. Each permit shall
be conditioned on continued compliance with the provisions of this article and
other provisions of law, on continued compliance with, and maintenance of, the
arrangements for housing and safety set forth in the permit application, and
any special conditions the director may deem reasonably necessary to protect
the public health, safety and welfare in view of the particular circumstances
and history of the dog concerned.
   (c)   Temporary permits. Following the registration of a potentially
dangerous, dangerous or vicious dog, or the impoundment of such a dog; upon
application therefor, and for good cause, the director may issue a temporary
permit allowing the owner, keeper or harborer of a registered potentially
dangerous, dangerous or vicious dog to retain possession of such dog, or to
confine such dog at a veterinary facility or kennel approved by the director. A
temporary permit also may be issued to allow the transport of a potentially
dangerous, dangerous or vicious dog from the territorial jurisdiction of this
article. A temporary permit shall be issued subject to the same conditions to
which a regular permit is subject and to any other conditions the director may
deem necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, consistent
with the provisions of this article. A temporary permit shall be valid only
until the earlier of its expiration, revocation or the issuance or denial of a
permit under the provisions of subsection (b) of this section.
   (d)   Term of permits and renewal thereof. No permit shall be issued under
subsection (b) of this section for a term of more than three years, but may, in
the director's discretion, be issued for a shorter period. Permits may be
renewed, subject to the same terms and conditions required for initial permits.
   (e)   Revocation of permits. The director may, upon notice and hearing and
for good cause shown, revoke any permit or modify any terms, conditions or
provisions thereof. If the director deems it necessary to protect the public
health or safety from any imminent threat or danger thereto, he may, without
hearing, suspend any permit, or any portion thereof, for not more than 30 days.
Good cause for revocation or modification of a permit shall include, without
limitation, violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this
article, or with any term, condition or provision of a permit.
   (f)   Inspections. The director shall cause periodic inspections to be made
of the premises of a permittee to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
article and the applicable permit.
   (g)   Insurance. Every person owning, keeping or harboring a dog that has
been declared dangerous, potentially dangerous or vicious, shall purchase and
maintain a policy of liability insurance covering any injury or property damage
caused by the dog. Minimum policy limits shall be $100,000.00 personal injury
or property damage, per occurrence. Such person shall cause a certificate or
declaration of insurance to be furnished to the director annually. Every
calendar day that the required insurance is not in full force and effect shall
constitute a violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 2008-5, § VI, 6-11-2008)
Sec. 4-57. Regulation of dangerous and vicious dogs; security and restraint
requirements.
   No person shall own, keep or harbor a dangerous, potentially dangerous, or a
vicious dog except in compliance with all provisions of this article,
including:
      (1)   Dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs. Dangerous dogs and
potentially dangerous dogs shall be subject to the following regulations:
         a.   Such dog shall be kept, secured and restrained while on the real
property of the person owning, keeping or harboring it only in the following
ways:
            1.   In a building with doors, windows, and other exits securely
fastened shut, under the supervision and control of a responsible adult person
capable of such supervision and control.
            2.   Securely kept in a locked enclosure which has secure sides,
top and bottom and is constructed out of materials and in a manner which will
preclude escape by the dog and prevent entry by small children.
            3.   While outside a building or enclosure described in subsections
(1)a1 and (1)a2 of this section, securely leashed with a leash no longer than
four feet in length in the hands of, and under the control of, a responsible,
competent person capable of such control, and muzzled by a muzzling device
sufficient to prevent such dog from biting persons or other animals.
         b.   No person owning, keeping, or harboring such a dog shall remove
such a dog from the real property of such person except to bring such dog to a
veterinarian or to the animal shelter, to remove such dog permanently from the
territorial jurisdiction of this article, or to provide bona fide exercise
necessary for the dog's continued good health. In the event of such removal,
such dog shall be securely restrained or enclosed, as set forth in subsection
(1)a of this section, for dogs being maintained outside buildings.
         c.   Such dog shall be sterilized within 30 days of the date that the
dog was declared dangerous or potentially dangerous by the animal control
director, or if the declaration by the director is timely appealed, then such
sterilization shall occur within 30 days of the date that the animal control
board determines that the dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous.
      (2)   Vicious dogs. No person shall keep or harbor a vicious dog within
the territorial jurisdiction of this article, except as follows:
         a.   In the care and custody of a veterinarian for the purposes of
treatment or quarantine or pending appeal, as herein provided, of the
determination that the dog is vicious, in which case the dog shall be kept and
secured by the veterinarian, as provided herein, for a dangerous dog.
         b.   In the custody of the animal shelter pending disposition in
accordance with the provisions of this article or lawful instructions of the
person owning or previously keeping or harboring such animal.
         c.   Pending appeal as herein provided, of the determination that the
dog is vicious, in which case the dog shall be kept and secured by the animal
shelter, as provided, herein, for a dangerous dog.
      (3)   Signage. Any owner of a dangerous, potentially dangerous, or
vicious dog shall erect a sign (two feet by two feet) on the enclosure housing
said dog which shall read:
BEWARE OF DOG.
THIS DOG IS DANGEROUS.
STAY AWAY!
(Ord. No. 2008-5, § VII, 6-11-2008)
Sec. 4-58. Impoundment of potentially dangerous, dangerous and vicious dogs.
   (a)   Apprehension and surrender. Upon an initial determination or upon
registration of a dog to be dangerous, potentially dangerous, or vicious, or if
the director has reasonable suspicion to believe that a dangerous, potentially
dangerous, or vicious dog is being kept or harbored within the territorial
jurisdiction of this article in violation of it, or of a permit issued
hereunder, animal control officers and law enforcement officers of the county,
and of any municipality subject to this article, shall impound such dog. It
shall be a violation of this article to fail or refuse to surrender such dog to
such officers upon their lawful demand. The officer impounding such a dog shall
deliver the same to the animal shelter.
   (b)   Confinement. A dog impounded by or surrendered to an animal control
officer or law enforcement officer, as provided herein, shall be confined in
the animal shelter or, upon request of the owner, keeper or harborer of the
dog, or a permittee hereunder, and at such person's expense, at a private
veterinary facility or kennel approved by the director, subject to the
following conditions:
      (1)   Costs of impoundment. Impoundment shall be at the expense of the
owner, keeper or harborer of the dog, or of the permittee. Costs of impoundment
at the animal shelter shall be paid by the person liable therefor, at the daily
rate therefor. The costs of impoundment at a veterinary facility or kennel
shall be paid by the person liable therefor, pursuant to the terms of the
agreement between such person and the proprietor of such facility or kennel. In
no event shall the county, or any municipality subject to this article, be
liable for, or pay for, impoundment at such private facility or kennel.
      (2)   Release from impoundment. No such dog shall be released from
impoundment, as provided herein, except upon registration of such dog and
issuance, as provided herein, of a permit or temporary permit allowing such
release. No such dog shall be released from the animal shelter until costs of
confinement of such dog, any registration and permit fees for such dog, and any
civil penalties assessed in connection with such dog have been paid in full.
      (3)   Disposition of unclaimed or abandoned dogs. The following dogs
impounded at the animal shelter pursuant to this article shall be deemed
abandoned and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article and
the rules and regulations of the animal shelter:
         a.   Any dog which remains unclaimed by its owner, keeper or harborer
or permittee thereof, for a period more than ten days, or a period of lawful
quarantine, whichever is longer.
         b.   Any dog claimed by its owner, keeper or harborer, which is
confined for a period in excess of ten days, or a period of lawful quarantine,
whichever is longer, during which no application has been made for a permit or
temporary permit; provided, however, the director shall extend such time upon a
showing of justifiable delay in such action by the owner, keeper, harborer or
permittee thereof.
(Ord. No. 2008-5, § VIII, 6-11-2008)
Sec. 4-59. Violations, penalties and other remedies.
   (a)   Violations. Each act or conduct prohibited by this article and each
failure to comply with a mandatory provision of this article shall constitute a
violation. Each day's continuing act, or conduct prohibited hereby, and each
day's continuing failure to comply, shall constitute a separate and distinct
offense. Violations shall subject the violator to civil penalties and to other
remedies allowed by law. For the purposes of assessing civil penalties,
violations of this article are classified as follows:
      (1)   Class I violations.
         a.   Failure to report an event for which a report is required.
         b.   Failure to register a potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious
dog as required.
         c.   Any other violation not otherwise classified in this section.
      (2)   Class II violations.
         a.   Keeping or harboring a vicious dog within the territorial
jurisdiction of this article in violation of this article.
         b.   Keeping or harboring a dangerous dog within the territorial
jurisdiction of this article in violation of terms, conditions and provisions
of a permit, or of the housing and restraint requirements of this article.
         c.   Failure to surrender a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog to
an animal control officer or law enforcement officer for impoundment as
required by this article.
         d.   Willfully or negligently allowing a potentially dangerous,
dangerous or vicious dog to leave the premises where it is required to be kept
and harbored.
      (3)   Class III violations.
         a.   Willfully or negligently allowing a potentially dangerous,
dangerous or vicious dog to leave the premises where it is required to be kept
and harbored, when such dog has thereafter committed an attack or a biting.
         b.   Refusal to surrender a vicious dog to an animal control officer
or law enforcement officer for impoundment as required by this article.
         c.   Failure to maintain insurance as required herein.
   (b)   Civil penalties. The following civil penalties shall be assessed for
each class of violation:
      (1)   Class I violations.
         a.   A fine in an amount as specified by the board of commissioners
from time to time, for the first day of a violation.
         b.   A fine in an amount as specified by the board of commissioners
from time to time, for each subsequent day of a continuing violation.
         c.   A maximum fine in an amount as specified by the board of
commissioners from time to time, for each continuing violation.
      (2)   Class II violations.
         a.   A fine in an amount as specified by the board of commissioners
from time to time, for the first day of a violation.
         b.   A fine in an amount as specified by the board of commissioners
from time to time, for each subsequent day of a continuing violation.
         c.   A maximum fine in an amount as specified by the board of
commissioners from time to time, for each continuing violation.
      (3)   Class III violations.
         a.   A fine in an amount as specified by the board of commissioners
from time to time, for the first day of a violation.
         b.   A fine in an amount as specified by the board of commissioners
from time to time, for each subsequent day of continuing violation.
         c.   A maximum fine in an amount as specified by the board of
commissioners from time to time, for each continuing violation.
   (c)   Other remedies. In addition to assessment of civil penalties, this
article may be enforced by any one or more of the remedies set forth in chapter
160A or 153A, as applicable, of the North Carolina General Statutes.
   (d)   State law violations.
      (1)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent an animal
control officer or any other person from pursuing remedies under G.S. 67-1A.
      (2)   The director or his designee is designated as the person
responsible for making the determination required under G.S. 67-4.1(c). In
making such determinations, the director or his designee shall follow the
procedure set forth herein for determinations.
      (3)   The animal control board is designated as the appellate board to
hear appeals of determinations made pursuant to G.S. 67-4.1(c).
(Ord. No. 2008-5, § IX, 6-11-2008)
Sec. 4-60. Administrative provisions.
   (a)   Responsibility. The director shall administer and enforce this article
and shall promulgate rules and regulations for such administration and
enforcement, as may be necessary or desirable, to such end.
   (b)   Citations assessing civil penalties. The director or any animal
control officer shall have authority to investigate alleged or suspected
violations of this article and upon the determination by such person, based on
observation or other evidence, that a violation has occurred; each such person
shall have the authority to issue a written citation for violation of this
article and to assess a civil penalty in the amount due. Such citation shall be
mailed to the violator, by an animal control officer, a law enforcement
officer, by certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the last
known address of the violator, or shall be personally delivered to the
violator, or to some responsible person at the violator's residence. Service
shall be complete upon personal delivery, as provided herein, or upon execution
of a receipt for the certified mail by the violator or his agent, in the event
of such service. If a civil penalty, duly assessed, is not paid when due, the
director shall initiate an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to
collect such amount due.
   (c)   Authority to enter upon premises. Animal control officers shall have
authority to:
      (1)   Enter into and inspect any premises, dwellings, rooming units,
barns and other outbuildings, any part of the curtilage thereof, or any yard or
other enclosure, to conduct any investigation of a dog alleged or suspected of
being potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious;
      (2)   To apprehend a dog determined to be potentially dangerous,
dangerous or vicious, or as to which there is reasonable suspicion to believe
is potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious;
      (3)   To investigate any violation of this article; or
      (4)   To serve a citation upon a person for violation of this article.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any animal control officer shall only make such
entry upon consent, pursuant to an administrative search warrant under G.S. 15-
27.2, or otherwise as authorized by law.
   (d)   Authority to immobilize or kill a dangerous or vicious dog.
      (1)   If in the course of investigating, apprehending or otherwise taking
into custody a potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious dog, or a dog as to
which there is reasonable suspicion to believe is potentially dangerous,
dangerous or vicious; such dog is not securely restrained and an animal control
officer or a law enforcement officer has reasonable cause to believe the dog
poses an imminent risk of serious physical injury or death to any person or
domestic animal, said officer shall have authority to render such dog immobile
by means of tranquilizers or other safe drugs or, if that is not safely or
timely possible under the circumstances, then said officer may humanely dispose
of said dog.
      (2)   If a potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious dog impounded in
the animal shelter cannot be cared for or handled without risk of serious
physical injury or death to persons caring for or handling such dog or to other
animals, an animal control officer shall have the authority to render such dog
immobile by means of tranquilizers or other safe drugs or, if that is not
safely or timely possible under the circumstances, then said officer may
humanely dispose of said dog.
      (3)   An animal control officer may humanely dispose of any dog being
investigated under the provisions of this article at the request of or with the
consent of its owner, keeper, or harborer.
(Ord. No. 2008-5, § X, 6-11-2008)
Sec. 4-61. Computation of time.
   In computing any period of time prescribed or allowed by this article, the
day of the act or event after which the designated period of time begins to run
is not to be included. The last day of the period so computed is to be
included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday when the county
animal shelter is closed, in which event the period runs until the end of the
next day which is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday when the county
animal shelter is closed. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven
days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and holidays shall be excluded in the
computation.
(Ord. No. 2008-5, § XII, 6-11-2008)
Secs. 4-62—4-80. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. BEAVERS
Sec. 4-81. Adopted.
   The provisions of this article are adopted under authority granted by G.S.
153A-121(a).
(Ord. No. 2001-9-1, § 1, 10-10-2001)
Sec. 4-82. Intent.
   The intent of this article is to provide a uniform system of controlling and
managing beavers throughout the county's jurisdiction in order to protect the
health, safety, and welfare of its citizens and to eliminate economic losses to
bottom land timber, agricultural crops, roadways, and personal property caused
by beavers.
(Ord. No. 2001-9-1, § 2, 10-10-2001)
Sec. 4-83. Jurisdiction.
   The jurisdiction of this article includes the entire geographical area of
the county, but excludes areas of jurisdiction of incorporated municipalities,
unless any municipality requests that this article applies also within their
jurisdiction and presents a valid resolution of evidence of same.
(Ord. No. 2001-9-1, § 3, 10-10-2001)
Sec. 4-84. Beaver season.
   The county establishes this beaver control management program to coincide
with the state trapping season from November 1 until March 31. If the state
wildlife commission changes the dates of the trapping season for beavers, the
county controlled management program will coincide with the state beaver
trapping season. The county will fund in an amount as determined by the board
of commissioners for this program for each beaver season and the program will
remain in effect for any beaver season until such funds are depleted or until
the county no longer funds the program or until the beaver season ends,
whichever shall first occur.
(Ord. No. 2001-9-1, § 4, 10-10-2001)
Sec. 4-85. Permits.
   Each trapper will need a beaver controlled management program permit issued
by the county and also each trapper must be licensed by the state and must be a
resident of the county in order to acquire a county permit. The cost of said
permit will be in an amount as determined by the board of commissioners from
time to time. Each trapper will have to submit a signed application indicating
his agreement and compliance with this article before a permit is issued. Each
permit will be numbered and recorded at the county office.
(Ord. No. 2001-9-1, § 5, 10-10-2001)
Sec. 4-86. Fines.
   It is expressly understood and agreed that the payment per beaver tail in an
amount as determined by the board of commissioners from time to time, applies
strictly to beaver tails acquired in the county. A fine will be imposed on
anyone bringing beaver tails from outside the county in an amount as determined
by the board of commissioners from time to time, for the first illegal beaver
tail and then an additional amount to be determined by the board of
commissioners from time to time, for each additional illegal beaver tail. Each
illegal beaver tail will be considered a separate violation and also will
result in a loss of permit issued by the county. A reward in an amount as
determined by the board of commissioners from time to time, will be given to
anyone who has any information leading to the arrest and conviction of anyone
bringing in beaver tails from outside the county and trying to or collecting a
bounty on them. Any rewards that are paid will be deducted from the fiscal year
amount funded for this program. The county will pursue any violation of state
criminal statutes for the taking of beaver tails outside the county and
receiving payment for same, including, but not limited to, obtaining property
by false pretense, or any other violation of state law concerning criminal
violations. Violation of this article is a misdemeanor punishable as provided
in G.S. 14-4 plus a fine in an amount as determined by the board of
commissioners from time to time, per beaver tail brought in from outside of the
county for collection.
(Ord. No. 2001-9-1, § 6, 10-10-2001; Ord. No. 2006-2, § 1, 6-14-2006; Ord. No.
2007-1, § 1, 1-10-2007)
Sec. 4-87. State laws.
   All trappers in the county will have to follow all regulations implemented
by the state wildlife commission.
(Ord. No. 2001-9-1, § 7, 10-10-2001)
Sec. 4-88. Payments.
   A collection site for beaver tails captured in the county will be the animal
control office located at the county landfill off of McCaskey Road. The beaver
tail will have to be turned in before it is counted. The enforcement officer
will receive the beaver tails and give a receipt to each trapper at that time.
The receipt issued by the enforcement officer will have to be turned into the
county's finance office. The enforcement officer will also have to record each
receipt. All checks will be mailed and will not be hand delivered to any
individual trapper. Payment for each beaver tail turned in will be established
by the board of commissioners during the annual budget development.
(Ord. No. 2001-9-1, § 8, 10-10-2001; Ord. No. 2006-2, § 2, 6-14-2006; Ord. No.
2007-1, § 2, 1-10-2007)
Sec. 4-89. Monitoring program.
   There will be an enforcement officer monitoring the beaver program. He has
the authority to check all trappers at any given time or any given place and,
if any trapper refuses to cooperate or permit the enforcement officer to check,
the trapper's permit will be revoked immediately. Permits will have to be
carried by the trappers at all times and any violation will be handled by the
county sheriff's department.
(Ord. No. 2001-9-1, § 9, 10-10-2001)
Sec. 4-90. Landowner forms.
   Landowner permission forms will be available at the county manager's office
when the permit is bought and any trapper will have to have signed proof that
he has permission to trap on each farm. A form signed by the landowner stating
the number of beaver tails that were collected off his farm and the farm number
will have to be presented and turned in before payment will be made. This has
to be done at the same time beaver tails are turned in and no receipts shall be
issued unless beaver tails and form of proof from landowner are turned in at
the same time. These forms will be available at the county manager's office.
(Ord. No. 2001-9-1, § 10, 10-10-2001; Ord. No. 2006-2, § 3, 6-14-2006; Ord. No.
2007-1, § 3, 1-10-2007)
Chapter 6
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 1
 
Notes
  Federal law reference—Compliance of Federal buildings with local building
  codes and zoning laws, consideration of local laws and cooperation with local
1 officials required, 40 USC § 3312.
  State law reference(s)—Building code council and state building code, G.S.
  143-136 et seq.; authority of county to levy taxes for building inspection,
  G.S. 153A-149(c)(26).
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 6-1. Jurisdiction.
   (a)   The jurisdiction for the state building code shall be for all of the
county and its municipalities.
   (b)   The county shall also have jurisdiction to enforce the code in any
municipality which requests by resolution that the county do so within its
corporate limits.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 1.5, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-2. Compliance with codes.
   All new construction, alterations, major repairs, and the installation of
building components and mobile homes within the jurisdiction of the county
shall conform with the state building code.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 1.6, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-3. Exclusions.
   (a)   The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this
article:
      (1)   Construction of nonresidential farm buildings, but not from the
electrical code;
      (2)   Construction of pipelines and storage tanks for LP gas and liquid
fertilizer;
      (3)   Construction of power, communication, and utility lines;
      (4)   Prefabricated buildings or preassembled outside storage buildings
(less than 145 square feet) but not any wiring, plumbing, or mechanical system
installed to or within.
   (b)   When a property owner improves property at a cost of more than
$2,500.00, the property owner must, within 14 days after the completion of the
work, submit to the county tax supervisor a statement setting forth the nature
of the improvement and the total cost thereof.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 1.7, 10-7-1985)
Secs. 6-4—6-26. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. INSPECTIONS DEPARTMENT
Sec. 6-27. Creation of inspections department.
   A county inspections department is created which consists of one or more
inspectors who may be given the titles of building inspector, electrical
inspector, plumbing inspector, housing inspector, zoning inspector, heating and
air-conditioning inspector, fire prevention inspector, deputy or assistant
inspector, or any other title that is generally descriptive of the duties
assigned. The department may be headed by a superintendent or director of
inspections.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 2.1, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-28. Duties of inspections department.
   The inspections department shall receive applications for permits, issue or
deny permits, make necessary inspections, issue or deny certificates of
compliance, issue orders to correct violations, revoke permits, bring judicial
actions against actual or threatened violations, keep adequate records, and
take any other actions that may be required in order to enforce the Code.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 2.2, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-29. Records and reports.
   (a)   Maintaining of records. The inspections department shall keep
complete, permanent, and accurate records in convenient form of all
applications received, permits issued, inspections and reinspections made,
defects and violations found, certificates of compliance granted, and all other
actions of the department.
   (b)   Periodic reports required. Periodic reports shall be submitted to the
board of commissioners and to the commissioner of insurance as required.
   (c)   Registration of contractors. Every person carrying on the business of
building contractor, plumbing contractor, heating and air-conditioning
contractor, insulation, or electrical contractor within the county shall
register at the office of the inspections department, giving name, place of
business and address, and his state contractor's license number.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 2.2.2, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-30. Inspectors.
   (a)   Qualifications of inspectors. The county shall employ only those
inspectors to enforce the state building code as a member of a county (or joint
inspections department) who have one of the following types of certificates
issued by the state code officials qualification board attesting to his
qualifications to hold such position:
      (1)   A probationary certificate;
      (2)   A standard certificate; or
      (3)   A limited certificate.
   An inspector holding one of the above certificates can be promoted to a
position requiring a higher level certificate only upon issuance by the board
of a standard certificate or probationary certificate appropriate for such new
position.
   (b)   Conflict of interest. Unless he is the owner of the building, no
member of an inspections department may be financially interested in furnishing
labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration, or maintenance
of any building within the county's territorial jurisdiction or any part or
system thereof, or in making plans or specifications therefor. No member of any
inspections department may engage in any work that is consistent with his
duties or with the interest of the county.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 2.3, 10-7-1985)
Secs. 6-31—6-48. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. BUILDING PERMITS
Sec. 6-49. Health department.
   Prior to the issuance of any permit, district health department approval for
use of a septic tank is required where a sewage system cannot be connected to
city or county sewer.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 3.1.1, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-50. Building permit.
   No person shall commence or proceed with the construction, reconstruction,
alteration, or repair of any building or other structure, or any part thereof,
without first securing a written permit therefor, from the building inspections
department; provided, however, that no building permit shall be required for
work the total cost of which does not exceed $500.00 and which does not involve
any change of the structural parts or the stairways, elevators, fire escapes or
other means of egress of the building or the structure in question.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 3.1.2, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-51. Mobile homes.
   A permit is required for the setting up and installation of mobile homes.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 3.1.3, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-52. Signs, marquees, etc.
   A permit is required to install signs, marquees, awnings, etc., when
required in accordance with the state building code.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 3.1.4, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-53. Change of use.
   A permit is required whenever the use of an existing building is changed.
This permit shall not be issued until the inspector has made an inspection of
the building to determine whether it must be altered or repaired in order to
meet the requirements of the Code with respect to the new use.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 3.1.5, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-54. Plumbing permit.
   No person shall commence or proceed with the installation, extension, or
general repair of any plumbing system without first securing a written permit
from the building inspections department; provided, however, no permit shall be
required for minor repairs or replacements on the house side of a trap to an
installed system of plumbing if such repairs or replacements do not disrupt the
original water supply or the waste or ventilating systems.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 3.1.6, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-55. Electrical permit.
   No person shall commence or proceed with the installation, extension,
alteration, or general repair of any electrical wiring, devices, appliances, or
equipment without first securing a written permit therefor from the building
inspections department; provided, however, no permit shall be required for
minor repair work such as the connection of portable devices to suitable
receptacles which have been permanently installed; provided, further, no permit
shall be required for the installation, alteration, or repair of the electrical
wiring, devices, appliances, and equipment installed by or for an electrical
public utility corporation for the use of such corporation in the generation,
transmission, distribution, or metering of electrical energy, or for the use of
such corporation in the operation of signals or the transmission of
intelligence.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 3.1.7, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-56. Heating and air-conditioning permit.
   No person shall commence or proceed with the installation, extension,
alteration, or general repairs of heating or air-conditioning systems without a
permit from the building inspections department; provided, however, no permit
shall be required for minor repairs or minor burner services.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 3.1.8, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-57. Fees for permits.
   The board of commissioners may establish reasonable fees for issuing permits
for inspections and for other services of the inspections department and the
fee schedule for the county shall be as established from time to time.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 3.2, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-58. Application for permits.
   (a)   Each application for a permit shall be filed with the inspections
department; in writing, on a form furnished for that purpose, and shall contain
a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application
shall be signed by the owner or his authorized agent.
   (b)   Each application shall indicate the proposed use or occupancy of all
parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not
covered by the building, and shall contain other pertinent information as may
be required by the inspections department.
   (c)   When required by the inspections department, two or more copies of
specifications and of drawings, drawn to scale with sufficient clarity and
detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, shall accompany each
application. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the
form of notes or otherwise, as to the quality of materials, where quality is
essential to conformity with this Code. The inspections department may require
details, computations, stress diagrams, and other dates necessary to describe
the construction and basis of calculations and they shall bear the signature of
the person responsible for the design. Plans for all buildings shall indicate
how required structural and fire-resistive integrity will be maintained where a
penetration of a required fire-resistive wall, floor, or partition will be made
for electrical, mechanical, plumbing, and communication conduits, pipes, and
systems and also indicate in sufficient detail how the fire integrity will be
maintained where required fire-resistive floors intersect the exterior walls.
   (d)   No permit shall be issued unless the plans and specifications are
identified by the name and address of the author thereof.
   (e)   Where state law requires that plans for certain types of construction
be prepared only by a registered architect or a registered engineer, no permit
shall be issued unless the plans and specifications bear the state seal of a
registered architect or registered engineer.
   (f)   Where state law requires a licensed contractor for certain types of
construction, no permit shall be issued for such construction except in
compliance with state statutes.
   (g)   The inspections department may require drawings showing the location
of the proposed building and of all existing buildings on the site or lot. The
department may also require a boundary line survey and a map prepared by a
registered land surveyor.
   (h)   Where necessary to determine compliance with code standards, the
inspections department may require tests or test reports. Such tests must be
made by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency, at the expense
of the applicant. Copies of test reports or the results of tests shall be kept
on file in the inspections department.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 3.3, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-59. Issuance of permits.
   (a)   If the inspections department is satisfied that the work described in
an application for permit and the drawings and specifications filed therewith
conforms to the requirements of this Code and all other applicable state and
local laws, it shall issue a permit therefor to the applicant.
   (b)   The permit shall be in writing and shall contain a provision that the
work done shall comply with the state building code and all other applicable
state and local laws.
   (c)   A permit issued for work under this Code shall expire by limitation
six months after the date of issuance if the work authorized has not been
commenced. If after commencement the work is discontinued for a period of 12
months, the permit shall immediately expire. No work authorized by any permit
that has expired shall be performed until a new permit has been secured.
   (d)   After a permit has been issued, no changes or deviations from the
terms of the application, plans and specifications, or the permit (except
changes or deviations clearly permissible under this Code) shall be made until
specific written approval of proposed changes or deviations has been obtained
from the inspections department.
   (e)   When the inspections department issues a permit, it shall endorse in
writing (or by stamping "APPROVED") all sets of plans which have been
submitted. One set of plans so approved shall be retained by the inspections
department, and the other set or sets shall be returned to the applicant; one
set of which shall be kept at the site of the work and shall be open to
inspection by any authorized member of the inspections department.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 3.4, 10-7-1985)
Secs. 6-60—6-76. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. INSPECTIONS
Sec. 6-77. Inspections authorized; right of entry.
   (a)   As the work covered by permit progresses, local inspectors shall make
as many inspections as necessary to satisfy them that the work is being done in
accordance with this Code, any other applicable state and local laws, and the
terms of the permit.
   (b)   Authorized personnel of a local inspections department shall have a
right, to the extent provided by state law, to enter on any premises within the
department's jurisdiction, including entry into or upon all buildings or
structures, for the purpose of inspection or other enforcement action, upon
presentation of proper credentials.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 4.1, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-78. Inspections required.
   When required, the inspections department shall make at least the following
inspections of all work being performed under the permit and shall either
approve that portion of the construction as completed or shall notify the
permit holder or his agent where in the same fails to comply with the law. The
permit holder or his agent shall give timely notice to the inspections
department when the work for these inspections is ready.
      (1)   Foundation inspection. To be made after excavation and forms, if
any are erected and reinforcing steel, if any, is placed and prior to placement
of concrete.
      (2)   Frame inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, rough
plumbing, ducts, wiring, fire-blocking, and bracing is in place and all pipes,
chimneys, and vents are complete.
      (3)   Insulation inspection. To be made after framing is complete with
insulation being installed and prior to finish being applied.
      (4)   Final inspection. To be made after the building or structure is
completed and ready for occupancy.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 4.2, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-79. Work not to proceed without approval.
   Work shall not proceed on any part of a building or structure beyond the
point indicated for each inspection described in section
6-78 until written approval has been received from the inspections department.
      (1)   Reinforcing steel or structural framework of any part of any
buildings shall not be covered or concealed, in any manner whatsoever, without
first obtaining the approval of the inspections department and, where
appropriate, the designing architect or engineer.
      (2)   In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection
purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the inspections
department after all lathing and backing is in place. Plaster shall not be
applied until the approval of the inspections department has been received.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 4.3, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-80. Tests.
   Where necessary to determine the compliance of any work with code standards,
the inspections department may require tests or test reports. Such tests must
be made by an approved testing laboratory or other approved agency, at the
expense of the owner. Copies of test reports or the results of tests shall be
submitted to and kept on file in the inspections department.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 4.4, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-81. Periodic inspections.
   Local inspections department shall make periodic inspections, as directed by
the board of commissioners, of existing buildings to determine their compliance
with this Code and to determine whether they meet minimum requirements for
safety to life. In addition, they shall make inspections when they have reason
to believe that unsafe, unsanitary, hazardous, or unlawful conditions may exist
in a particular structure.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 4.5, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-82. Change of use.
   When an existing building is to be converted to another use or occupancy, it
shall be the responsibility of the owner or his agent to notify the inspections
department to make an inspection of such building to ensure that it will be in
compliance with the safety requirements of this Code as they would apply to the
new use or occupancy.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 4.6, 10-7-1985)
Secs. 6-83—6-107. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. CERTIFICATES OF COMPLIANCE
Sec. 6-108. Issuance.
   At the conclusion of all work done under a permit, the appropriate inspector
or inspectors shall make a final inspection, and if they find the completed
work complies with this Code and all other applicable state and local laws and
with the terms of the permits, the inspections department shall issue a
certificate of compliance.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 5.1, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-109. Certificate required for occupancy.
   No new building or structure or part thereof may be occupied, and no
addition or enlargement of an existing building or structure may be occupied,
and no existing building or structure that has been altered or moved may be
occupied, and no existing building or structure whose use has been changed may
be occupied, until the inspections department has issued a certificate of
compliance.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 5.2, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-110. Temporary certificates.
   A temporary certificate of compliance may be issued permitting occupancy for
a stated period of specified portions of the building or structure that the
inspections department finds may safely be occupied prior to final completion
of the entire building or structure.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 5.3, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-111. Occupancy without certificate a violation.
   Occupying a building or structure in violation of this section will
constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 5.4, 10-7-1985)
Secs. 6-112—6-135. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 6-136. Stop orders.
   (a)   Whenever any building or structure or part thereof is being
constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, or demolished in a hazardous
manner, or in substantial violation of this Code or any other applicable state
or local building law, or in a manner that endangers life or property, the
appropriate inspector may order the specific part of the work that is in
violation or presents such a hazard to be immediately stopped.
   (b)   The stop order shall be in writing, directed to the person doing the
work, and shall state the specific work to be stopped, the specific reasons
therefor, and the conditions under which the work may be resumed.
   (c)   Violation of a stop order shall constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 6.1, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-137. Revocation of permits.
   The inspections department may revoke and require the return of any permit
by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason for the
revocation. Permits may be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, or specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of this Code or any other applicable state or
local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the
permit. Any permit mistakenly issued in violation of this Code or any other
applicable state or local law may also be revoked.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 6.2, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-138. Equitable enforcement.
   In any violation of this article which is a misdemeanor, the county, either
in addition to or in lieu of other remedies, may initiate any appropriate
action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate the violation or
to prevent the occupancy of the building involved.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 6.3, 10-7-1985)
Secs. 6-139—6-159. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. APPEALS
Sec. 6-160. Process.
   The owner of a building may appeal from a stop order to the state
commissioner of insurance within a period of five days after the order is
issued. Notice of the appeal shall be given in writing to the commissioner of
insurance, with a copy to the local inspections department. The commissioner
shall promptly conduct a hearing at which the appellant and the inspector
issuing the order shall be permitted to submit relevant evidence, and shall
rule on the appeal as expeditiously as possible. Pending the ruling by the
commissioner of insurance on an appeal, no further work shall take place in
violation of the stop order. Further appeals may be taken to the building codes
or to the courts as provided by law.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, art. VII, 10-7-1985)
Secs. 6-161—6-186. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. CONDEMNATION OF UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Sec. 6-187. Unsafe buildings condemned.
   The inspector shall condemn as unsafe each building that appears to him to
be especially dangerous to life because of its liability to fire, bad condition
of walls, overloaded floors, defective construction, decay, unsafe wiring or
heating system, inadequate means of egress, or other causes; and he shall affix
a notice of the dangerous character of the building to a conspicuous place on
its exterior wall. In addition, the inspections department shall bring
appropriate actions to prevent violations, require corrective action, or
prevent occupancy of the building.
      (1)   Condemnation procedure. Whenever an inspector finds that a building
has not been constructed in compliance with this Code or other applicable state
and local laws, or that a building because of its condition is dangerous to
life, contains fire hazards, is unfit for human habitation, or constitutes a
nuisance, he shall notify the owner or occupant of the building of its defects,
hazardous conditions, or failure to comply with law. He shall also initiate
action in accordance with G.S. 153A-368 to vacate, demolish, close, repair, or
otherwise correct such conditions. The owner or occupant shall immediately
remedy the defects, hazardous conditions, or violations of law in the property
that each owns.
      (2)   Removal of notice. Removal of a notice condemning a building as
unsafe or failure to comply with a valid order to correct such conditions shall
constitute a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 8.1, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-188. Procedure in the event of failure to take corrective action.
   (a)   If the owner of a building that has been condemned as unsafe pursuant
to section
6-187 fails to take prompt corrective action, the local inspector shall, by
certified mail to his last known address or by personal service, give him
written notice:
      (1)   That the building is in a condition that appears to constitute a
fire or safety hazard or to be dangerous to life, health, or other property;
      (2)   That a hearing will be held before the inspector at a designated
place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the notice, at which
time the owner is entitled to be heard in person or by counsel and to present
arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      (3)   That following the hearing, the inspector may issue any order to
repair, close, vacate, or demolish the building that appears appropriate.
   (b)   If, after due diligence, the name or whereabouts of the owner cannot
be discovered, the notice shall be considered properly and adequately served
if:
      (1)   A copy thereof is posted on the outside of the building in question
at least ten days before the day of the hearing; and
      (2)   A notice of the hearing is published at least once not later than
one week before the hearing.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 8.2, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-189. Order to take corrective action.
   If, upon a hearing held pursuant to section
6-188(2), the inspector finds that the building is in a condition that
constitutes a fire or safety hazard or renders it dangerous to life, health, or
other property, he shall issue a written order, directed to the owner of the
building, requiring the owner to remedy the defective conditions by repairing,
closing, vacating, or demolishing the building or taking other necessary steps,
within such period, not less than 60 days, as the inspector may prescribe.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 8.3, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-190. Appeal of condemnation order to county board of commissioners.
   An owner who has received an order under section
6-189, may appeal that order to the board of commissioners by giving written
notice of appeal to the inspector and to the clerk within ten days following
the day the order is issued. In the absence of an appeal, the order of the
inspector is final. The board of commissioners shall hear any appeal within a
reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or revoke the order.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 8.4, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-191. Failure to comply with an order.
   If the owner of a building fails to comply with an order issued pursuant to
section
6-189 from which no appeal has been taken, or fails to comply with an order of
the board of commissioners following an appeal, he is guilty of a misdemeanor.
The county may also initiate appropriate action or proceedings to ensure
compliance with this article.
(Ord. No. 1985-1, § 8.5, 10-7-1985)
Sec. 6-192. Building permit fees.
   Building permit and inspection fees and criteria shall be as established
from time to time by the board of commissioners.
Secs. 6-193—6-222. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. MINIMUM HOUSING STANDARDS 2
 
Notes
2 State law reference(s)—Authority to enact minimum housing standards, G.S.
  160A-441 et seq.
Sec. 6-223. Purpose.
   (a)   Pursuant to G.S. 153A, it is hereby declared that there exist in the
county, dwellings which are unfit for human habitation due to dilapidation,
defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents and other calamities; lack of
ventilation, light and sanitary facilities; and other conditions rendering such
dwellings unsafe or unsanitary, dangerous and detrimental to the health, safety
and morals and otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the
county.
   (b)   In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of
the county, it is the purpose of this article to establish minimum standards of
fitness for the initial and continued occupancy of all buildings for human
habitation, as expressly authorized by G.S. 153A.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 01, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-224. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Basement means a portion of a dwelling which is located partly underground,
having direct access to light and air from windows located above the level of
the adjoining ground.
   Cellar means a portion of dwelling which is located partly or wholly
underground having an adequate access to light and air from windows located
partly or wholly below the level of the adjoining ground.
   Deteriorated means that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation and can be
repaired, altered or improved to comply with all of the standards established
by this article at a cost not in excess of 50 percent of its value, as
determined by finding of the officer.
   Dilapidated means that a dwelling is unfit for human habitation and cannot
be repaired, altered or improved to comply with all the minimum standards
established by this article except at a copy in excess of 50 percent of its
value, as determined by finding of the officer.
   Dwelling means any building, structure, or part thereof which is wholly or
partly used or intended to be used for living, sleeping or habitation by human
occupants, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or
usually enjoyed therewith. Temporary housing, as hereinafter defined, shall not
be regarded as a dwelling. The term "dwelling" includes within its meaning the
terms "rooming unit" and "roominghouse," as hereafter defined.
   Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and
forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to
be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
   Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents, or
other pests by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as
their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, or trapping; or by any other
recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the officer.
   Garbage means the organic waste resulting from the handling, preparation,
cooking and consumption of food.
   Gender. Terms having a masculine gender include the feminine and neuter
genders.
   Habitable room means a room or enclosed floor space used or intended to be
used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
watercloset compartments, laundries, heater rooms, foyers, or communicating
corridors, closets and storage spaces.
   Infestation means the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects,
rodents or other pests in such number as to constitute a menace to the health,
safety or welfare of the occupants or the public.
   Multiple-dwelling means any dwelling containing more than two dwelling
units.
   Occupant means any person over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking or
eating in, or having actual possession of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming
unit.
   Officer means the minimum housing code enforcement officer or any authorized
agent of the officer.
   Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a building, or
part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
   Owner means any person who, alone, jointly, or severally with others:
      (1)   Shall have title to any dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit,
with or without accompanying actual possession thereof;
      (2)   Shall be a mortgagee of record for any dwelling, dwelling unit or
rooming unit; or
      (3)   Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling, dwelling unit
or rooming unit, as owner or agent of the actual owner, or as executor,
executrix, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the actual
owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to
comply with the provisions of this article, and of rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, to the same extent as if he were the owner.
   Party or parties in interest means all persons who have interests of record
in a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and any persons who are in
possession thereof.
   Person means any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization or other legal entity.
   Plumbing includes all of the following supplies, facilities and equipment:
gas pipes, gas burning equipment, water pipes, mechanical garbage disposal
units (mechanical sink grinders), sewage disposal pipes, water closets, sinks,
installed dishwashers, lavatories, bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes
washing machines, catchbasins, drains, vents and other similar supplied
fixtures, together with all connections to water, sewer or gas lines.
   Public authority means the county housing authority or any officer who is in
charge of any department or branch of the government of the county or the state
relating to health, fire, building regulations or other activities concerning
dwellings in the county.
   Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable
unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking
or eating purposes.
   Roominghouse means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one
or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three
or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father,
or sister or brother of the owner or operator.
   Rubbish means non-organic waste materials. The term "rubbish" includes
paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches,
yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass and dust.
   Supplied means paid for, furnished, or provided by, or under the control of,
the owner or operator.
   Temporary housing means any tent, trailer or other structure used for human
shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not attached to the
ground, to another structure, or to any utilities system on the same premises
for more than 30 consecutive days.
   Terms having certain meaning. Whenever the terms "dwelling unit,"
"roominghouse," or "premises" are used in this article, they shall be construed
as though they were followed by the terms "or any part thereof."
   Unfit for human habitation means that conditions exist in a dwelling,
dwelling unit, roominghouse, or rooming unit which violate or do not comply
with one or more of the minimum standards of fitness or one or more of the
requirements established by this article.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 02, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-225. Minimum standards of fitness for dwellings and dwelling units.
   (a)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit used as a human habitation, or held
out for use as a human habitation, shall comply with all of the minimum
standards of fitness for human habitation and all the requirements of sections
6-226 through
6-231.
   (b)   No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for
occupancy or use as a human habitation, any dwelling or dwelling unit which
does not comply with all of the minimum standards of fitness for human
habitation and all of the requirements of sections
6-226 through
6-231.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 03, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-226. Minimum standards for structural condition.
   The following standards shall constitute the minimum standards for
structural condition of a dwelling or dwelling unit:
      (1)   Walls or partitions or supporting members, sills, joists, rafters
or other structural members shall not list, lean or buckle, and shall not be
rotted, deteriorated, or damaged, and shall not have holes or cracks which
might admit rodents.
      (2)   Floors or roof shall have adequate supporting members and strength
to be reasonably safe for the purpose used.
      (3)   Foundations, foundation walls, piers or other foundation supports
shall not be deteriorated or damaged.
      (4)   Steps, stairs, landings, porches, or other parts or appurtenances
shall be maintained in such condition that they will not fail or collapse.
      (5)   Adequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic shall be
provided.
      (6)   Interior walls and ceilings of all rooms, closets and hallways
shall be furnished of suitable materials, which will, by use of reasonable
household methods, promote sanitation and cleanliness, and shall be maintained
in such a manner as to enable the occupants to maintain reasonable privacy
between various spaces.
      (7)   The roof, flashing, exterior walls, basement walls, floors, and all
doors and windows exposed to the weather shall be constructed and maintained so
as to be weathertight and watertight.
      (8)   There shall be no chimneys or parts thereof which are defective,
deteriorated or in danger of falling, or in such condition or location as to
constitute a fire hazard.
      (9)   There shall be no use of the ground for floors, or wood floors on
the ground.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 04, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-227. Minimum standards for basic plumbing, heating, and electrical
equipment facilities.
   (a)   Plumbing system.
      (1)   Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a potable water supply and
to a public sewer or other approved sewage disposal system.
      (2)   Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen sink,
lavatory, tub or shower, water closet, and adequate supply of both cold water
and hot water. All water shall be supplied through an approved pipe
distribution system connected to a potable water supply.
      (3)   All plumbing fixtures shall meet the standards of the state
plumbing code and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in good
working order.
      (4)   All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling
unit and be accessible to the occupants of same. The water closet and tub or
shower shall be located in a room or rooms affording privacy to the user.
   (b)   Heating system. Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall have facilities
for providing heat in accordance with the following:
      (1)   Central and electric heating system. Every central or electric
heating system shall be of sufficient capacity to heat all habitable rooms,
bathrooms, and water closet compartments in every dwelling unit to which it is
connected with a minimum temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit, measured at a
point three feet above the floor during ordinary winter conditions.
      (2)   Other heating facilities. Where a central or electric heating
system is not provided, each dwelling and dwelling unit shall be provided with
sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues, gas vents or other facilities to which
heating appliances may be connected to heat all habitable rooms with a minimum
temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit, measured three feet above the floor
during ordinary winter conditions.
   (c)   Electrical system.
      (1)   Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be wired for electric lights
and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall contain at least two
floor or wall-type electric convenience receptacles, connected in such manner
as determined by the state electrical code. They shall be installed in every
bathroom, water closet room, laundry room, and furnace room, at least one
supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. In the event wall or
ceiling light fixtures are not provided in any habitable room then each such
habitable room shall contain at least three floor or wall-type electric
convenience receptacles.
      (2)   Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling shall be
adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when natural daylight is not
sufficient.
      (3)   All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be maintained
in a state of good repair, safe, capable of being used, and installed in
accordance with the state electrical code.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 05, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-228. Minimum standards for ventilation.
   (a)   General. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or
skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area,
measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be ten percent of the
floor area of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a
window or any room and such light obstructing structures are located less than
five feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of
the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors
and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window
area. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top
of such a room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least 15
percent of the total floor area of such room.
   (b)   Habitable rooms. Every habitable room shall have at least one window
or skylight which can easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately
ventilate the room. The total openable window area in every habitable room
shall be equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum window area size or
minimum skylight-type window size as required, or shall have other approved,
equivalent ventilation.
   (c)   Bathroom and water closet rooms. Every bathroom and water closet
compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for
habitable rooms except that no window or skylight shall be required in
adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet rooms equipped with an
approved ventilation system.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 06, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-229. Minimum standards for space, use and location.
   (a)   Room sizes. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least the minimum
room size in each habitable room as required by the state residential building
code:
      (1)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of
habitable floor area for the first occupant, at least 100 square feet of
additional habitable area for each of the next three occupants, and at least 75
square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional occupant.
      (2)   In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, every room
occupied for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square
feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than
one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each
occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area for
each occupant under 12 years of age.
   (b)   Ceiling height. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable
room shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet, six inches.
   (c)   Floor area calculation. Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of
habitable room area. However, closet area and wall area within the dwelling
unit may count for not more than ten percent of the required habitable floor
area. The floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height is less
than four feet, six inches shall not be considered as part of the floor area
for the purpose of determining maximum permissible occupancy.
   (d)   Cellar. No cellar shall be used for living purposes.
   (e)   Basements. No basement shall be used for living purposes unless:
      (1)   The floor and walls are substantially watertight;
      (2)   The total window area, total openable window area and ceiling
height are equal to those required for habitable rooms;
      (3)   The required minimum window area of every habitable room is
entirely above the grade adjoining such window area, except where the window or
windows face a stairwell, window well or accessway.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 07, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-230. Minimum standards for safe and sanitary maintenance.
   (a)   Exterior foundation, walls and roofs. Every foundation wall, exterior
wall and exterior roof shall be substantially weathertight and rodent proof;
shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; shall be capable of affording
privacy; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which
normal use would cause to be placed thereon. Every exterior wall shall be
protected with paint or other protective covering to prevent the entrance or
penetration of moisture or the weather.
   (b)   Interior floors, walls and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall and
ceiling shall be substantially rodent proof; shall be kept in sound condition
and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load
which normal use would cause to be placed thereon.
   (c)   Stairs, porches and appurtenances. Every outside and inside stair,
porch and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use would cause to be placed thereon and shall
be kept in sound condition and good repair.
   (d)   Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door, basement or cellar
door and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight, watertight and rodent
proof and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair.
   (e)   Bathroom floors. Every bathroom floor surface and water closet
compartment floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so that it will
be reasonably impervious to water and will permit such floor to be easily kept
in a clean and sanitary condition.
   (f)   Supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or
utility which is required under this article shall be so constructed or
installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be maintained
in satisfactory working condition.
   (g)   Drainage. Every yard shall be properly graded in order to obtain
thorough drainage and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water.
   (h)   Egress. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with adequate means of
egress as required by the state residential building code.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 08, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-231. Minimum standards for control of insects, rodents, and
infestations.
   (a)   Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be
used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide
an entry for rodents, shall be equipped with screens or such other approved
device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
   (b)   Infestation. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling
unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or
other pests therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit
in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for
such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested.
Whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling
in a rodent proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the
owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
   (c)   Rubbish storage and disposal. Every dwelling and every dwelling unit
shall be supplied with approved containers and covers for storage of rubbish as
required by county ordinances; and the owner, operator or agent in control of
such dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.
   (d)   Garbage storage and disposal. Every dwelling and every dwelling unit
shall be supplied with an approved garbage disposal facility, which may be an
adequate mechanical garbage disposal unit (mechanical sink grinder) in each
dwelling unit, or an approved outside garbage can as required by county
ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 09, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-232. Minimum standards applicable to roominghouses; exceptions.
   All of the provisions of this article, and all of the minimum standards and
requirements of this article, shall be applicable to roominghouses, and to
every person who operates a roominghouse, or who occupies or lets to another
for occupancy any roominghouse, except as provided in the following
subsections:
      (1)   Water closet, hand lavatory and bath facilities. At least one water
closet, lavatory basin and bathtub or shower, properly connected to an approved
water and sewer system and in good working condition, shall be supplied for
each four rooms within a roominghouse whenever these facilities are shared. All
such facilities shall be located within the residence building served and shall
be directly accessible from a common hall or passageway and shall be not more
than one story removed from any of the persons sharing such facilities. Every
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water
at all times. Such required facilities shall not be located in a cellar.
      (2)   Minimum floor area for sleeping purposes. Every room occupied for
sleeping purposes alone by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet
of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant
12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area for each
occupant 12 years of age.
      (3)   Sanitary conditions. The operator of every roominghouse shall be
responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, and ceilings,
and for the sanitary maintenance of every other part of the roominghouse. He
shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire
premises where the entire structure or building within which the roominghouse
is contained is leased or occupied by the operator.
      (4)   Sanitary facilities. Every water closet, flush urinal, lavatory
basin and bathtub or shower required by subsection (1) of this section shall be
located within the roominghouse and within a room or rooms which afford
privacy, are separate from the habitable rooms, are accessible from a common
hall, and are accessible without going outside the roominghouse or through any
other room therein.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 10, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-233. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
   (a)   Public areas. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary
condition the shared or public areas of dwelling and premises thereof.
   (b)   Cleanliness. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep
in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and
premises thereof which he occupies and controls.
   (c)   Rubbish and garbage. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit
shall dispose of all his rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by
placing it in the supplied storage facilities. In all cases, the owner shall be
responsible for the availability of rubbish and garbage storage facilities.
   (d)   Supplied plumbing fixtures. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall
keep all supplied plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition
and shall be responsible for the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use
and operation of the same.
   (e)   Care of facilities, equipment and structure. No occupant shall
willfully destroy, deface, or impair any of the facilities or equipment, or any
part of the structure of the dwelling or dwelling unit.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 11, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-234. Powers and duties of minimum housing code enforcement officer.
   The minimum housing code enforcement officer is hereby designated as the
officer to enforce the provisions of this article and to exercise the duties
and powers herein prescribed. The officer is authorized to exercise such powers
as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose of
provision of this article. The officer shall have the following powers and
duties:
      (1)   To investigate the dwelling conditions, and to inspect dwellings
and dwelling units located in the county, in order to determine which dwellings
and dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for the purpose of
carrying out the objectives of this article with respect to the repair, closing
or demolition of such dwellings and dwelling units;
      (2)   To take such action, together with other appropriate departments
and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effect rehabilitation
of housing which is deteriorated;
      (3)   To keep a record of the results of inspections made under this
article and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the minimum
standards of fitness herein prescribed;
      (4)   To administer oaths and affirmations, examine witnesses and receive
evidence;
      (5)   To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examination
inspections, provided such entries shall be made in accordance with section
6-236 and state law, and shall be made in such manner as to cause the least
possible inconvenience to the persons in possession;
      (6)   To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, and agents and
employees as he deems necessary to assist in carrying out the purposes of this
article, and to delegate any of his functions and powers to such officers,
agents and employees; and
      (7)   To perform such other duties as may be prescribed herein or by the
county.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 12, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-235. Inspections; duty of owners and occupants.
   (a)   For the purpose of making inspections, the officer is hereby
authorized to enter, examine and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings,
dwelling units, roominghouse or rooming units and the premises associated
therewith. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit, roominghouse
or rooming unit or the person in charge thereof may give the officer free
access to such dwelling and its premises at all reasonable times for the
purposes of such inspection, examination and survey.
   (b)   Every occupant of dwelling, dwelling unit, roominghouse or rooming
unit shall give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part
of such dwelling or dwelling unit and its premises at all reasonable times for
the purposes of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this article or with any lawful order
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 13, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-236. Procedure for enforcement.
   (a)   Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing. Whenever a petition is
filed with the officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of
the county charging that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human
habitation, he shall, if his preliminary investigation discloses a basis for
such charges, issue and cause to be served upon the owner of and parties of
interest in such dwelling or dwelling unit, a complaint stating the charges and
containing a notice that a hearing will be held before the officer at a place
therein fixed, not less than ten, nor more than 30 days after the serving of
the complaint. The owner or any party in interest shall have the right to file
an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. Notice of such hearing
shall also be given to at least one of the persons signing a petition relating
to such dwelling. Any person desiring to do so may attend such hearing and give
evidence relevant to the matter being heard. The rules of evidence prevailing
in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the
officer.
   (b)   Procedure after hearing. After such notice and hearing, if the public
officer determines that the dwelling under consideration is unfit for human
habitation, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of that
determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an
order:
      (1)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling can be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling (an
ordinance of the city may fix a certain percentage of this value as being
reasonable), requiring the owner, within the time specified, to repair, alter
or improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation. The
order may require that the property be vacated and closed only if continued
occupancy during the time allowed for repair will present a significant threat
of bodily harm, taking into account the nature of the necessary repairs,
alterations, or improvements; the current state of the property; and any
additional risks due to the presence and capacity of minors under the age of 18
or occupants with physical or mental disabilities. The order shall state that
the failure to make timely repairs as directed in the order shall make the
dwelling subject to the issuance of an unfit order under this section; or
      (2)   If the repair, alteration or improvement of the dwelling cannot be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling (an
ordinance of the county may fix a certain percentage of this value as being
reasonable), requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to
remove or demolish such dwelling. However, notwithstanding any other provision
of law, if the dwelling is located in a historic district and the historic
district commission determines, after a public hearing as provided by
ordinance, that the dwelling is of particular significance or value toward
maintaining the character of the district, and the dwelling has not been
condemned as unsafe, the order may require that the dwelling be vacated and
closed consistent with G.S. 160A-400.14(a).
   (c)   Failure to comply with order.
      (1)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair, alter or
improve or to vacate and close the dwelling, the public officer may cause the
dwelling to be repaired, altered or improved or to be vacated and closed; the
public officer may cause to be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so
closed, a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human
habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is
prohibited and unlawful." Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a
Class 1 misdemeanor. The duties of the public officer set forth in this
subsection shall not be exercised until the board of commissioners shall have
by ordinance ordered the public officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of
this article with respect to the particular property or properties which the
public officer shall have found to be unfit for human habitation and which
property or properties shall be described in the ordinance. The ordinance shall
be recorded in the office of the register of deeds in the county wherein the
property is located and shall be indexed in the name of the property owner in
the grantor index.
      (2)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to remove or demolish
the dwelling, the public officer may cause such dwelling to be removed or
demolished. The duties of the public officer set forth in this subsection shall
not be exercised until the board of commissioners shall have by ordinance
ordered the public officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this article
with respect to the particular property or properties which the public officer
shall have found to be unfit for human habitation and which property or
properties shall be described in the ordinance. No such ordinance shall be
adopted to require demolition of a dwelling until the owner has first been
given a reasonable opportunity to bring it into conformity with the housing
code. The ordinance shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds in
the county wherein the property is located and shall be indexed in the name of
the property owner in the grantor index.
   (d)   Failure of occupant to vacate a dwelling.
      (1)   If any occupant fails to comply with an order to vacate a dwelling,
the public officer may file a civil action in the name of the city to remove
such occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in the nature of
summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint naming as
parties-defendant any person occupying such dwelling. The clerk of superior
court shall issue a summons requiring the defendant to appear before a
magistrate at a certain time, date and place not to exceed ten days from the
issuance of the summons to answer the complaint. The summons and complaint
shall be served as provided in G.S. 42-29. The summons shall be returned
according to its tenor, and if on its return it appears to have been duly
served, and if at the hearing the public officer produces a certified copy of
an ordinance adopted by the board of commissioners authorizing the officer to
proceed to vacate the occupied dwelling, the magistrate shall enter judgment
ordering that the premises be vacated and that all persons be removed. The
judgment ordering that the dwelling be vacated shall be enforced in the same
manner as the judgment for summary ejectment entered under G.S. 42-30. An
appeal from any judgment entered hereunder by the magistrate may be taken as
provided in G.S. 7A-228, and the execution of such judgment may be stayed as
provided in G.S. 7A-227. An action to remove an occupant of a dwelling who is a
tenant of the owner may not be in the nature of a summary ejectment proceeding
pursuant to this subsection unless such occupant was served with notice at
least 30 days before the filing of the summary ejectment proceeding that the
board of commissioners has ordered the public officer to proceed to exercise
his duties under this section to vacate and close or remove and demolish the
dwelling.
      (2)   Whenever a determination is made pursuant to this section that a
dwelling must be vacated and closed, or removed or demolished, under the
provisions of this section, notice of the order shall be given by first class
mail to any organization involved in providing or restoring dwellings for
affordable housing that has filed a written request for such notices. A minimum
period of 45 days from the mailing of such notice shall be given before removal
or demolition by action of the public officer to allow the opportunity for any
organization to negotiate with the owner to make repairs, lease, or purchase
the property for the purpose of providing affordable housing. The public
officer or clerk shall certify the mailing of the notices, and the
certification shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud. Only an organization
that has filed a written request for such notices may raise the issue of
failure to mail such notices, and the sole remedy shall be an order requiring
the public officer to wait 45 days before causing removal or demolition.
   (e)   Appeals from orders of officer.
      (1)   An appeal from any decision or order of the officer may be taken by
any person aggrieved thereby. Any appeal shall specify the grounds upon which
the appeal is based. Upon the filing of any notice of appeal, the officer shall
forthwith transmit to the board all the papers constituting the record upon
which the decision appealed from was made. When an appeal is from a decision of
the officer refusing to allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, his
decision shall remain in force until modified or reversed. When an appeal is
from a decision of the officer requiring the person aggrieved to do the act,
the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the
hearing by the board, unless the officer certifies to the board, after the
notice of appeal is filed with him, that by reason of the facts stated in the
certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished the appellant), a suspension of
his requirement shall not be suspended except for due cause shown upon not less
than one day's written notice to the officer, by the board, or by a court of
record upon petition made pursuant to G.S. 153A, and subsection (f) of this
section.
      (2)   The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of all
appeals, shall give due notice to all the parties, and shall render its
decision within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent
or attorney. The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify
the decision or order appealed from, and may make such decision or order as in
its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it shall have all
the powers of the officer, but the concurring vote of four members of the board
shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision or order of the officer.
The board shall have power also in passing upon appeals, in any case where
there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of
carrying out the strict letter of the ordinance, to adapt the application of
the ordinance to the necessities of the case to the end that the spirit of the
ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial
justice done.
      (3)   Every decision of the board shall be subject to review by
proceedings in the nature of certiorari instituted within 15 days of the
decision of the board, but not otherwise.
   (f)   Petition to superior court by owner. Any person aggrieved by an order
issued by the officer or a decision rendered by the board shall have the right,
within 30 days after issuance of the order or rendering of the decision, to
petition the superior court for a temporary injunction restraining the officer
pending a final disposition of the cause, as provided by G.S. 153A.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 14, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-237. Methods of service of complaints and orders.
   Complaints or orders issued by the officer shall be served upon persons
either personally or by registered or certified mail. If the whereabouts of
such person are unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the officer in
the exercise of reasonable diligence, the officer shall make an affidavit to
that effect, and the serving of such complaint or order upon such person may be
made by publishing the same at least once no later than the time at which
personal service would be required under the provisions of this article in a
newspaper having general circulation in the county. Where service is made by
publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises affected by the complaint or order.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 15, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-238. Costs; a lien on premises.
   (a)   As provided by G.S. 153A, the cost of any repairs, alterations, or
improvements or of vacating and closing, or removal or demolition caused to be
made or done by the officer pursuant to this article shall be a lien against
the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such lien shall be filed,
having priority, and be collected in the same manner as the lien for special
assessments established by article 10, chapter 153A of the General Statutes.
   (b)   If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the public officer, he
shall sell the materials of the dwelling, and any personal property, fixtures
or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling, and shall credit the
proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or demolition, and any
balance remaining shall be deposited in the superior court by the public
officer, shall be secured in a manner directed by the court, and shall be
disbursed by the court to the persons found to be entitled thereto by final
order or decree of the court. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
impair or limit in any way the power of the county to define and declare
nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings, or
otherwise.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 17, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-239. Alternative remedies.
   Neither this article nor any of its provisions shall be construed to impair
or limit in any way the power of the county to define and declare nuisances and
to cause their abatement by summary action or otherwise, or to enforce this
article by criminal process as authorized by G.S. 14-4, and the enforcement of
any remedy provided herein shall not prevent the enforcement of any other
remedy or remedies provided herein or in other ordinances or laws.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 18, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-240. Board of adjustment to hear appeals.
   (a)   The county board of commissioners shall act as the board of
adjustment.
   (b)   All appeals which may be taken from decisions or orders of the officer
pursuant to section
6-236(e) shall be heard and determined by the board of adjustment. As the
appeals body, the board shall have the power to fix the times and places of its
meetings, to adopt necessary rules and regulations for the proper discharge of
its duties. The board shall perform the duties prescribed by section
6-236(e) and shall keep an accurate journal of all its proceedings.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 19, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-241. Conflict with other provisions.
   In the event any provision, standard, or requirement of this article is
found to be in conflict with any provision of any other ordinance or code of
the county, the provision which establishes the higher standard or more
stringent requirements for the promotion and protection of the health and
safety of the residents of the county shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 20, 5-19-1993)
Sec. 6-242. Violations; penalty.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit to
fail, neglect, or refuse to repair, alter, or improve the same, or to vacate
and close and remove or demolish the same, upon order of the officer duly made
and served as herein provided, within the time specified in such order. Each
day that any such failure, neglect, refusal to comply with such order continues
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (b)   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit,
with respect to which an order has been issued pursuant to section
6-236, to occupy or permit the occupancy of the same after the time prescribed
in such order for its repair, alteration or improvement or its vacation and
closing. Each day that such occupancy continues after such prescribed time
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   (c)   The violation of any provision of this article shall constitute a
misdemeanor, as provided by G.S. 14-4, and shall carry a penalty of a fine of
an amount as established by the board of commissioners from time to time, for
each separate occurrence.
   (d)   In addition to the penalty established by subsection (c) of this
section, and the remedies provided by other provisions of this article, this
article may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 1993-5, § 21, 5-19-1993)
Chapter 7
BUSINESS AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 7-1—7-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Sec. 7-21. Intent; permit requirements and applications; revocation of permits;
exceptions.
   (a)   Intent. The purpose of this section is to regulate the door-to-door
offering for sale and selling of goods, wares, merchandise, food, periodicals
and services and the solicitation of orders therefore countywide, and to
thereby promote the public safety and welfare. This chapter is written in
accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 153A-125 and G.S. §§ 66-250 through
66-259.
   (b)   Permit required. It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
sell, offer for sale, or solicit orders for goods, wares, merchandise, food,
periodicals or services by going from door-to-door ("peddle" or "solicit") or
to beg or panhandle, within the county without having first secured a peddler/
solicitor's permit from the county as provided for in this section, unless it
is done with the prior request or invitation of the residents or occupants of
the premises visited. This permit is only required for areas of Martin County
that are unincorporated (there may be additional permits required by other
municipalities) and this permit shall not supersede or interfere with any
ordinance or law of those localities. Additionally, it is unlawful to peddle,
solicit, beg, or panhandle unless the following requirements are met:
      (1)   Such peddling, soliciting, begging or panhandling shall be
permitted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
      (2)   The peddler/solicitor permit issued for that person shall be
carried and displayed at all times while conducting such solicitations in such
a manner as to be clearly visible to a reasonable person of adequate vision.
      (3)   All other permits or licenses required by law shall have been
obtained.
   (c)   Permit applications.
      (1)   Applications for peddler/solicitor permits under this section shall
be submitted to include a $25.00 permit fee during normal business hours
(Monday through Friday, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.) on a form provided by the
sheriff's office and shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
         a.   The full name of the applicant;
         b.   The permanent residence address of the applicant;
         c.   The applicant's temporary address in or in the vicinity of the
county, if applicable;
         d.   The name and address of the applicant's employer or the
organization with which the applicant is associated in connection with the
begging, panhandling, sale activity, or solicitation of orders;
         e.   A description of the automobile or other vehicle to be used in
the business, including make, model, body style, color and license number;
         f.   The type of donations, goods, wares, merchandise, food,
periodicals and services to be requested, sold or offered for sale;
         g.   The period for which the application is sought, which shall not
exceed 60 consecutive calendar days; provided that the permit may be renewed
for 60-day periods without limit, upon proper application therefore;
         h.   A record of any and all crimes of which the applicant has been
convicted or has pleaded no contest in the ten years preceding the submittal of
the application;
         i.   The age, height, weight, and any other additional information
which the county may reasonably require for identification, including a copy of
the document used by the applicant to verify personal identification (e.g.,
driver's license, passport, picture I.D.);
         j.   A complete listing of and information concerning all other
permits or licenses, such as privilege licenses, which were obtained by the
applicant.
      (2)   If an application is filed by an employer, there shall also be
filed separate applications for each peddler, solicitor, beggar and panhandler,
giving the information set forth above for each peddler, solicitor, beggar and
panhandler and signed and sworn to by each peddler/solicitor, and a separate
permit shall be issued for each applicant.
   (d)   Procedures for considering applications.
      (1)   Upon receipt of a complete application, the sheriff or designee
(hereafter "sheriff") shall make or cause to be made such investigation as
reasonably necessary to verify the information in the application and to assure
compliance with the provisions of this section and shall issue a permit unless
the applicant:
         a.   Has not submitted a completed application;
         b.   Is not permitted by law to engage in such activity due to age;
         c.   Has been convicted of, or has pleaded no contest to, a felony
charge within the ten years preceding the submittal of the application;
         d.   Has been, within the previous five years, convicted of, or
pleaded no contest to, a misdemeanor charge involving theft, fraud, forging,
uttering, or other crimes of like nature or any crime involving moral
turpitude;
         e.   Does not have valid driving privileges in the state in those
cases where the applicant will be operating a vehicle in the course and scope
of the peddling, soliciting, begging, or panhandling; or
         f.   Has not obtained any necessary licenses.
      (2)   The sheriff shall approve or deny an application and issue a permit
as soon as possible and, except in the case of extraordinary circumstances, as
when a number of applications are submitted within a short period of time,
should act within five business days of receipt of the completed application.
Such issued permit shall be nontransferable.
   (e)   Permit renewal. A peddler/solicitor permit may be renewed for an
unlimited number of 60-day periods, provided an application for renewal is made
on such form as provided by the sheriff's office no later than the expiration
date on the current valid permit. Applications received after that date shall
be processed as new applications. The sheriff shall review each application for
renewal to determine that the applicant is in full compliance with the
provisions of this section. If the sheriff's office finds that the application
meets the above requirements, the renewal permit shall be issued.
   (f)   Appeals. The appeal of a refusal to issue a permit or the revocation
of a permit shall be made to the sheriff's office by filing a written notice of
appeal, specifying with particularity the grounds upon which the appeal is
made, no later than ten days from the date of the refusal to issue a permit or
the revocation of a permit. The sheriff's office or designee shall fix a
reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, shall give due notice to all
parties, and shall render a decision within a reasonable time. The order or
decision of the sheriff shall be the final county action for the purpose of
judicial review.
   (g)   Revocation of permit. Permits issued under this section may be revoked
at the discretion of the sheriff or if evidence arises that the permit
application was falsified in any way. Additional grounds for revocation of a
permit include, where evidence is presented, that the applicant has been
arrested for a felony or a misdemeanor involving theft, fraud, forgery, moral
turpitude, criminal trespass, or a threat to the public safety during the
peddling/solicitation period, or has otherwise violated the provisions of this
section. A permit which has been revoked shall be immediately surrendered to
the sheriff's office. Appeals of revocations may be made pursuant to the same
process as for denied permits.
   (h)   Exemptions. This section shall not apply to:
      (1)   A peddler or an itinerant merchant who sells only one or more of
the following types of merchandise:
         a.   Farm or nursery products produced by the merchant;
         b.   Crafts or goods made by the merchant;
         c.   The merchant's own household personal property;
         d.   Wood for fuel produced by the merchant; and/or
         e.   Ice, seafood, meat, poultry, livestock, eggs, dairy products,
bread, cakes or pies; produced by the merchant.
      (2)   A peddler or an itinerant merchant who is an authorized automobile
dealer licensed pursuant to G.S. Chapter 20.
      (3)   A peddler or an itinerant merchant who is a nonprofit charitable,
educational, religious, scientific or civic organization.
      (4)   An itinerant merchant who meets any of the following descriptions:
         a.   Locates at a farmer's market;
         b.   Is part of the state fair or an agriculture fair that is licensed
by the commissioner of agriculture pursuant to G.S. § 106-520.3; and/or
         c.   Sells goods at an auction conducted by an auctioneer licensed
pursuant to G.S. Chapter 85B.
      (5)   A peddler who complies with the requirements of G.S. §§ 25A-38
through 25A-42, or who complies with the requirements of G.S. § 14-401.13.
      (6)   The delivery of goods or services which have been ordered before
delivery.
      (7)   The circulation of petitions for signature or lawful distribution
of advertising materials, flyers, or materials expressing views on political,
social or religious matters.
      (8)   The lawful promotion or expression of views concerning political,
social, religious and other like matters.
      (9)   The sale or delivery of goods to business establishments.
(Ord. of 5-13-2015(2) )
Sec. 7-22. Licenses or permits; refusal to issue, suspension, revocation;
notice, hearing.
   (a)   The sheriff may refuse to issue a license or permit, or the licenses
or permits issued pursuant to this chapter, unless otherwise provided
hereunder, may be suspended or revoked by the county manager or other
authorized official, department, board or agency where applicable, after notice
and hearing for any of the following causes:
      (1)   Any fraud, misrepresentations or false statements contained in the
application for permit or license;
      (2)   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection
with the selling of goods, wares, merchandise and services;
      (3)   Any violation of this chapter and/or any ordinance of the county;
      (4)   Conviction of the applicant, licensee or permittee of any crime or
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or a violation of any act of this state,
or any law of the United States having a reasonable relationship to the purpose
and scope of the permit or license;
      (5)   Conducting the activity under this chapter and/or any ordinance of
the county in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach
of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, morals or general
welfare of the public.
   (b)   Notice of hearing for the suspension or revocation of a license or
permit shall be in writing given by the sheriff or his designee, setting forth
specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the
hearing. Service of such notice shall be made either by personal service or by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant, licensee or
permittee at the last known address, at least five days prior to the date set
for the hearing.
   (c)   In case of refusal to issue a permit or license or the suspension or
revocation of a license or permit as herein provided, no portion of the
application, license or permit fee shall be returned to the applicant, licensee
or permittee unless otherwise provided in this chapter and/or any ordinance of
the county.
   (d)   Any suspension or revocation hereunder shall not be considered a
recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty from being enforced.
   (e)   The order of the sheriff or other authorized official, department,
board or agency where applicable, shall be the final county action for the
purpose of judicial review.
(Ord. of 5-13-2015(2) )
Sec. 7-23. Penalty.
   Violations of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any
of its requirements, shall constitute a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of up
to $500.00 or a maximum of 30 days imprisonment, as provided in G.S. § 14-4.
(Ord. of 5-13-2015(2) )
Chapter 8
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 1
 
Notes
  State law reference(s)—North Carolina Emergency Management Act, G.S. 166A-19
  et seq.; county and municipal emergency management, G.S. 166A-19.15; power of
1 counties and municipalities to enact ordinances to deal with states of
  emergency, G.S. 166A-19.31; county power to adopt ordinances to address states
  of emergency, G.S. 14-288.13; ordinances may be effective if state of
  emergency exists or is imminent, G.S. 14-288.17.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 8-1. Short title.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the
"Emergency Management Ordinance for the County of Martin."
(Ord. No. 1988-2, § 1, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-2. Intent and purpose.
   (a)   It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to establish an office
that will ensure the complete and efficient utilization of all of the city and
county resources to combat disaster resulting from enemy actions or other
disasters as defined herein.
   (b)   The county office of emergency management will be the coordinating
agency for all activity in connection with emergency management. It will be the
instrument through which the city council and the county board of commissioners
may exercise the authority and discharge the responsibilities vested in them
during disaster emergencies.
   (c)   This chapter will not relieve any city or county department of the
moral responsibilities or authority given to it in the city or county Charter
or by local ordinances, nor will it adversely affect the work of any volunteer
agency organized for relief in disaster emergencies.
(Ord. No. 1988-2, § 2, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-3. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Coordinator means the coordinator of the county emergency management agency,
appointed as prescribed in this article.
   Disaster means a gubernatorial declaration that the impact or anticipated
impact of an emergency constitutes a disaster of one of the types enumerated in
G.S. 16A-19.21(b).
   Emergency means an occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe
damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or
manmade accidental, military, paramilitary, weather-related, or riot-related
cause.
   Emergency area means the geographical area covered by a state of emergency.
   Emergency management means the basic government functions of maintaining the
public peace, health and safety during an emergency. The term "emergency
management" includes plans and preparations for protection and relief, recovery
and rehabilitation from effects of an attack by the forces of an enemy nation
or the agents thereof, or a disaster as defined herein. It shall not, however,
include any activity that is the primary responsibility of the military forces
of the United States. The term "emergency management" also includes those
measures taken by the populace and governments at federal, state, and local
levels to minimize the adverse effect of any type emergency, which includes the
never-ending preparedness cycle of planning, prevention, mitigation, warning,
movement, shelter, emergency assistance, and recovery.
   Emergency management forces means the employees, equipment and facilities of
all city and county departments, boards, councils, institutions and commissions
that may be used during an emergency; and in addition, it shall include all
volunteer personnel, equipment and facilities contributed by, or obtained from,
volunteer persons or agencies.
   Emergency management volunteer means any person duly registered, identified
and appointed by the coordinator of the county emergency management agency and
assigned to participate in the emergency management activity.
   Regulations include plans, programs and other emergency procedures deemed
essential to emergency management.
   State of emergency means a finding and declaration by any of the following
authorities that an emergency exists:
      (1)   The governor, acting under the authority of G.S. 166A-19.20.
      (2)   The general assembly, acting under the authority of G.S. 166A-
19.20.
      (3)   The governing body of a municipality or the mayor of a
municipality, acting under the authority of G.S. 166A-19.22.
      (4)   The governing body of a county or the chairperson of the board of
commissioners of a county, acting under the authority of G.S. 166A-19.22.
   Volunteer means contributing a service, equipment or facilities to the
emergency management agency without remuneration.
(Ord. No. 1988-2, § 3, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-4. Organization and appointments.
   (a)   The organization of emergency management shall consist of the
following:
      (1)   An agency of emergency management within the executive department
of the county government under the direction of the county board of
commissioners. The head of the county emergency management agency shall be
known as the coordinator, and such assistants and other employees as are deemed
necessary for the proper functioning of the agency will be appointed.
      (2)   The employees and resources of all city and county departments,
boards, institutions, and councils shall be included in emergency management
activities. During emergency operations, duties assigned to various departments
shall be the same as or similar to the normal duties of the department, where
possible.
      (3)   Volunteer personnel and agencies offering service to, and accepted
by the city and county.
   (b)   The board of commissioners shall appoint a coordinator of the county
emergency management agency who shall be a person well versed and trained in
planning operations involving the activities of many different agencies, which
will operate to protect the public health, safety and welfare in the event of
danger from enemy action or disaster as defined in this article.
   (c)   The coordinator shall designate and appoint deputy coordinators to
assume the emergency duties of the coordinator in the event of his absence or
inability to act.
(Ord. No. 1988-2, § 4, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-5. Day-to-day duties and responsibilities of the coordinator.
   The coordinator shall be responsible to the board of commissioners in regard
to all phases of emergency management activity. The coordinator shall be
responsible for the planning, coordination and operation of the emergency
management activities in the county. The coordinator shall maintain liaison
with the state and federal authorities and the authorities of nearby political
subdivisions so as to ensure the most effective operation of the emergency
management plans. The coordinator's duties shall include, but not be limited
to, the following:
      (1)   Coordinating the recruitment of volunteer personnel and agencies to
augment the personnel and facilities of the county for emergency management
purposes.
      (2)   Development and coordination of plans for the immediate use of all
facilities, equipment, manpower and other resources of the county for the
purpose of minimizing or preventing damage to persons and property; and
protecting and restoring to usefulness governmental services and public
utilities necessary for the public health, safety, and welfare.
      (3)   Negotiating and concluding agreements with owners or persons in
control of building or other property for the use of such building or other
property for emergency management purposes and designating suitable buildings
as public shelters.
      (4)   Through public informational programs, educating the populace as to
actions necessary and required for the protection of their persons and property
in case of enemy attack or disaster as defined herein, either impending or
present.
      (5)   Conducting public practice alerts to ensure the efficient operation
of the emergency management forces and to familiarize residents with emergency
management regulations, procedures and operations.
      (6)   Coordinating the activity of all other public and private agencies
engaged in any emergency management activities.
(Ord. No. 1988-2, § 5, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-6. Emergency management plans.
   (a)   Comprehensive emergency management plans shall be adopted and
maintained by the board of commissioners. In the preparations of these plans as
it pertains to city and county organization, it is intended that the services,
equipment and facilities and personnel of all existing departments and agencies
shall be utilized to the fullest extent. When approved, it shall be the duty of
all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by these plans
and to maintain their portions of the plans in a current state of readiness at
all times. These plans shall have the effect of law whenever a disaster, as
defined in this article, has been declared.
   (b)   The coordinator shall prescribe in the emergency plans those positions
within the disaster organization, in addition to his own, for which lines of
succession are necessary. In each instance, the responsible person will
designate and keep on file with the coordinator a current list of two persons
as successors to his position. The list will be in order of succession and will
nearly as possible designate persons best capable of carrying out all assigned
duties and functions.
   (c)   Each service chief and department head assigned responsibility in the
plans shall be responsible for carrying out all duties and functions assigned
therein. Duties will include the organization and training of assigned
employees and, where needed, volunteers. Each chief shall formulate the
standing operating procedure to implement the plans for his service.
   (d)   Amendments to these plans shall be submitted to the coordinator. If
approved, the coordinator will then submit the amendments to the board of
commissioners with his recommendation for their approval. Such amendments shall
take effect 30 days from the date of approval.
   (e)   When a required competency or skill for a disaster function is not
available within government, the coordinator is authorized to seek assistance
from persons outside of government. The assignment of duties, when of a
supervisory nature, shall also include the granting of authority for the
persons so assigned to carry out such duties prior to, during, and after the
occurrence of a disaster. Such services from persons outside of government may
be accepted by local government on a volunteer basis. Such citizens shall be
enrolled as emergency management volunteers.
(Ord. No. 1988-2, § 6, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-7. No municipal or private liability.
   (a)   This chapter is an exercise by the county of its governmental
functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety, and
neither the county nor its agents and representatives if some, or any
individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee,
or any of the agents thereof in good faith carrying out, complying with or
attempting to comply with any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to
the provisions of this article, shall be liable for any damage sustained to
persons or property as the result of said activity.
   (b)   Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who
voluntarily and without compensation grants the county the right to inspect,
designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or
premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or
practice disaster situation shall not be civilly liable for the death of, or
injury to, any persons on or about such real estate or premises under such
license, privilege or other permission; or for loss of, or damage to, the
property of such person.
(Ord. No. 1988-2, § 7, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-8. Violations.
   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter or plans issued pursuant to the authority contained herein, or to
willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management
organization, as herein defined, in the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter, or any plan issued thereunder.
(Ord. No. 1988-2, § 8, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-9. Conflicting ordinances, orders, rules and regulations suspended.
   At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated
pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing
ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be
inconsistent therewith.
(Ord. No. 1988-2, § 10, 3-1-1988)
Secs. 8-10—8-36. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. STATES OF EMERGENCY
Sec. 8-37. State of emergency; restrictions authorized.
   (a)   A state of emergency shall be deemed to exist whenever during times of
public crisis, disaster, rioting, catastrophe, or similar public emergency, for
any reason, public safety authorities are unable to maintain public order or
afford adequate protection for lives, safety or property, or whenever the
occurrence of any such condition is imminent.
   (b)   In the event of an existing or threatened state of emergency
endangering the lives, safety, health and welfare of the people within the
county or any part thereof, or threatening damages to or destruction of
property, the chairperson of the board of commissioners is hereby authorized
and empowered under G.S. 14-288.13 and 166A-19.22 to issue a public declaration
declaring to all persons the existence of such a state of emergency, and, in
order to more effectively protect the lives and property of people within the
county, to place in effect any or all of the restrictions hereinafter
authorized.
   (c)   The chairperson is hereby authorized and empowered to limit by the
declaration the application of all or any part of such restrictions to any area
specifically designated or described within the county and to specific hours of
the day or night; and to exempt from all or any part of such restrictions,
while acting in the line of and within the scope of their respective duties,
law enforcement officers, firefighters and other public employees, rescue squad
members, doctors, nurses, employees of hospitals and other medical facilities;
on-duty military personnel, whether state or federal; on-duty employees of
public utilities, public transportation companies, and newspaper, magazine,
radio broadcasting, and television broadcasting corporations operated for
profit; and such other classes of persons as may be essential to the
preservation of public order and immediately necessary to serve the safety,
health, and welfare needs of people within the county.
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 1, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-38. Declaration imposing prohibitions and restrictions.
   (a)   The chairperson of the board of commissioners, by declaration, may
impose the prohibitions and restrictions specified in sections
8-39 through
8-44 in the manner described in those sections. The chairperson may impose as
many of those specified prohibitions and restrictions as he finds are
necessary, because of an emergency, to maintain an acceptable level of public
order and services, and to protect lives, safety, and property. The chairperson
shall recite his findings in the declaration.
   (b)   The declaration shall be in writing. The chairperson shall take
reasonable steps to give notice of the terms of the declaration to those
affected by it and shall post a copy of it in the county courthouse. The
chairperson shall send reports of the substance of the declaration to the mass
communications media which serves the affected area. The chairperson shall
retain a text of the declaration and furnish upon request certified copies of
it.
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 2, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-39. Evacuation.
   The chairperson may direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the
population of the county, to prescribe routes, modes of transportation, and
destination in connection with evacuation; and to control ingress and egress of
a disaster area, the movement of persons within the area, and the occupancy of
premises therein. Details of the evacuation may be set forth or amended in a
subsequent declaration which shall be well publicized.
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 3, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-40. Curfew.
   (a)   The declaration may impose a curfew prohibiting in certain areas and
during certain periods the appearance in public of anyone who is not a member
of an exempted class. The declaration shall specify the geographical area or
areas and the period during each 24-hour day to which the curfew applies. The
chairperson may exempt from some or all of the curfew restrictions classes of
people whose exemption the chairperson finds necessary for the preservation of
the public health, safety, and welfare. The declaration shall state the
exempted classes and the restrictions from which each is exempted.
   (b)   Unless otherwise specified in the declaration, the curfew shall apply
during the specified period each day until the chairperson by declaration
removes the curfew.
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 4, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-41. Restrictions on possession, consumption, or transfer of alcoholic
beverages.
   The declaration may prohibit the possession or consumption of any alcoholic
beverage, including beer, wine, and spirituous liquor other than on one's own
premises, and may prohibit the transfer, transportation, sale or purchases of
any alcoholic beverage within the area of the county described in the
declaration. The prohibition, if imposed, may apply to transfers of alcoholic
beverages by employees of alcoholic beverage control stores as well as by
anyone else within the geographical area described.
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 5, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-42. Restriction on possession, transportation, and transfer of dangerous
weapons and substances.
   (a)   The declaration may prohibit the transportation or possession off
one's own premises, or the sale or purchase of any dangerous weapon or
substance. The chairperson may exempt from some or all of the restrictions
classes of people whose possession, transfer, or transportation of certain
dangerous weapons or substances is necessary to the preservation of the
public's health, safety, or welfare. The declaration shall state the exempted
classes and the restrictions from which each is exempted.
   (b)   The term "dangerous weapon or substance" means:
      (1)   Any deadly weapon, ammunition, explosive, incendiary device,
radioactive material or device as defined in G.S. 14-288.B(c)(5), gasoline, or
other instrument or substance designed for a use that carries a threat of
serious bodily injury or destruction of property.
      (2)   Any other instrument or substance that is capable of being used to
inflict serious bodily injury or destruction of property, when the
circumstances indicate that there is some probability that such instrument or
substance will be so used.
      (3)   Any part or ingredient in any instrument or substance included
above when the circumstances indicate a probability that such a part or
ingredient will be so used.
   (c)   If imposed, the restrictions shall apply throughout the jurisdiction
of the county or such part thereof as designated in the declaration.
   (d)   A violation of this section shall be punishable as provided in G.S.
14-288.7.
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 6, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-43. Restrictions on access to areas.
   (a)   The declaration may prohibit obtaining access or attempting to obtain
access to any area, designated in the manner described in this section, in
violation of any order, clearly posted notice, or barricade indicating that
access is denied or restricted.
   (b)   Areas to which access is denied or restricted shall be designated by
the sheriff and his subordinates or other law enforcement officer when directed
in the declaration to do so by the chairperson. When acting under this
authority, the sheriff and his subordinates may restrict or deny access to any
area, street, highway or location within the county if that restriction or
denial of access or use is reasonably necessary to promote efforts being made
to overcome the emergency or to prevent further aggravation of the emergency.
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 7, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-44. Prohibitions and restrictions in declaration.
   The declaration may prohibit or restrict:
      (1)   Movements of people in public places;
      (2)   The operation of offices, business establishments, and other places
to or from which people may travel or at which they may congregate; and
      (3)   Other activities or conditions the control of which may be
reasonably necessary to maintain order and protect lives or property during the
state of emergency, within the area designated in the declaration.
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 8, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-45. Removal of prohibitions and restrictions.
   The chairperson shall by declaration terminate the entire declaration of
emergency or remove any of the prohibitions and restrictions when the emergency
no longer requires them, or when directed to do so by the board of
commissioners.
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 9, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-46. Superseding and amendatory declarations.
   The chairperson in his discretion may invoke the restrictions authorized by
this article in separate declarations, and may amend any declaration by means
of a superseding declaration in accordance with the procedures set forth in
section
8-38.
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 10, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-47. Termination of declaration.
   Any declaration issued under this article shall expire five days after its
last imposition unless sooner terminated in writing under the same procedures
set forth in section
8-38 for declarations.
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 11, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-48. In case of absence or disability of chairperson.
   In case of the absence or disability of the chairperson, the vice-
chairperson of the board of commissioners, or such other person as may be
designated by the board of commissioners, shall have and exercise of all the
powers herein given the chairperson.
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 12, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-49. Penalty for violation.
   Except as provided in section
8-42, any person violating any prohibition or restriction imposed by a
declaration authorized by this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
punishable upon conviction by a fine in an amount as specified by the board of
commissioners from time to time, or imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, as
provided by G.S. 14-4.
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 13, 3-1-1988)
Sec. 8-50. Territorial applicability.
   This article shall not apply within the corporate limits of any
municipality, or within any area of the county over which the municipality has
jurisdiction to enact general police-power ordinances, unless the municipality
by resolution consents to its application or the mayor of the municipality has
requested its application, in which event it shall apply to such areas as fully
and to the same extent as elsewhere in the county.
(Ord. No. 1988-3, § 15, 3-1-1988)
Chapter 10
EMERGENCY SERVICES
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 10-1—10-19. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. AMBULANCE SERVICE FRANCHISES 1
 
Notes
1 State law reference(s)—County power to franchise ambulance services, G.S.
  153A-250 et seq.
Sec. 10-20. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Advanced life support non-emergency franchise means a franchise granted to
an organization with personnel trained to the advanced level of service and
certified by the North Carolina Office of Emergency Medical Services. This
level is franchised to transport patients who are in need of a higher level of
medical treatment between health care facilities or between health care
facilities and home in order to prevent loss of life, further aggravation,
psychological illness or injury. Franchisee may not use warning lights and
audible warning devices. Franchisee must have a medical director approved by
Martin County and advanced life support protocols approved by the Martin County
Medical Director and the Martin County Office of Emergency Medical Services.
   Ambulance means any privately or publicly owned motor vehicle, aircraft or
vessel that is specially designed, constructed, or modified and equipped, and
is intended to be used for and is maintained or operated for the transportation
on the streets or highways, waterways, or airways of this state, of persons who
are sick, injured, wounded, or otherwise incapacitated or helpless.
   Ambulance provider means a person who engages in the business or service of
transporting patients in an ambulance.
   Approved means approved by the state medical care commission pursuant to the
latest rules and regulations promulgated under G.S. 143B-165.
   Basic life support non-emergency franchise means a franchise granted to an
organization with personnel trained at the emergency medical technician (EMT)
level and certified by the North Carolina Office of Emergency Medical Services.
This level is franchised to transport patients between health care facilities
and home in non-emergent situations within the county. The use of warning
lights and audible warning devices is not allowed.
   Council means the county ambulance service advisory council.
   County means the board of commissioners and/or EMS administrator.
   Dispatcher means a person who is available at all times to receive requests
for emergency services, to dispatch emergency services and to advise local law
enforcement agencies and emergency medical facilities of any existing or
threatened emergency.
   Driver's license means any driver's license or permit to operate a motor
vehicle issued under or granted by the laws of the state.
   Emergency medical service means a person with personnel and equipment who
engages or professes to engage in the business or service of transporting
patients who are sick, injured, wounded, or otherwise incapacitated or
helpless, who are in need of immediate medical treatment in order to prevent
loss of life, further aggravation, or psychological illness or injury and is
normally dispatched on first call response.
   Emergency medical technician (EMT) means an individual who has completed a
training program in emergency medical care at least equal to the national
standard training program for emergency medical technicians, as defined by the
United States Department of Transportation, and has been certified as an
emergency medical technician by the North Carolina Department of Health and
Human Services, Office of Emergency Medical Services.
   Emergency transportation service means the use of an ambulance, its
equipment and personnel to provide medical care and transportation of a patient
who is in need of immediate medical treatment between health care facilities or
between health care facilities and home in order to prevent loss of life,
further aggravation, or psychological illness or injury.
   Franchise means a permit issued by the Martin County Office of Emergency
Medical Services to a person for the operation as an ambulance provider.
   Franchisee means any person having been issued a franchise by the Martin
County Office of Emergency Medical Services for the operation as an ambulance
provider.
   Frivolous complaint means a complaint filed without valid proof of
wrongdoing, not a serious complaint.
   Medical responder (MR) means an individual who has completed a training
program in emergency medical care and first aid approved by the North Carolina
Department of Health and Human Services and has been certified as a medical
responder by the North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services, Office
of Emergency Medical Services.
   Non-emergency transportation service means the operation of an ambulance for
any purpose other than transporting emergency patients or transporting patients
between health care facilities.
   Operator means a person in actual physical control of an ambulance which is
in motion or which has the engine running.
   Owner means any person or entity who owns an ambulance.
   Patient means an individual who is sick, injured, wounded, or otherwise
incapacitated or helpless such that the need for some medical assistance might
be anticipated while being transported to or from a medical facility or
residence.
   Person means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, or group of individuals acting together for a common purpose, or
organization of any kind, including any governmental agency other than the
United States.
   Rescue means a situation where the victim cannot escape an area through the
normal exit or under such victim's own power.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-100, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-21. Ambulance service advisory council created.
   There is hereby created the county ambulance service advisory council,
hereafter known as the council, the membership of which shall be appointed by
the board of commissioners. Terms are all ex officio.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-101, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-22. Membership of council.
   Membership on the council shall consist of:
      (1)   The emergency department nurse manager of Martin General Hospital
or the manager's designee.
      (2)   The county medical director.
      (3)   The county EMS administrator.
      (4)   Rescue chiefs from Jamesville, Williamston, Hamilton, Oak City, and
Robersonville EMS squads.
      (5)   EMS educator/instructor selected by the board of commissioners.
      (6)   The county emergency management director.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-102, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-23. Voting rights and responsibilities of council members.
   (a)   All members of the council shall have full and equal voting rights and
responsibilities on matters to be considered by the council.
   (b)   All members have the legal responsibility to vote on all matters
brought before the council; unless excused for a specific stated conflict of
interest, by a quorum consisting of greater than 50 percent of the members of
the council present.
   (c)   The administrator of the county emergency medical services shall serve
as staff and act as chairperson until a chairperson from the membership is
elected.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-103, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-24. Providing advice to administrator of emergency services.
   The council shall have the responsibility and duty of advising the
administrator of emergency medical services on matters relating to the
enforcement of this article, and shall develop and recommend to the
administrator of emergency medical services for approval by the board of
commissioners such standards of care, policies, procedures, and actions which
will maintain and improve the quality of emergency medical services for the
residents of the county.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-104, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-25. Enforcement agency.
   (a)   The Martin County Office of Emergency Medical Services shall be the
enforcing agency for the regulations contained in this article and shall
establish policies, procedures and standards for the evaluation of franchise
applications.
      (1)   Receive all applications for franchise and/or for elevated levels
of service from potential providers.
      (2)   Study each application for conformance to this article.
      (3)   With the approval of the council and the medical director,
recommend to the board of commissioners the award of the franchise to the
applicant if appropriate.
      (4)   Inspect the premises, vehicles, equipment, and personnel of
franchisees to ensure compliance to this article and perform any other
inspections that may be required.
      (5)   With approval of the council, recommend to the board of
commissioners the temporary or permanent suspension of a franchise in the event
of non-compliance with the terms of the franchise ordinance.
      (6)   Ensure by cooperative agreement with other ambulance services the
continued service in a district where an ambulance service franchise has been
suspended.
      (7)   Require and receive monthly reports from ambulance providers. Refer
to section
10-37(a).
      (8)   Receive complaints from the public, other enforcing agencies and
ambulance providers regarding franchisee infractions. Review the complaint with
the council. Obtain recommended corrective action with the approval of the
council.
      (9)   With the approval of the council, recommend improvements to the
board of commissioners, which will ensure better medical transportation
services.
      (10)   Maintain all records required by this article and other applicable
county regulations.
   (b)   Ensure due process as follows.
      (1)   Require written complaints filed against a franchisee be submitted
to the Martin County Office of Emergency Medical Services.
      (2)   At the council hearing, both sides will have an opportunity to
present their case regarding the written complaint, in writing or in person.
      (3)   The council shall deliberate following the hearing, excluding any
parties who were involved in the complaint.
      (4)   The decision of the council regarding the written complaint shall
be sent by mail to all parties within 15 days of the hearing, including
procedures for appeal.
      (5)   Upon receipt of the council's written decision, franchisee will
have 15 days to send a written appeal to the board of commissioners.
      (6)   Upon receipt of written appeal from franchisee, the board of
commissioners shall render a decision in writing within 15 days of their
monthly meeting. The decision, at their discretion, may include, but is not
limited to, probation, suspension, fines, or termination.
   (c)   It shall be a violation of this article for anyone to file a frivolous
complaint against any franchisee or any employee or representative of a
franchisee, with the intent to cause a fine, suspension, probation, or
termination of any ambulance franchise.
   (d)   Penalties shall be imposed by the Martin County Board of Commissioners
for violations of or acts of non-compliance with any of the franchise terms of
this article. Penalties may be imposed and fines collected by the Martin County
Office of Emergency Medical Services. Penalties are as follows:
      (1)   First offense: fine of $500.00.
      (2)   Second offense (if within one year of the first offense): fine of
$1,000.00.
      (3)   Third offense (if within one year of the second offense): shall
cause the council to recommend to the board of commissioners the permanent
termination of the franchise. A new application by the terminated franchisee
shall not be accepted for a period of one year or a new franchise application
period, whichever is greater.
      (4)   Penalties for any offense may include fines and suspension or
probation. Termination of the franchise may be imposed by the recommendation of
the council at the discretion of the board of commissioners.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-105, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-26. Inspections.
   The Martin County EMS Administrator or a designee may inspect a franchisee's
records, premises and equipment at any time in order to ensure compliance with
this article and any franchise granted pursuant to this article. Inspections
will be graded on a point system. (Refer to the NCOEMS ambulance bus vehicle
inspection report). A total of 30 points shall cause an ambulance unit to be
suspended for a period of 24 hours from service. If a unit under suspension is
found to be in service, a three-month suspension of the franchised company will
be enforced by the Martin County Office of EMS.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-106, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-27. State permits and county franchise required.
   No person either as owner, agent, or otherwise, shall furnish, operate,
conduct, maintain, advertise, or otherwise be engaged in or profess to be
engaged in the transportation of patients within the county, unless the person
holds a valid permit for each ambulance used in such business or service issued
by the North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services, Office of
Emergency Medical Services, and has been granted a franchise for the operation
of such service by the county, pursuant to this article.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-107, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-28. Exemptions from franchise requirements.
   No franchise shall be required for:
      (1)   Any entity rendering assistance to a franchised ambulance service
in the case of a major catastrophe, mutual aid, or emergency with which the
services franchised by the county are insufficient or unable to cope.
      (2)   Any entity operated from a location or headquarters outside of the
county, and transport to facilities located within the county, or to pick up
patients within the county for transporting to locations outside of the county.
      (3)   Ambulances owned and operated by an agency of the United States
Government.
      (4)   Vehicles owned and operated by emergency medical services or rescue
squads chartered by the state as non-profit corporations and approved by the
county to operate in the county as of the date of the ordinance from which this
article is derived.
      (5)   Any entity providing emergency transportation services within the
meaning of this article that provides trauma transportation services in
connection with a state-certified trauma transportation program.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-108, 11-9-2005)
Sec. 10-29. Franchise districts.
   The franchise district shall encompass the county in its entirety.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-109, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-30. Contents of franchise application.
   Application for a franchise to operate ambulances in the county shall be
made by the ambulance provider, as prescribed by the county. The application
shall be submitted to the Martin County Office of Emergency Medical Services
and shall contain:
      (1)   The name and address of the ambulance provider and of the owner of
the ambulances.
      (2)   The trade or other fictitious names, if any, under which the
applicant does business, along with a certified copy of an assumed name
certificate stating such name or articles of incorporation stating such name.
      (3)   A resume of the training and experience of the applicant in the
transportation and care of patients.
      (4)   A full description of the type and level of service to be provided
including the location of the places from which it is intended to operate, the
manner in which the public will be able to obtain assistance, and how the
vehicles will be dispatched.
      (5)   A description of the applicant's capability to provide service; how
many hours a day the service will be available and how many days a week the
service will be available for the district covered by the franchise applied
for.
      (6)   Any information the Martin County Office of Emergency Medical
Services shall deem reasonably necessary for a fair determination of the
capability of the applicant to provide ambulance services in the county, in
accordance with the requirements of state laws and the requirements of this
article.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-110, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-31. BLS non-emergency transportation and ALS non-emergency
transportation.
   An applicant may apply for a franchise to operate either BLS non-emergency
transportation service or ALS non-emergency transportation service, or both. If
both types of service are to be provided, separate applications must be filed
for each type. All applications are at the discretion of the medical director.
The types of applications will be as follows:
      (1)   Basic life support non-emergency.
      (2)   Convalescent.
      (3)   Advanced life support non-emergency.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-111, 11-9-2005)
Sec. 10-32. Hearing.
   Upon receipt of an application for a new franchise, the Martin County Office
of Emergency Medical Services shall schedule a time and place with the council
for hearing the application. Within 30 days after the hearing, the county shall
cause such investigation as it may deem necessary to be made of the applicant
and the applicant's proposed operations.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-112, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-33. Franchise operator fees to county; limit on number of franchise
operators.
   (a)   A fee in an amount as specified by the board of commissioners from
time to time shall accompany all original applications and requests for
increased level of service before consideration will be given to the
application or renewal thereof. Fees are non-refundable regardless of approval.
A franchise application fee in an amount as specified by the board of
commissioners from time to time shall be required with each new application.
Renewal applications are due by the second Friday of April or the franchise
shall terminate the last day of June and not be eligible for a new application
for a period of one year. Increases in number of transport units by a
franchised operator within the franchise period shall be subject to approval by
the EMS administrator and a fee in an amount as specified by the board of
commissioners from time to time will be required per unit upon approval.
Operation of a new unit without approval of the county is considered a
violation of the franchise.
   (b)   The board of commissioners reserves its right to limit the number of
ambulance franchise operators in the county, and fees shall be as established
from time to time. The county hereby exercises its right to limit the number of
ambulance franchise operators that may operate within the county to five.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-113, 11-9-2005; Ord. No. 2013-1, § 1(1-113), 8-12-2012;
Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-34. Appeals of franchise rejection.
   Any applicant for franchise who is rejected by the Martin County Office of
Emergency Medical Services shall have the right to appeal first to the council
in writing within 15 days of receiving notice and thereafter to the board of
commissioners for final decision. The aggrieved party shall give written notice
of appeal to the board of commissioners within 15 days from the date the
decision to be appealed is received from the council.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-114, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-35. Term of franchise, renewal.
   A franchise pursuant to this article shall be valid for a term of one year.
Either party may terminate the franchise upon 60 days' written notice to the
other party. After a notice of service termination is given, the ambulance
provider may reapply for a franchise during the next year's application period
as a new applicant. Existing franchises may be renewed following the submission
of an application by the second Friday of April and $3,000.00 within 30 days of
franchise approval notice.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-115, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-36. Insurance.
   (a)   The ambulance provider, at its sole expense, shall maintain throughout
the term of the franchise, including any renewals hereof, insurance, including:
      (1)   General liability insurance in the amount of at least $1,000,000.00
per occurrence, $2,000,000.00 umbrella coverage, for a combined total of
$3,000,000.00, with a combined single limit with contractual coverage
endorsements;
      (2)   Vehicle liability with insurance limits covering bodily injury,
death and property damage claims in the amount of at least $1,000,000.00 per
occurrence, $2,000,000.00 umbrella, for combined coverage of $3,000,000.00,
with combined single limits;
      (3)   Professional liability, errors and omissions insurance for all
personnel in the minimum amount of $1,000,000.00, per occurrence, $3,000,000.00
combined coverage.
   (b)   The ambulance provider shall furnish to the Martin County Office of
Emergency Medical Services, prior to the issuance of the franchise and 30 days
in advance of each insurance renewal date, a certificate of insurance in a form
acceptable to the Martin County Office of Emergency Medical Services, which
documents that the ambulance provider has complied with the foregoing insurance
requirements.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-116, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-37. Records and reports.
   (a)   Each franchisee shall maintain the following permanent records:
      (1)   Record of dispatch. Showing time call was received, time ambulance
dispatched, time arrived on scene, time arrived at destination, time in
service. Service must be rendered within 30 minutes, except for scheduled
transports.
      (2)   Trip record. Shall state all information required in subsection (a)
(1) of this section in addition to information on a form approved by the
county. The trip record shall be so designed as to provide the patient with a
copy of it and may serve as a receipt for any charges paid.
      (3)   Daily report log. Shall be maintained for the purpose of
identifying all persons transported in any given day.
      (4)   Daily driver and attendant checklist and inspection report. Shall
list contents and description of operations for each vehicle, signed by the
individual verifying vehicle operations and equipment.
   (b)   Each franchisee shall comply with the electronic data reporting
requirements as set forth by the North Carolina Office of Emergency Medical
Services.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-117, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-38. Cessation of activity upon franchise termination.
   (a)   Upon suspension, revocation, or termination of a franchise such
franchised ambulance provider shall immediately cease operations.
   (b)   Upon suspension, revocation or termination of a driver's license such
persons shall cease to operate an ambulance or attend to the operation of an
ambulance.
   (c)   The franchisee shall not permit any person whose emergency medical
technician certification is invalid to operate an ambulance or provide medical
care in conjunction with the ambulance provider.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-118, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-39. Compliance with law.
   Each franchised ambulance service shall comply at all times with the
requirements of this article, and all applicable federal, state and local laws
relating to health, sanitation, safety, equipment, and ambulance design per
federal standards.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-119, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-40. Change of ownership.
   (a)   Prior approval of the Martin County Office of Emergency Medical
Services shall be required where ownership, control, or right of control of
more than ten percent of the franchise is to be acquired by a person or group
of persons acting in concert, none of whom own or control ten percent or more
of such right of control, singularly or collectively, at the date of the
franchise. By its acceptance of the franchise, the franchisee specifically
agrees that any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the Martin
County Office of Emergency Medical Services shall constitute a violation of the
franchise by the franchisee and shall be cause for penalties at the option of
the council and/or the board of commissioners.
   (b)   Any change of ownership of a franchised ambulance service without the
approval of the Martin County Office of Emergency Medical Services shall
terminate the franchise. A new application and fee shall be as upon original
franchising.
   (c)   No franchise may be sold, assigned, mortgaged, or otherwise
transferred without the approval of the Martin County Office of Emergency
Medical Services. Each franchised ambulance provider, its equipment, and the
premises designated in the application, and all records relating to its
maintenance and operation, as such, shall be open to inspection by the state,
the county, or their designated representatives at all reasonable times.
   (d)   A franchise document may not be defaced, removed or obliterated except
by an authorized person.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-120, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-41. Certificate required for medical responders, emergency medical
technicians, and paramedics.
   No person shall drive an ambulance, attend a patient in an ambulance, or
permit an ambulance to be operated when transporting a patient within Martin
County unless such person holds a currently valid certificate as a medical
responder, emergency medical technician, intermediate, or paramedic issued by
the North Carolina Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Emergency
Medical Services, in accordance with G.S. chapter 131E, article 7, as amended
from time to time.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-121, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-42. Standards for ambulance operators.
   Standards for operators, as developed by the North Carolina Medical Care
Commission as requirements for certification of medical responders, emergency
medical technicians, intermediate emergency medical technicians, and paramedics
in accordance with G.S. chapter 131E, article 7, and G.S. chapter 143, article
56, and shall be applied, and such standards are incorporated in this article
by reference.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-122, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-43. Standards for vehicles and equipment.
   Vehicle and equipment standards, as developed by the North Carolina Medical
Care Commission, pursuant to G.S. chapter 131E, article 7, and G.S. chapter
143, article 56, shall be applied, and such standards are incorporated in this
article by reference.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-123, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-44. Standards for communications.
   (a)   Each ambulance vehicle shall be equipped with an operational two-way
radio capable of establishing good quality voice communications from within the
geographic confines of the county to each hospital emergency department in the
county in which the ambulance is based. Each ambulance vehicle shall be
equipped with two-way radio communications capabilities compatible with all
hospital emergency departments to which transportation of patients is made on a
regular or routine basis anywhere within North Carolina. Each ambulance vehicle
shall be equipped with an operational two-way radio capable of establishing
good quality voice communications from within the geographic confines of the
county with the ambulance-dispatching agency within the county. Cellular phones
may be used in lieu of radios between dispatch and transport units.
   (b)   Each ambulance provider shall maintain current authorization or
Federal Communication Commission licenses for all frequencies and radio
transmitters operated by that provider. Copies of all authorizations and
licenses shall be on display and available for inspection per the Federal
Communication Commission's rules and regulations.
   (c)   Each base of operations must have at least one open telephone line.
Telephone numbers must be registered with each law enforcement agency and E-911
communications center in Martin County.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-124, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Sec. 10-45. Grandfather provisions.
   Any entity providing ambulance services within Martin County on the
effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived may continue
to provide that same service following the new effective date of the ordinance
from which this article is derived, provided that such entity continues to
demonstrate their compliance with G.S. 131E-155 et seq. (formerly, chapter 130,
article 26), and conformity to the rules set forth by the franchise.
(Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-126, 11-9-2005; Ord. of 9-13-2017(1) , 9-13-2017)
Editor's note(s)—Ord. of 9-13-2017(1), adopted Sept. 13, 2017, repealed § 10-45
Editor's note(s)—, which pertained to rates and charges for customers and
derived from Ord. No. 2005-7, § 1-125, 11-9-2005. Subsequently, Ord. of 9-13-
2017(1) renumbered the former § 10-46 as new § 10-45
Editor's note(s)— as set out herein.
Chapter 12
ENVIRONMENT
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 12-1—12-18. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. WATERSHED PROTECTION
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 12-19. Authority and enactment.
   The legislature of the state has, in chapter 153A, article 6, section 121,
General Ordinance Authority; in chapter 153A, article 18, Planning and
Regulation of Development; and in chapter 143, article 21, Watershed Protection
Rules, delegated the responsibility or directed local governmental units to
adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general
welfare of its citizenry. The county board of commissioners does hereby ordain
and enact into law the following articles as the Watershed Protection Ordinance
of Martin County.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 101, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-20. Jurisdiction.
   The provisions of this article shall apply within the areas designated as a
public water supply watershed by the state environmental management commission
and shall be defined and established on the map entitled, "Watershed Protection
Map of Martin County, North Carolina" (the watershed map), which is adopted
simultaneously herewith. The watershed map and all explanatory matter contained
thereon accompanies and is hereby made a part of this article. This article
shall be permanently kept on file in the office of the county clerk.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 102, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-21. Exceptions to applicability.
   (a)   Nothing contained herein shall repeal, modify, or amend any federal or
state law or regulation, or any ordinance or regulation pertaining thereto
except any ordinance which these regulations specifically replace; nor shall
any provision of this article amend, modify, or restrict any provisions of this
Code; however, the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is
derived, shall and does amend any and all ordinances, resolutions, and
regulations in effect in the county at the time of the adoption of the
ordinance from which this article is derived that may be construed to impair or
reduce the effectiveness of this article or to conflict with any of its
provisions.
   (b)   It is not intended that these regulations interfere with any easement,
covenants or other agreements between parties. However, if the provisions of
these regulations impose greater restrictions or higher standards for the use
of a building or land, then the provisions of these regulations shall control.
   (c)   Existing development, as defined in this article, is not subject to
the requirements of this article. Expansions to structures classified as
existing development must meet the requirements of this article; however, the
built-upon area of the existing development is not required to be included in
the density calculations.
   (d)   If a nonconforming lot of record is not contiguous to any other lot
owned by the same party, then that lot of record shall not be subject to the
development restrictions of this article if it is developed for single-family
residential purposes. Any lot or parcel created as part of a family subdivision
after the effective date of these rules shall be exempt from these rules if it
is developed for one single-family detached residence and if it is exempt from
local subdivision regulation. Any lot or parcel created as part of any other
type of subdivision that is exempt from a local subdivision ordinance shall be
subject to the land use requirements (including impervious surface
requirements) of these rules, except that such a lot or parcel must meet the
minimum buffer requirements to the maximum extent practicable.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 103, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-22. Repeal of existing watershed ordinance.
   This article in part carries forward by re-enactment, some of the Watershed
Ordinance of Martin County, North Carolina (adopted by the board of
commissioners on December 23, 1993), and it is not the intention to repeal but
rather to re-enact and continue in force such existing provisions so that all
rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are preserved and may be
enforced. All provisions of the watershed ordinance which are not re-enacted
herein are hereby repealed. All suits at law or in equity and/or all
prosecutions resulting from the violation of any ordinance provisions
heretofore in effect, which are now pending in any court of this state or of
the United States, shall not be abated or abandoned by reason of the adoption
of the ordinance from which this article is derived, but shall be prosecuted to
their finality the same as if the ordinance from which this article is derived
had not been adopted; and any and all violations of the existing watershed
protection ordinance, prosecutions for which have not been instituted, may be
hereafter filed and prosecuted; and nothing in this article shall be so
construed as to abandon, abate or dismiss any litigation or prosecution now
pending and/or which may heretofore have been instituted or prosecuted.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 104, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-23. Criminal penalties.
   Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished in accordance with G.S. 14-
4. The maximum fine for each offense shall not exceed $500.00. Each day that
the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 105, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-24. Remedies.
   (a)   If any subdivision, development and/or land use is found to be in
violation of this article, the county board of commissioners may, in addition
to all other remedies available either in law or in equity, institute a civil
penalty in an amount as specified by the board from time to time, action or
proceedings to restrain, correct, or abate the violation; to prevent occupancy
of the building, structure, or land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct,
business, or use in or about the premises. In addition, the state environmental
management commission may assess civil penalties in accordance with G.S. 143-
215.6(a). Each day that the violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (b)   If the watershed administrator, hereinafter referred to as chief code
enforcement officer or his designee, finds that any of the provisions of this
article are being violated, he shall notify in writing the person responsible
for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation, and ordering the
action necessary to correct it. He shall order discontinuance of the illegal
use of land, buildings or structures; removal of illegal buildings or
structures, or of additions, alterations or structural changes thereto;
discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any action
authorized by this article to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of
its provisions. If a ruling of the chief code enforcement officer is
questioned, the aggrieved party or parties may appeal such ruling to the board
of county commissioners.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 106, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-25. General definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Agricultural use means the use of waters for stock watering, irrigation, and
other farm purposes.
   Best management practices (BMP) means a structural or nonstructural
management-based practice used singularly or in combination to reduce nonpoint
source inputs to receiving waters in order to achieve water quality protection
goals.
   Buffer means an area of natural or planted vegetation through which
stormwater runoff flows in a diffuse manner so that the runoff does not become
channelized and which provides for infiltration of the runoff and filtering of
pollutants. The buffer is measured landward from the normal pool elevation of
impounded structures and from the bank of each side of streams or rivers.
   Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls,
and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property.
The connection of two buildings by means of an open porch, breezeway,
passageway, carport or other such open structure, with or without a roof, shall
not be deemed to make them one building.
   Built-upon area means built-upon areas shall include that portion of a
development project that is covered by impervious or partially impervious cover
including buildings, pavement, gravel areas (e.g., roads, parking lots, paths),
recreation facilities (e.g., tennis courts), etc. The term built-upon area does
not include a wooden slatted deck, the water area of a swimming pool, or
pervious or partially pervious paving material to the extent that the paving
material absorbs water or allows water to infiltrate through the paving
material.
   Chief code enforcement officer means an official or designated person of the
county responsible for administration and enforcement of this article.
   Cluster development means the grouping of buildings in order to conserve
land resources and provide for innovation in the design of the project
including minimizing stormwater runoff impacts. The term "cluster development"
includes nonresidential development as well as single-family residential and
multifamily developments. For the purpose of this article, planned unit
developments and mixed use development are considered as cluster development.
   Critical area means the area adjacent to a water supply intake or reservoir
where risk associated with pollution is greater than from the remaining
portions of the watershed. The critical area is defined as extending either
one-half mile from the normal pool elevation of the reservoir in which the
intake is located or to the ridge line of the watershed (whichever comes
first); or one-half mile upstream from the intake located directly in the
stream or river (run-of-the-river), or the ridge line of the watershed
(whichever comes first). Local governments may extend the critical area as
needed. Major landmarks such as highways or property lines may be used to
delineate the outer boundary of the critical area if these landmarks are
immediately adjacent to the appropriate outer boundary of one-half mile.
   Customary home occupations means any use conducted entirely within a
dwelling and carried on by the occupants thereof, which use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes
and does not change the character thereof. Provided further that no mechanical
equipment is installed or used except as is normally used for domestic or
professional purposes, and that not over 25 percent of the total floor space of
any structure is used for the occupation. No home occupation shall be conducted
in any accessory building except for the storage and service of a vehicle that
is driven off site, such as a service repair truck, delivery truck, etc.
   Development means any land disturbing activity which adds to or changes the
amount of impervious or partially impervious cover on a land area or which
otherwise decreases the infiltration of precipitation into the soil.
   Dwelling unit means a building, or portion thereof, providing complete and
permanent living facilities for one family.
   Existing development means those projects that are built or those projects
that at a minimum have established a vested right under state zoning law as of
the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, based
on at least one of the following criteria:
      (1)   Substantial expenditures of resources (time, labor, money) based on
a good faith reliance upon having received a valid local government approval to
proceed with the project;
      (2)   Having an outstanding valid building permit as authorized by G.S.
153A-344.1 and G.S. 160A-385.1; or
      (3)   Having an approved site specific or phased development plan as
authorized by G.S. 153A-344.1 and G.S. 160A-385.1.
   Existing lot (lot of record) means a lot which is part of a subdivision, a
plat of which has been recorded in the office of the register of deeds prior to
the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, or a lot
described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded
prior to the adoption of this article.
   Family means one or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided
that unless all members are related by blood or marriage or adoption, no such
family shall contain over five persons, but further provided that domestic
servants employed or living on the premises may be housed on the premises
without being counted as a family or families.
   Family subdivision means a division of a tract of land:
      (1)   To convey the resulting parcels, with the exception of parcels
retained by the grantor, to a relative or relatives as a gift or for nominal
consideration, but only if no more than one parcel is conveyed by the grantor
from the tract to any one relative; or
      (2)   To divide land from a common ancestor among tenants in common, all
of whom inherited by intestacy or by will.
   Industrial development means any nonresidential development that requires an
NPDES permit for an industrial discharge and/or requires the use or storage of
any hazardous material for the purpose of manufacturing, assembling, finishing,
cleaning or developing any product or commodity.
   Landfill means a facility for the disposal of solid waste on land in a
sanitary manner in accordance with G.S. chapter 130A, article 9. For the
purpose of this article the term "landfill" does not include composting
facilities.
   Lot means a parcel of land occupied or capable of being occupied by a
building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the
customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same.
   Major variance means a variance from the minimum statewide watershed
protection rules that results in any one or more of the following:
      (1)   The relaxation, by a factor greater than ten percent, of any
management requirement under the low density option;
      (2)   The relaxation, by a factor greater than five percent, of any
buffer, density or built-upon area requirement under the high density option;
      (3)   Any variation in the design, maintenance or operation requirements
of a wet detention pond or other approved stormwater management system.
   Minor variance means a variance from the minimum statewide watershed
protection rules that results in a relaxation, by a factor of up to five
percent of any buffer, density or built-upon area requirement under the high
density option; or that results in a relaxation, by a factor of up to ten
percent, of any management requirement under the low density option.
   Nonconforming lot of record means a lot described by a plat or a deed that
was recorded prior to the effective date of local watershed protection
regulations (or their amendments) that does not meet the minimum lot size or
other development requirements of the statewide watershed protection rules.
   Nonresidential development means all development other than residential
development, agriculture and silviculture.
   Plat means a map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be, or has been
subdivided.
   Protected area means the area adjoining and upstream of the critical area of
WS-IV watersheds. The boundaries of the protected area are defined as within
five miles of and draining to the normal pool elevation of the reservoir or to
the ridgeline of the watershed; or within ten miles upstream and draining to
the intake located directly in the stream or river or to the ridgeline of the
watershed.
   Residential development means buildings for residence such as attached and
detached single-family dwellings, apartment complexes, condominiums,
townhouses, cottages, etc. and their associated outbuildings such as garages,
storage buildings, gazebos, etc. and customary home occupations.
   Residuals mean any solid or semi-solid waste generated from a wastewater
treatment plant, water treatment plant or air pollution control facility
permitted under the authority of the environmental management commission.
   Single-family residential means any development where:
      (1)   No building contains more than one dwelling unit;
      (2)   Every dwelling unit is on a separate lot; and
      (3)   Where no lot contains more than one dwelling unit.
   Street (road) means a right-of-way for vehicular traffic which affords the
principal means of access to abutting properties.
   Structure means anything constructed or erected, including, but not limited
to, buildings, which requires location on the land or attachment to something
having permanent location on the land.
   Subdivider means any person, firm or corporation who subdivides or develops
any land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined.
   Subdivision means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or
more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose of sale or
building development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all
division of land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in
existing streets; but the following shall not be included within this
definition nor be subject to the regulations authorized by this article:
      (1)   The combination or recombination of portions of previously
subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased
and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of this article;
      (2)   The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres where no
street right-of-way dedication is involved;
      (3)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the
widening or opening of streets;
      (4)   The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no
greater than two acres into not more than three lots, where no street right-of-
way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed
the standards of this article;
      (5)   The division of a tract into plots or lots used as a cemetery.
   Toxic substance means any substance or combination of substances (including
disease causing agents), which after discharge and upon exposure, ingestion,
inhalation, or assimilation into any organism, either directly from the
environment or indirectly by ingestion through food chains, has the potential
to cause death, disease, behavioral abnormalities, cancer, genetic mutations,
physiological malfunctions (including malfunctions or suppression in
reproduction or growth) or physical deformities in such organisms or their
offspring or other adverse health effects.
   Variance means a permission to develop or use property granted by the board
of county commissioners relaxing or waiving a water supply watershed management
requirement adopted by the environmental management commission that is
incorporated into this article.
   Water dependent structure means any structure for which the use requires
access to or proximity to or citing within surface waters to fulfill its basic
purpose, such as boat ramps, boat houses, docks and bulkheads. Ancillary
facilities such as restaurants, outlets for boat supplies, parking lots and
commercial boat storage areas are not water dependent structures.
   Watershed means the entire land area contributing surface drainage to a
specific point (e.g., the water supply intake.)
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 601, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-26. Word interpretation.
For the purpose of this article, certain terms shall be interpreted as follows:
   Terms in the present tense include the future tense.
   Terms used in the singular number include the plural, and terms used in the
plural number include the singular, unless the natural construction of the
wording indicates otherwise.
   The term "person" includes a firm, association, corporation, trust, and
company as well as an individual.
   The term "structure" includes the term "building."
   The term "lot" includes the terms, "plot," "parcel," or "tract."
   The term "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
   The term "will" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 602, 8-14-2013)
Secs. 12-27—12-55. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Sec. 12-56. General provisions.
   (a)   No subdivision plat of land within the public water supply watershed
shall be filed or recorded by the register of deeds until it has been approved
in accordance with the provisions of this article. Likewise, the clerk of
superior court shall not order or direct the recording of a plat if the
recording of such plat would be in conflict with this article.
   (b)   The approval of a plat does not constitute or effect the acceptance by
the county or the public of the dedication of any street or other ground,
easement, right-of-way, public utility line, or other public facility shown on
the plat and shall not be construed to do so.
   (c)   All subdivisions shall conform with the mapping requirements contained
in G.S. 47-30.
   (d)   All subdivisions of land within the watershed protection jurisdiction
of the county after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article
is derived shall require a plat to be prepared, approved, and recorded pursuant
to this article.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 201, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-57. Subdivision application and review procedures.
   (a)   All proposed subdivisions shall be reviewed prior to recording with
the register of deeds by submitting a vicinity map to the chief code
enforcement officer to determine whether or not the property is located within
the designated public water supply watershed. Subdivisions that are not within
the designated watershed area shall not be subject to the provisions of this
article and may be recorded, provided the chief code enforcement officer
initials the vicinity map. In addition, subdivisions within a WS-IV watershed
are subject to the provisions of this article only when an erosion and
sedimentation plan is required under the provisions of state law, or an
approved local program. Subdivisions within the designated watershed area shall
comply with the provisions of this article and all other state and local
requirements that may apply.
   (b)   Subdivision applications shall be filed with the chief code
enforcement officer. The application shall include a completed application
form, two copies of the plat and supporting documentation deemed necessary by
the chief code enforcement officer or the watershed review board; hereinafter
referred to as the board of commissioners (see appendix A).
   (c)   The chief code enforcement officer shall review the completed
application and shall either approve, approve conditionally or disapprove each
application. The chief code enforcement officer shall take final action within
45 days of submission of the application. The chief code enforcement officer
may provide public agencies an opportunity to review and make recommendations.
However, failure of the agencies to submit their comments and recommendations
shall not delay action within the prescribed time limit. Said public agencies
may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   The district highway engineer with regard to proposed streets and
highways.
      (2)   The director of the health department with regard to proposed
private water system or sewer systems normally approved by the health
department.
      (3)   The state department of environmental and natural resources with
regard to proposed sewer systems normally approved by the department,
engineered stormwater controls or stormwater management in general.
      (4)   Any other agency or official designated by the chief code
enforcement officer or board of commissioners.
   (d)   If the chief code enforcement officer approves the application, such
approval shall be indicated on both copies of the plat by the following
certificate and signed by the chief code enforcement officer:
Certificate of Approval for Recording
I certify that the plat shown hereon complies with the watershed protection
ordinance and is approved by the chief code enforcement officer for recording
in the register of deeds office.
 
________________________
Date                      Chief Code Enforcement Officer
 
NOTICE: This property is located within a public water supply
watershed—development restrictions may apply.
   (e)   If the chief code enforcement officer disapproves, or approves
conditionally, the application, the reasons for such action shall be stated in
writing for the applicant and entered into the written record. The subdivider
may make changes and submit a revised plan which shall constitute a separate
request for the purpose of review.
   (f)   All subdivision plats shall comply with the requirements for recording
of the county register of deeds.
   (g)   The plat shall be recorded within 30 days of approval. The subdivider
shall provide the chief code enforcement officer with evidence the plat has
been recorded with the register of deeds within five working days.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 202, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-58. Subdivision standards and required improvements.
   (a)   Adequate building space. All lots shall provide adequate building
space in accordance with the development standards contained in division 3 of
this article. Lots which are smaller than the minimum required for residential
lots may be developed using built-upon area criteria as established.
   (b)   Calculation of built-upon area. For the purpose of calculating built-
upon area, total project area shall include total acreage in the tract on which
the project is to be developed. When the total project area involves the
development of public streets, the built-upon area in those new streets is
included in the calculation of the built-upon area for the project. As a
result, the allowable built-upon area for the remaining lot or lots shall be
adjusted to account for the built-upon area of the street. Any final
subdivision plat, zoning permit and conditional use permit for the project
shall indicate the maximum permitted square feet of built-upon area for each
parcel.
   (c)   Stormwater drainage facilities. The application shall be accompanied
by a description of the proposed method of providing stormwater drainage. The
subdivider shall provide a drainage system that diverts stormwater runoff away
from surface waters and incorporates best management practices to minimize
water quality impacts.
   (d)   Erosion and sedimentation control. The application shall, where
required, be accompanied by a written statement that a sedimentation and
erosion control plan has been submitted to and approved by the local agency
administering a sedimentation and erosion control ordinance approved by the
state division of energy, mineral and land resources.
   (e)   Roads constructed in critical areas and watershed buffer areas. Where
possible, roads should be located outside of critical areas and watershed
buffer areas. Roads constructed within these areas shall be designed and
constructed as to minimize their impact on water quality.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 203, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-59. Construction procedures.
   (a)   No construction or installation of improvements shall commence in a
proposed subdivision located within a watershed protection area until a
subdivision plat has been approved by the chief code enforcement officer.
   (b)   No building or other permits shall be issued for erection of a
structure on any lot not of record at the time of adoption of this article
until all requirements of this article have been met. The subdivider, prior to
commencing any work within the subdivision, shall make arrangements with the
chief code enforcement officer to provide for adequate inspection.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 204, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-60. Penalties for transferring lots in unapproved subdivisions.
   Any person who, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located
within the jurisdiction of the county, thereafter subdivides his land in
violation of this article or transfers or sells land by reference to,
exhibition of, or any other use of a plat showing a subdivision of the land
before the plat has been properly approved under this article and recorded in
the office of the register of deeds, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document
used in the process of selling or transferring land shall not exempt the
transaction from this penalty. The county may bring an action for injunction of
any illegal subdivision, transfer, conveyance, or sale of land, and the court
shall, upon appropriate findings, issue an injunction and order requiring the
offending party to comply with this article.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 205, 8-14-2013)
Secs. 12-61—12-78. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Sec. 12-79. Establishment of watershed areas.
   The purpose of this division is to list and describe the watershed areas
herein adopted. For purposes of this division, the county is hereby divided
into the following areas, as appropriate:
 
WS-IV-CA (Critical Area)
WS-IV-PA (Protected Area)
 
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 301, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-80. Watershed areas described.
   (a)   WS-IV Watershed areas; critical area (WS-IV-CA). Only new development
activities that require an erosion/sedimentation control plan under state law
or approved local program are required to meet the provisions of this division
when located in a WS-IV watershed. In order to address a moderate to high land
use intensity pattern, single-family residential uses are allowed at a maximum
of two dwelling units per acre. All other residential and nonresidential
development shall be allowed at a maximum of 24 percent built-upon area. New
residuals application sites and landfills are specifically prohibited.
      (1)   Allowed uses.
         a.   Agriculture. Subject to the provisions of the Food Security Act
of 1985 and the Food, Agriculture, Conservation and Trade Act of 1990 and the
rules and regulations of the soil and water conservation commission.
         b.   Silviculture. Subject to the provisions of the Forest Practices
Guidelines Related to Water Quality (15 NCAC 1I.0101-.0209).
         c.   Residential.
         d.   Nonresidential development. Excluding:
            1.   Landfills; and
            2.   Sites for land application of residuals or petroleum
contaminated soils.
      (2)   Density and built-upon limits.
         a.   Single-family residential. Development shall not exceed two
dwelling units per acre on a project by project basis. No residential lot shall
be less than one-half acre (or 20,000 square feet excluding roadway right-of-
way), except within an approved cluster development.
         b.   All other residential and nonresidential. Development shall not
exceed 24 percent built-upon area on a project by project basis. For the
purpose of calculating the built-upon area, total project area shall include
total acreage in the tract on which the project is to be developed.
   (b)   WS-IV Watershed areas; protected area (WS-IV-PA). Only new development
activities that require an erosion/sedimentation control plan under state law
or approved local government program are required to meet the provisions of
this division when located in a WS-IV watershed. In order to accommodate
moderate to high land use intensity, single-family residential uses shall
develop at a maximum of two dwelling units per acre. All other residential and
nonresidential development shall be allowed at a maximum of 24 percent built-
upon area. A maximum of three dwelling units per acre or 36 percent built-upon
area is allowed for projects without a curb and gutter street system.
      (1)   Uses allowed.
         a.   Agriculture. Subject to the provisions of the Food Security Act
of 1985 and the Food, Agricultural, Conservation and Trade Act of 1990.
         b.   Silviculture. Subject to the provisions of the Forest Practices
Guidelines Related to Water Quality (15 NCAC 1I.0101-.0209).
         c.   Residential development.
         d.   Nonresidential development. Excluding the storage of toxic and
hazardous materials unless a spill containment plan is implemented.
      (2)   Density and built-upon limits.
         a.   Single-family residential. Development shall not exceed two
dwelling units per acre, as defined on a project by project basis. No
residential lot shall be less than one-half acre (or 20,000 square feet
excluding roadway right-of-way), or one-third acre for projects without a curb
and gutter street system, except within an approved cluster development.
         b.   All other residential and nonresidential. Development shall not
exceed 24 percent built-upon area on a project by project basis. For projects
without a curb and gutter street system, development shall not exceed 36
percent built-upon area on a project by project basis. For the purpose of
calculating built-upon area, total project area shall include acreage in the
tract on which the project is to be developed. When the total project involves
the development of public streets, the built-upon area in those new streets is
included in the calculation of the built-upon area for the project. As a
result, the allowable built upon area for the remaining lot or lots shall be
adjusted to account for the built-upon area of the street. Any final
subdivision plat, zoning permit and conditional use permit for the project
shall indicate the maximum permitted square feet of built-upon area for each
parcel.
   In addition to the development allowed under subsections (2)a and (2)b of
this section, new development and expansions to existing development may occupy
up to ten percent of the protected area with up to 70 percent built-upon area
on a project by project basis, when approved as a special intensity allocation
(SIA). The chief code enforcement officer is authorized to approve SIAs
consistent with the provisions of this division. Projects must, to the maximum
extent practicable, minimize built-upon surface area, direct stormwater away
from surface waters and incorporate best management practices to minimize water
quality impacts. For the purpose of calculating built-upon area, total project
area shall include total acreage in the tract on which the project is to be
developed.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 302, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-81. Cluster development.
   Cluster development is allowed in all watershed areas under the following
conditions:
      (1)   Minimum lot sizes are not applicable to single-family cluster
development projects; however, the total number of lots shall not exceed the
number of lots allowed for single-family detached developments in section
12-80. Density or built-upon area for the project shall not exceed that allowed
for the critical area, balance of watershed or protected area, whichever
applies.
      (2)   All built-upon area shall be designed and located to minimize
stormwater runoff impact to the receiving waters and minimize concentrated
stormwater flow, maximize the use of sheet flow through vegetated areas, and
maximize the flow length through vegetated areas.
      (3)   Areas of concentrated density development shall be located in
upland area and away, to the maximum extent practicable, from surface waters
and drainageways.
      (4)   The remainder of the tract shall remain in a vegetated or natural
state. The title to the open space area shall be conveyed to an incorporated
homeowners association for management; to a local government for preservation
as a park or open space; or to a conservation organization for preservation in
a permanent easement. Where a property association is not incorporated, a
maintenance agreement shall be filed with the property deeds.
      (5)   Cluster developments that meet the applicable low density
requirements shall transport stormwater runoff by vegetated conveyances to the
maximum extent practicable.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 303, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-82. Buffer areas required.
   (a)   A minimum 100-foot vegetative buffer is required for all new
development activities that are approved for a special intensity allocation
(SIA); otherwise, a minimum 30-foot vegetative buffer for development
activities is required along all perennial waters indicated on the most recent
versions of U.S.G.S. 1:24,000 (7.5 minute) scale topographic maps or as
determined by local government studies. Desirable artificial streambank or
shoreline stabilization is permitted.
   (b)   No new development is allowed in the buffer except for water dependent
structures, other structures such as flag poles, signs and security lights
which result in only diminutive increases in impervious area and public
projects such as road crossings and greenways where no practical alternative
exists. These activities should minimize built-upon surface area, direct runoff
away from the surface waters and maximize the utilization of stormwater best
management practices.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 304, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-83. Rules governing the interpretation of watershed area boundaries.
   Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the watershed areas, as
shown on the watershed map, the following rules shall apply:
      (1)   Where area boundaries are indicated as approximately following
either street, alley, railroad or highway lines or centerlines thereof, such
lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
      (2)   Where area boundaries are indicated as approximately following lot
lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be said boundaries. However, a
surveyed plat prepared by a registered land surveyor may be submitted to the
county as evidence that one or more properties along these boundaries do not
lie within the watershed area.
      (3)   Where the watershed area boundaries lie at a scaled distance more
than 25 feet from any parallel lot line, the location of watershed area
boundaries shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the watershed
map.
      (4)   Where the watershed area boundaries lie at a scaled distance of 25
feet or less from any parallel lot line, the location of watershed area
boundaries shall be construed to be the lot line.
      (5)   Boundaries of watershed districts indicated as approximately
following the ridge lines shall be construed as the actual ridge line as
determined by accepting surveying practices. The property owner shall bear the
expense of any surveys.
      (6)   Where other uncertainty exists, the chief code enforcement officer
shall interpret the watershed map as to location of such boundaries. This
decision may be appealed to the board of commissioners.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 305, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-84. Application of regulations.
   (a)   No building or land shall hereafter be used and no development shall
take place except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the
watershed area in which it is located.
   (b)   No area required for the purpose of complying with the provisions of
this division shall be included in the area required for another building.
   (c)   Every residential building hereafter erected, moved or structurally
altered shall be located on a lot which conforms to the regulations herein
specified, except as permitted in section
12-85.
   (d)   If a use or class of use is not specifically indicated as being
allowed in a watershed area, such use or class of use is prohibited.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 306, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-85. Existing development.
   Existing development as defined in this division may be continued and
maintained subject to the provisions provided herein. Expansions to structures
classified as existing development must meet the requirements of this division,
however, the built-upon area of the existing development is not required to be
included in the built-upon area calculations.
      (1)   Occupied lots. This category consists of lots, occupied for
residential purposes at the time of the adoption of this division. These lots
may continue to be used provided that whenever two or more adjoining lots of
record, one of which is occupied, and such lots individually or together have
less area than the minimum requirements for residential purposes for the
watershed area in which they are located, such lots shall be combined to create
lots which meet the minimum size requirements or which minimize the degree of
nonconformity.
      (2)   Uses of land. This category consists of uses existing at the time
of adoption of the ordinance from which this division is derived, where such
use of the land is not permitted to be established hereafter in the watershed
area in which it is located. Such uses may be continued except as follows:
         a.   When such use of land has been changed to an allowed use, it
shall not thereafter revert to any prohibited use.
         b.   Such use of land shall be changed only to an allowed use.
         c.   When such use ceases for a period of at least one year, it shall
not be re-established.
      (3)   Reconstruction of buildings or built-upon areas. Any existing
building or built-upon area not in conformance with the restrictions of this
division, that has been damaged or removed, may be repaired and/or
reconstructed, except that there are no restrictions on single-family
residential development, provided:
         a.   Repair or reconstruction is initiated within 12 months and
completed within two years of such damage.
         b.   The total amount of space devoted to built-upon area may not be
increased unless stormwater control that equals or exceeds the previous
development is provided.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 307, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-86. Watershed protection permit.
   (a)   Except where a single-family residence is constructed on a lot deeded
prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is
derived, no building or built-upon area shall be erected, moved, enlarged or
structurally altered, nor shall any building permit be issued nor shall any
change in the use of any building or land be made until a watershed protection
permit has been issued by the chief code enforcement officer. No watershed
protection permit shall be issued except in conformity with the provisions of
this article.
   (b)   Watershed protection permit applications shall be filed with the chief
code enforcement officer. The application shall include a completed application
form (see appendix A) and supporting documentation deemed necessary by the
chief code enforcement officer.
   (c)   Prior to issuance of a watershed protection permit, the chief code
enforcement officer may consult with qualified personnel for assistance to
determine if the application meets the requirements of this article.
   (d)   A watershed protection permit shall expire if a building permit or
watershed occupancy permit for such use is not obtained by the applicant within
12 months from the date of issuance.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 308, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-87. Building permit required.
   No watershed protection permit is required for a single-family residence
constructed on a lot of record prior to the effective date of the ordinance
from which this article is derived. No permit required under the state building
code shall be issued for any activity for which a watershed protection permit
is required until that permit has been issued.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 309, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-88. Watershed protection occupancy permit.
   (a)   The chief code enforcement officer shall issue a watershed protection
occupancy permit certifying that all requirements of this article have been met
prior to the occupancy or use of a building hereafter erected, altered or moved
and/or prior to the change of use of any building or land.
   (b)   A watershed protection occupancy permit, either for the whole or part
of a building, shall be applied for coincident with the application for a
watershed protection permit and shall be issued or denied within ten days after
the erection or structural alterations of the building.
   (c)   When only a change in use of land or existing building occurs, the
chief code enforcement officer shall issue a watershed protection occupancy
permit certifying that all requirements of this article have been met
coincident with the watershed protection permit.
   (d)   If the watershed protection occupancy permit is denied, the chief code
enforcement officer shall notify the applicant in writing stating the reasons
for denial.
   (e)   No building or structure which has been erected, moved, or
structurally altered may be occupied until the chief code enforcement officer
has approved and issued a watershed protection occupancy permit.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 310, 8-14-2013)
Secs. 12-89—12-119. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. PUBLIC HEALTH REGULATIONS
Sec. 12-120. Public health, in general.
   No activity, situation, structure or land use shall be allowed within the
watershed which poses a threat to water quality and the public health, safety
and welfare. Such conditions may arise from inadequate on-site sewage systems
which utilize ground absorption; inadequate sedimentation and erosion control
measures; the improper storage or disposal of junk, trash, or other refuse
within a buffer area; the absence or improper implementation of a spill
containment plan for toxic and hazardous materials; the improper management of
stormwater runoff; or any other situation found to pose a threat to water
quality.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 401, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-121. Abatement.
   (a)   The chief code enforcement officer shall monitor land use activities
within the watershed areas to identify situations that may pose a threat to
water quality.
   (b)   The chief code enforcement officer shall report all findings to the
board of commissioners. The chief code enforcement officer may consult with any
public agency or official and request recommendations.
   (c)   Where the board of commissioners finds a threat to water quality and
the public health, safety and welfare, the board shall institute any
appropriate action or proceeding to restrain, correct or abate the condition
and/or violation.
   (d)   The chief code enforcement officer shall coordinate enforcement
activities with the county health department.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 402, 8-14-2013)
Secs. 12-122—12-140. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND APPEALS
Sec. 12-141. Watershed administrator and duties thereof.
   The county manager shall appoint the chief code enforcement officer as the
watershed administrator, who shall be duly sworn in. It shall be the duty of
the chief code enforcement officer to administer and enforce the provisions of
this article as follows:
      (1)   The chief code enforcement officer shall issue watershed protection
permits and watershed protection occupancy permits as prescribed herein. A
record of all permits shall be kept on file and shall be available for public
inspection during regular office hours of the chief code enforcement officer.
      (2)   The chief code enforcement officer, or his designee, shall serve as
clerk to the board of commissioners in the board's role as watershed review
board.
      (3)   The chief code enforcement officer shall keep records of all
amendments to the local water supply watershed protection ordinance and shall
provide copies of all amendments upon adoption to the section of the state
department of environment and natural resources.
      (4)   The chief code enforcement officer shall keep records of the
jurisdiction's use of the provision that a maximum of ten percent of the non-
critical area of WS-II and WS-III watersheds and, for local governments that do
not choose to incorporate the high density option, ten percent of the protected
area of WS-IV watersheds may be developed with new development at a maximum of
70 percent built-upon surface area. Records for each watershed shall include
the total acres of non-critical watershed area, total acres eligible to be
developed under this option, total acres approved for this development option,
and individual records for each project with the following information:
location, number of developed acres, type of land use and stormwater management
plan (if applicable).
      (5)   The chief code enforcement officer is granted the authority to
administer and enforce the provisions of this division, exercising in the
fulfillment of his responsibility the full police power of the county. The
chief code enforcement officer, or his duly authorized representative, may
enter any building, structure, or premises, as provided by law, to perform any
duty imposed upon him by this division.
      (6)   The chief code enforcement officer shall keep a record of variances
to the local water supply watershed protection ordinance. This record shall be
submitted for each calendar year to the state department of environment and
natural resources, on or before January 1 of the following year, and shall
provide a description of each project receiving a variance and the reasons for
granting the variance.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 501, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-142. Appeal from the chief code enforcement officer.
   (a)   Any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the chief
code enforcement officer may be appealed to and decided by the board of
commissioners.
   (b)   An appeal from a decision of the chief code enforcement officer must
be submitted to the board of commissioners within 30 days from the date the
order, interpretation, decision or determination is made. All appeals must be
made in writing stating the reasons for appeal. Following submission of an
appeal, the chief code enforcement officer shall transmit to the board all
papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
   (c)   An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed,
unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board after
the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that by reason of facts stated in
the certificate, a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a
restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on
application of notice of the officer from whom the appeal is taken and upon due
cause shown.
   (d)   The board shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give
notice thereof to the parties and shall decide the same within a reasonable
time. At the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent or by attorney.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 502, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-143. Changes and amendments to the watershed protection ordinance.
   (a)   The board of commissioners may, on its own motion or on petition,
after public notice and hearing, amend, supplement, change or modify the
watershed regulations and restrictions as described herein.
   (b)   Under no circumstances shall the board adopt such amendments,
supplements or changes that would cause this division to violate the watershed
protection rules as adopted by the state environmental management commission.
All amendments must be filed with the state department of environment and
natural resources.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 503, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-144. Adoption and amendments; public notice and hearing required.
   Before adopting or amending this article, the board shall hold a public
hearing on the proposed changes. A notice of the public hearing shall be given
once a week for two successive calendar weeks in a newspaper having general
circulation in the area. The notice shall be published for the first time not
less than ten nor more than 25 days before the date for the hearing.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 504, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-145. Establishment of a watershed review board.
   The board of commissioners shall serve as the watershed review board. The
board shall conduct its meetings according to rules of procedure which it shall
adopt and amend from time to time to ensure consistency with statutory
requirements.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 505, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-146. Rules of conduct for members.
   (a)   No board member shall take part in the hearing, consideration, or
determination of any case in which he is personally or financially interested.
A board member shall have a financial interest in a case when a decision in the
case will:
      (1)   Cause him or his spouse to experience a direct financial benefit or
loss; or
      (2)   Will cause a business in which he or his spouse owns a ten percent
or greater interest, or is involved in a decision-making role, to experience a
direct financial benefit or loss. A board member shall have a "personal
interest" in a case when it involves a member of his immediate family (i.e.,
parent, spouse, or child).
   (b)   No board member shall discuss any case with any parties thereto prior
to the public hearing on that case; provided, however, that members may receive
and/or seek information pertaining to the case from the chief code enforcement
officer or any other member of the board, its secretary or clerk prior to the
hearing.
   (c)   Members of the board shall not express individual opinions on the
proper judgment of any case prior to its determination on that case.
   (d)   Members of the board shall give notice to the chairperson at least 48
hours prior to the hearing of any potential conflict of interest which he has
in a particular case before the board.
   (e)   No board member shall vote on any matter that decides an application
or appeal unless he had attended the public hearing on that application or
appeal.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 506, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-147. Powers and duties of the board of commissioners in its role as the
watershed review board.
   In exercising the powers in this article, the board may reverse or affirm,
wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decision, or
determination of the watershed administrator, and may direct the issuance of a
watershed permit.
      (1)   Administrative review. The board of commissioners shall hear and
decide appeals from any decision or determination made by the chief code
enforcement officer in the enforcement of this article.
      (2)   Variances. The board of commissioners shall have the power to
authorize, in specific cases, minor variances from the terms of this article as
will not be contrary to the public interests where, owing to special
conditions, a literal enforcement of this article will result in practical
difficulties or unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this article shall
be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done.
In addition, the county shall notify and allow a reasonable comment period for
all other local governments having jurisdiction in the designated watershed
where the variance is being considered.
         a.   Applications for a variance shall be made on the proper form
obtainable from the chief code enforcement officer and shall include the
following information:
            1.   A site plan, drawn to a scale of at least one inch to 40 feet,
indicating the property lines of the parcel upon which the use is proposed; any
existing or proposed structures; parking areas and other built-upon areas;
surface water drainage. The site plan shall be neatly drawn and indicate north
point, name and address of person who prepared the plan, date of the original
drawing, and an accurate record of any later revisions.
            2.   A complete and detailed description of the proposed variance,
together with any other pertinent information which the applicant feels would
be helpful to the board of commissioners in considering the application.
            3.   The chief code enforcement officer shall notify in writing
each local government having jurisdiction in the watershed and the entity using
the water supply for consumption. Such notice shall include a description of
the variance being requested. Local governments receiving notice of the
variance request may submit comments to the chief code enforcement officer
prior to a decision by the board of commissioners. Such comments shall become a
part of the record of proceedings of the board of commissioners.
         b.   Before the board of commissioners may grant a variance, it shall
make the following three findings, which shall be recorded in the permanent
record of the case, and shall include the factual reasons on which they are
based:
            1.   There are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in
the way of carrying out the strict letter of this article. In order to
determine that there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships, the
board must find that the five following conditions exist:
               (i)   If he complies with the provisions of this article, the
applicant can secure no reasonable return from, nor make reasonable use of, his
property. Merely proving that the variance would permit a greater profit to be
made from the property will not be considered adequate to justify the board in
granting a variance. Moreover, the board shall consider whether the variance is
the minimum possible deviation from the terms of this article that will make
possible the reasonable use of his property.
               (ii)   The hardship results from the application of this article
to the property rather than from other factors such as deed restrictions or
other hardship.
               (iii)   The hardship is due to the physical nature of the
applicant's property, such as its size, shape, or topography, which is
different from that of neighboring property.
               (iv)   The hardship is not the result of the actions of an
applicant who knowingly or unknowingly violates the ordinance, or who purchases
the property after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article
is derived, and then comes to the board for relief.
               (v)   The hardship is peculiar to the applicant's property,
rather than the result of conditions that are widespread. If other properties
are equally subject to the hardship created in the restriction, then granting a
variance would be a special privilege denied to others, and would not promote
equal justice.
            2.   The variance is in harmony with the general purpose and intent
of the ordinance and preserves its spirit.
            3.   In the granting of the variance, the public safety and welfare
have been assured and substantial justice has been done. The board shall not
grant a variance if it finds that doing so would in any respect impair the
public health, safety, or general welfare.
         c.   In granting the variance, the board may attach thereto such
conditions regarding the location, character, and other features of the
proposed building, structure, or use as it may deem advisable in furtherance of
the purpose of this article. If a variance for the construction, alteration or
use of property is granted, such construction, alteration or use shall be in
accordance with the approved site plan.
         d.   The variance or request requires a four-fifths vote by the board
of commissioners for approval.
         e.   The board of commissioners shall refuse to hear an appeal or an
application for a variance previously denied if it finds that there have been
no substantial changes in conditions or circumstances bearing on the appeal or
application.
         f.   A variance issued in accordance with this section shall be
considered a watershed protection permit and shall expire if a building permit
or watershed occupancy permit for such use is not obtained by the applicant
within six months from the date of the decision.
         g.   If the application calls for the granting of a major variance,
and if the board of commissioners decides in favor of granting the variance,
the board shall prepare a preliminary record of the hearing with all deliberate
speed. The preliminary record of the hearing shall include:
            1.   The variance application;
            2.   The hearing notices;
            3.   The evidence presented;
            4.   Motions, offers of proof, objections to evidence, and rulings
on them;
            5.   Proposed findings and exceptions;
            6.   The proposed decision, including all conditions proposed to be
added to the permit.
         h.   The preliminary record shall be sent to the environmental
management commission for its review as follows:
            1.   If the environmental management commission concludes from the
preliminary record that the variance qualifies as a major variance and that:
               (i)   The property owner can secure no reasonable return from,
nor make any practical use of the property unless the proposed variance is
granted; and
               (ii)   The variance, if granted, will not result in a serious
threat to the water supply, then the environmental management commission shall
approve the variance as proposed or approve the proposed variance with
conditions and stipulations. The environmental management commission shall
prepare a commission decision and send it to the board of commissioners. If the
environmental management commission approves the variance as proposed, the
board shall prepare a final decision granting the proposed variance. If the
environmental management commission approves the variance with conditions and
stipulations, the board shall prepare a final decision, including such
conditions and stipulations, granting the proposed variance.
            2.   If the environmental management commission concludes from the
preliminary record that the variance qualifies as a major variance and that:
               (i)   The property owner can secure a reasonable return from or
make a practical use of the property without the variance; or
               (ii)   The variance, if granted, will result in a serious threat
to the water supply, then the environmental management commission shall deny
approval of the variance as proposed. The environmental management commission
shall prepare a commission decision and send it to the board of commissioners.
The board shall prepare a final decision denying the variance as proposed.
      (3)   Subdivision approval. See division 2 of this article.
      (4)   Public health. See division 4 of this article.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 507, 8-14-2013)
Sec. 12-148. Appeals from the board of commissioners.
   Appeals from the board of commissioners must be filed with the superior
court within 30 days from the date of the decision. Decisions by the superior
court will be in the manner of certiorari.
(Ord. No. 2014-1, § 508, 8-14-2013)
Secs. 12-149—12-179. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. NOISE CONTROL 1
 
Notes
1 State law reference(s)—County authority to regulate noise, G.S. 153A-133;
  sport shooting range protection, G.S. 14-409.46.
Sec. 12-180. Purpose.
   (a)   It is recognized that excessive noise endangers the physical and
emotional health and welfare of the people, interferes with legitimate business
and recreational activity, depresses property values, offends the senses,
creates public nuisances, and in other respects reduces the quality of life.
   (b)   It is further recognized that a substantial body of science and
technology exists by which excessive sound may be measured and substantially
abated. Because excessive noise may jeopardize human health or welfare or
substantially degrade the quality of life, it is the purpose of this article to
prevent, prohibit, and provide for the regulation and abatement of excessive
noise, which may injure the physical and emotional health or welfare of its
citizens or degrade the quality of life.
(Ord. No. 2008-2, § 1, 5-14-2008; Ord. - -)
Sec. 12-181. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   A-weighted sound level means the sound pressure level in decibels as
measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level so
read is designated dB(A).
   Decibel (dB) means a unit for describing the amplitude of sound, equal to 20
times the logarithm to the base ten of the ratio of the pressure of the sound
measured to the reference pressure, which is 20 micronewtons per square meter.
   Emergency work means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or
alleviating physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an
existing or imminent peril.
   Holiday, for the purposes of this article, means the following days will be
recognized as holidays for the purpose of granting permits to exceed maximum
sound level: St. Patrick's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Halloween and December 31.
   Muffler means an apparatus consisting of a series of chambers or baffle
plates designed for the purpose of transmitting gases while reducing sound
emanating from such apparatus.
   Nighttime means that time commencing at 10:00 p.m. on one day and ending at
7:00 a.m. the next day or, if using the 24-hour clock, from 22:00 to 7:00.
   Noise means any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or
tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
   Outdoor amplified sound means any sound using amplifying equipment, whose
source is outside or whose source is inside and the sound propagates to the
outside through open doors or windows or other openings in the building.
   Owner of real property means the owner, or listing owner, of real property
as defined in G.S. 105-302.
   Person means any individual, association, partnership, or corporation and
includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of the
United States, the state or any political subdivision thereof.
   Plainly audible means any sound that can be clearly heard at a distance of
30 feet or more. Measurement standards shall be the auditory senses, based upon
the direct line of sight. Words or phrases need not be discernible and bass
reverberations are included.
   Sound means an oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that
causes compression, and rarefaction of that medium. The description of sound
may include any characteristic of such sound, including duration, intensity and
frequency.
   Sound amplification system means any radio, tape player, compact disc
player, loud speaker or other electronic device used for the amplification of
sound.
   Sound level means the weighted sound pressure level obtained by the use of a
sound level meter and frequency weighting network, such as A, B or C as
specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound
level meters (ANSI S1.41971 or the latest approved version thereof). If the
frequency weighting employed is not indicated, the A-weighting shall also
apply.
   Sound source means any person, animal, device, operation, process, activity,
or phenomenon, which emits or causes sound.
   Tenant means one who resides on or has the temporary use or occupation of
real property owned by another person. In the case of residential property, the
term tenant shall be construed to mean any individual actually residing at the
residential location, whether such person is listed on a lease or not.
   Unreasonably loud noise means any excessive or unusually loud sound or any
sound which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which does
disturb, injure or endanger the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of any
reasonable person of ordinary sensibilities or causes damage to property.
(Ord. No. 2008-2, § 2, 5-14-2008; Ord. - -)
Sec. 12-182. Maximum permitted sound levels by use occupancy.
   (a)   The use of sound amplifying equipment is limited to the conditions
specified in this section.
   (b)   Outdoor amplified sound, including a live musical group or individual
using sound amplifying equipment, may be produced only if an authorized agent
of the sponsoring business, organization, group or person has been granted an
outdoor amplified sound permit. This permit must be signed by a representative
of the business, organization or group holding or sponsoring the event at which
the outdoor amplified sound will be produced, as well as the applicant if
different from the business, organization or group holding or sponsoring the
event.
   (c)   Except as allowed in subsection (d) of this section, no person shall
operate, or cause to be operated, any source of sound in such a manner as to
create a sound level which, at its peak, exceeds the limits set forth for the
use occupancy categories in Table 1 when measured at or beyond the property
line of the property from which the sound originates. For purposes of
measurement, the back of the curb, the outside edges of driveways, fences,
hedges, or other physical features commonly associated with property boundaries
are presumed to be at a point which is at or beyond the property line. In all
cases the maximum sound level permitted by use occupancy shall be determined on
the basis of the use occupancy of the property from which the sound originates
and not by the use occupancy of any surrounding property. Sound, which
originates from a dwelling unit in a duplex or other multifamily housing unit
shall be measured from any point, which is at least 25 lineal feet, whether
inside or outside a building, from the nearest point of the enclosed or
habitable space of the dwelling unit from which the sound originates.
Table 1 Sound Levels by Use Occupancy
 
Use Occupancy Category       Time                 Sound Level Limit(dB(A))
Residential                  7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m60
                             10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m55
Public space, commercial or  7:00 a.m.—10:00 p.m60
business                     10:00 p.m.—7:00 a.m65
Manufacturing, industrial or At all times         75
agricultural
 
   (d)   Sound levels in excess of the limits established in Table 1 will be
permitted in public space, commercial or business space, manufacturing,
industrial or agricultural space, but not on residential space, as follows:
Table 2
 
                                                 Without        With Permission
                                                 Permission to  to Exceed (dB
                                                 Exceed (dB(A)) (A))
Weekends (Friday 5:00 p.m.—11:00 p.m. Sunday)  70             80
Holidays (as defined in Section 2) (Noon—11:00 70             80
p.m.)
 
(Ord. No. 2008-2, § 3, 5-14-2008; Ord. - -)
Sec. 12-183. Nuisance noise.
   (a)   In addition to any other violation of this article, it shall be
unlawful to emit any unreasonably loud noise. Specifically, it shall be
unlawful to emit noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be
detrimental to the life or health of any reasonable person of ordinary
sensibilities.
   (b)   In addition to any other violation of this article, the following acts
are specifically declared to be unreasonably loud noise, the emission of which
shall be unlawful. Such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive:
      (1)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger
signal, or if in motion, only as a danger signal after or as brakes are being
applied and deceleration of the vehicle is intended; the creation by means of
any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the
sounding of such device for an unreasonable period of time.
      (2)   The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle other than police,
fire, ambulance or other emergency vehicles.
      (3)   The playing of any radio, phonograph, CD player, computer generated
and/or amplified sound, amplifier, television, tape deck, tape recorder,
musical instrument or any other electronically created or amplified sound
equipment, including those installed and/or in use in any automobile, bus or
other vehicle, in such a manner or with such volume at all times as to disturb
the quiet, comfort or repose of any person or persons in any dwelling, hotel,
motel or other type of residence.
      (4)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so out of
repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud grating, grinding,
rattling or other noise.
      (5)   The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler.
      (6)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any stationary
internal combustion engine or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other
device, which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
      (7)   The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
school, institution of learning, church or court, while the same are in
session, or within 150 feet of any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with
the work of such institution or which disturbs patients in the hospital.
      (8)   The creation of loud and excessive noise in connection with loading
or unloading any vehicles or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes,
crates and containers.
      (9)   The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers or vendors,
which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood.
      (10)   The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance,
show or sale or display of merchandise.
      (11)   The repair, rebuilding or testing of any motor vehicle in any
residential district, so as to cause loud or offensive noises to be emitted
therefrom during the nighttime hours.
      (12)   The creation of excessive noise by the operation of an airplane
over the county by stunting, diving or otherwise operating an airplane for the
purpose of advertising or otherwise.
      (13)   The keeping or maintaining or permitting the keeping of, on any
premises, owned, leased, occupied or controlled by such person, any animal or
fowl otherwise permitted to be kept which, by habitual or frequent sound, cry,
howling, barking, squawking, meowing or other noise, that disturbs the quiet,
comfort or repose of any person.
      (14)   The operation on public property or on public vehicular areas of
any sound amplifier which is part of, or connected to, any radio, stereo
receiver, compact disc player, cassette tape player, or other similar device
when operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 30
feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located or
operated and which because of its volume, level, duration and character
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, health, peace or safety of
reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities.
      (15)   Yelling or shouting in residential areas during the nighttime
hours where such yelling or shouting is of such volume, level, and duration as
to interfere with the quiet enjoyment of reasonable persons of ordinary
sensibilities or disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, health, peace or
safety of reasonable persons of ordinary sensibilities.
(Ord. No. 2008-2, § 4, 5-14-2008; Ord. - -)
Sec. 12-184. Exceptions.
   The following are exempt from the provisions of
Table 1 and
Table 2 of sections
12-182 and
12-183:
      (1)   Sound emanating from scheduled outdoor athletic events, i.e.,
raceways.
      (2)   Construction operations from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on weekdays and
8:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on weekends for which building permits have been issued
or construction operations not requiring permits; providing all equipment is
operated in accord with the manufacturer's specifications and with all standard
equipment manufacturer's mufflers and noise-reducing equipment in use and in
proper operating condition.
      (3)   Noise of safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure relief
valves, and all church bells.
      (4)   Noise resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle.
      (5)   Noise resulting from parades, lawful picketing or other public
demonstrations protected by the U.S. Constitution or federal law, or for which
a local permit has been granted, provided such activity is of a temporary
duration lasting no longer than two hours during any 24-hour period. Regulation
of noise emanating from activities under permit shall be according to the
conditions and limits stated in this article and according to any additional
conditions stated on the permit.
      (6)   Non-amplified and amplified sound at street fairs conducted,
sponsored or sanctioned by the county.
      (7)   Noise from noisemakers on holidays and fireworks on holidays or at
times allowed under a pyrotechnics permit issued pursuant to G.S. ch. 14,
article 54.
      (8)   Lawn mowers and agricultural equipment used between 7:00 a.m. and
9:00 p.m. when operated with all of the manufacturer's standard mufflers and
noise-reducing equipment in use and in proper operating condition.
      (9)   Non-amplified and amplified sound at community concerts conducted,
sponsored or sanctioned by the county.
      (10)   Noise from trains and associated railroad rolling stock when
operated in proper repair and manner.
      (11)   Generators and emergency work, as defined in section
12-181.
(Ord. No. 2008-2, § 9.5, 5-14-2008; Ord. - -)
Sec. 12-185. Determinations.
   In determining whether a noise is unreasonably loud, the following factors
incident to such noise are to be considered:
      (1)   The time of day.
      (2)   The proximity to residential structures, whether the noise is
recurrent, intermittent or constant.
      (3)   The volume and intensity.
      (4)   Whether the noise has been enhanced in volume or range by any type
of electronic or mechanical means.
      (5)   The character and zoning of the area.
      (6)   Whether the noise is related to the normal operation of a business
or other labor activity.
      (7)   Whether the noise is subject to being controlled without
unreasonable effort or expense to the creator thereof.
(Ord. No. 2008-2, § 6, 5-14-2008; Ord. - -)
Sec. 12-186. Permits.
   (a)   Who may apply. A person or group of persons may produce or cause to be
produced sound in excess of the limits set in section
12-182, Table 1 only if a permit to exceed has been obtained. With a permit
granted pursuant to this section, maximum sound levels shall be as set out in
section
12-182, Table 2.
   (b)   Application for permit. Any person or group of persons desiring an
outdoor amplified sound permit or a permit to exceed shall apply as provided in
this section, and shall provide all information required. All applications for
a permit to exceed shall be submitted to the sheriff; failure to comply with
this requirement shall be grounds for denying the permit.
   (c)   Action by sheriff. The sheriff or his or her designee shall act upon
all requests for permits. In considering and acting on all requests for permits
pursuant to this article, the sheriff or his or her designee shall consider,
but shall not be limited to, the following in issuing or denying such permit:
      (1)   The timeliness of the application;
      (2)   The nature of the requested activity; previous experience with the
applicant;
      (3)   The time of the event; other activities in the vicinity of the
location proposed;
      (4)   The frequency of the application;
      (5)   The cultural or social benefits of the proposed activity;
      (6)   The effect of the activity on any residential area of the county;
and
      (7)   Previous violations, if any, of the applicant.
   (d)   Conditions on permits. Permits to exceed and outdoor amplified sound
permits shall specify the duration for which noncompliance shall be permitted
and shall prescribe the conditions or requirements necessary to minimize
adverse effects upon the community or surrounding neighborhood. The sheriff or
his or her designee may require, but shall not be limited to, the following:
      (1)   No sound speakers may be set up more than ten feet off the ground.
      (2)   The permit holder change the arrangement of amplifying equipment or
sound instruments upon the request of any county law enforcement officer so as
to minimize the disturbance to others resulting from the position or
orientation of the amplifying equipment or from atmospherically or
geographically caused dispersal of sound beyond the property lines.
      (3)   Adjoining property owners surrounding the location proposed as the
site of the permitted event be notified by the applicant at least 72 hours
prior to the scheduled event. Notice to the adjoining property owners shall
include a statement indicating that comments or concerns regarding the issuance
of a permit at the proposed location may be made to the sheriff prior to the
event. These conditions are mandatory on all permit to exceed applicants. For
the purposes of the provision of notice to adjoining property owners as
required by this subsection, when the location proposed as the site of the
permitted event is at or within an apartment complex or other multifamily
dwelling development, adjoining property shall include all units within the
development, which are wholly or partially within 100 feet of the site of the
permitted event and all properties, which either abut directly on the external
boundary of the development or are only separated from the external boundary of
the development by a street or the right-of-way of a street, railroad, or other
public service corporation.
      (4)   No permitted event may last more than four hours in duration.
      (5)   No event may extend beyond 10:00 p.m.
      (6)   Misrepresentations, false, misleading or inaccurate information
provided in the application for an outdoor amplified sound permit will result
in the immediate revocation of the permit and may result in the denial of
future permits.
      (7)   Applicants and others that may be responsible, according to the
terms of the permit application, are responsible for all costs, salaries, and
expenses incurred by the county for violations of the permit to exceed the
outdoor amplified sound permit.
   (e)   Cooperation with sheriff. The permit holder shall agree to cooperate
with the sheriff's department by having the signer of the permit available at
the site of the event during the entire time for which a permit has been issued
and capable of assisting the officers in enforcing the noise control ordinance.
Failure of such signer of a permit to be present or to assist the officers in
complying with the terms of the permit will be cause for immediate revocation
of said permit.
(Ord. No. 2008-2, § 7, 5-14-2008; Ord. - -)
Sec. 12-187. Motor vehicle noise.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate, move, or permit
to be driven, operated, or moved, a motor vehicle or combination of vehicles at
any time in such a manner that the sound level of the vehicle exceeds the
levels set forth for that category of vehicles as shown below:
Table 3 Maximum Motor Vehicle Sound Level in dB(A)
 
                     Speed Limit 35 mph Speed Limit 35 mph Vehicle Stationary
                     or Less            or More
Motor vehicle with a
gross vehicle weight
rating (GVWR) of     81                 85                 83
less than 10,000
pounds
Motorcycle           81                 85                 83
Motor vehicle with a
GVWR of more than    89                 94                 91
10,000 pounds
Any other motor
vehicle or any
combination of       76                 80                 78
vehicles towed by
any motor vehicle
 
   (b)   Sound levels are to be measured at a distance of 25 feet from the
nearest lane being monitored and at a height of at least four feet above the
immediate surrounding surface.
   (c)   This section shall apply to the total noise from a vehicle and shall
not be construed as limiting or precluding the enforcement of any other
provisions of this article relating to motor vehicle mufflers or noise control.
   (d)   Traffic and other transportation noise sources and other background
noises shall not be considered in taking measurements under this section.
(Ord. No. 2008-2, § 8, 5-14-2008; Ord. - -)
Sec. 12-188. Mufflers.
   (a)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated
a motor vehicle unless the exhaust system is free from defects, which affect
sound reduction.
   (b)   No person shall remove or render inoperative, or cause to be removed
or rendered inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair or
replacement, any muffler or sound dissipative device on a motor vehicle.
   (c)   It shall be unlawful for any person to modify the exhaust system of a
motor vehicle by the installation of a muffler cutout or bypass, and no person
shall operate a motor vehicle, which has been so modified.
(Ord. No. 2008-2, § 9, 5-14-2008; Ord. - -)
Sec. 12-189. Owner responsibility for noise violations.
   (a)   No property owner shall allow a noise-related nuisance or health or
safety hazard to be created or maintained by or on account of tenants of the
property owner. For purposes of this section, a noise-related nuisance or
health or safety hazard shall be deemed to exist when a tenant or group of
tenants at a specific location receives a third citation for a noise ordinance
violation pursuant to this article. A property owner may be held liable for the
costs of abating the nuisance or remedying the health or safety hazard only if
the property owner has been notified in writing of the first two ordinance
violations. A property owner shall be liable for the costs of abating the
nuisance or remedying the health or safety hazard upon the third and any
subsequent action by the same tenant at a specific location, provided the third
violation occurs at least 15 days from the date of actual receipt of notice of
the second violation. It shall be a complete defense to a citation under this
subsection if the owner of the real property involved can prove that the
property owner is actively pursuing an eviction process according to law, and
that the eviction process was begun prior to the date of the third or any
subsequent violation by the same tenant at a specific location.
   (b)   Owners, property managers, agents, management companies, employees of
the owner, property manager, agent or management companies, and their family
members shall be responsible and liable for any violations of this article by
tenants, guests, or licensees on the premises if the owners, property managers,
agents, management companies, employees of the owner, property manager, agent
or management companies, or their family members are present at the time of the
violation.
   (c)   Notice of any previous violations pursuant to this section shall be
affected by registered or certified mail and by regular mail sent concurrently.
Alternately, notice may be affected by personal hand delivery and
acknowledgment of receipt by the owner or agent of the owner. If the certified
or registered notification is returned, but the regular mail notification is
not returned, it will be presumed the addressee received the notification. The
burden shall be on the addressee to establish that such notification was not
received.
(Ord. No. 2008-2, § 10, 5-14-2008; Ord. - -)
Sec. 12-190. Violations.
   (a)   When it is reasonable and practical to do so, a person believed to be
violating any portion of this article may be given an oral order to cease or
abate the noise immediately, or as soon as is reasonable or practical, prior to
being charged with a violation.
   (b)   If the order to cease or abate the noise is not complied with, the
person or persons responsible for the violation may be charged with a violation
of this article.
(Ord. No. 2008-2, § 11, 5-14-2008; Ord. - -)
Sec. 12-191. Penalties and enforcement.
   (a)   Civil penalty. Any violation of the provisions of this article shall
subject the offender to a civil penalty in the amount as shall be determined by
the board of commissioners from time to time. In the event there is more than
one violation within any 30-day period, then the civil penalty shall be
increased for each additional violation over one during such period, as
follows. The date of the first violation shall establish the beginning date for
the initial 30-day period. The next violation within that 30-day period shall
be considered the second violation. Any violations that follow within that 30-
day period shall be numbered sequentially. The penalty shall be:
      (1)   A second offense within same 30-day period shall be subject to a
fine in the amount as specified by the board of commissioners from time to
time.
      (2)   Third and subsequent offenses within same 30-day period shall be
subject to a fine in the amount as specified by the board of commissioners from
time to time.
      (3)   Once the 30-day period has run from the first violation, the next
violation shall be considered to be a first violation for the purposes of
establishing a new 30-day period. Each subsequent violation that follows more
than 30 days from the previous first violation shall be a new first violation
for the purpose of establishing a new 30-day period. Violators shall be issued
a written citation, which must be paid within 72 hours of the issue date and
time, which penalty may provide for an additional delinquency charge in an
amount as specified by the board of commissioners from time to time, for each
72-hour period thereafter upon nonpayment until paid in full. The county
attorney, or his or her designee, is authorized to file suit on behalf of the
county to collect any unpaid citations and any delinquency charge, and the
sheriff, or his or her designee, is authorized to verify and sign complaints on
behalf of the county in such suits. A county law enforcement officer or other
employee authorized by the county manager to enforce the noise control
ordinances may issue a citation for violations of this article. If litigation
is required to recover the penalties and delinquency charges, the county
attorney or his or her designee in addition to the penalties and delinquency
charges may recover reasonable attorney's fees and other costs incurred in
bringing the action and collecting the judgment.
   (b)   Remedies. This article may also be enforced through equitable remedies
including, but not limited to, nuisance abatement procedures as issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 2008-2, § 12, 5-14-2008; Ord. - -)
Chapter 14
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 1
 
Notes
  State law reference(s)—Local government authority to regulate uses in flood
1 hazard areas and grant permits, G.S. 143-215.54(a); minimum standards for
  ordinances, G.S. 143-215.54A; local government to delineate flood hazard
  area, G.S. 143-215.56(c); procedure in issuing permits, G.S. 143-215.57.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 14-1. Statutory authorization.
   The legislature of the State of North Carolina has in part 6, article 21 of
chapter 143; parts 3 and 4 of article 18 of chapter 153A; and part 121, article
6 of chapter 153A of the North Carolina General Statutes, delegated to local
governmental units the responsibility to adopt regulations designed to promote
the public health, safety, and general welfare.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 1, § A, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-2. Findings of fact.
   (a)   The floodprone areas within the jurisdiction of the county are subject
to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary
public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax
base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
   (b)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the
occupancy in floodprone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 1, § B, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-3. Statement of purpose.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within floodprone areas by provisions designed to:
      (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights or velocities;
      (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
      (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
      (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that
may increase erosion or flood damage; and
      (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 1, § C, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-4. Objectives.
   The objectives of this chapter are to:
      (1)   Protect human life, safety, and health;
      (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
      (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
      (4)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
      (5)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e., water and
gas mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and bridges)
that are located in floodprone areas;
      (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of floodprone areas; and
      (7)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a
special flood hazard area.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 1, § D, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-5. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Accessory structure (appurtenant structure) means a structure located on the
same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage
sheds are common urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like
qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or may not be located on the
same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
   Addition (to an existing building) means an extension or increase in the
floor area or height of a building or structure.
   Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   Area of shallow flooding means a designated Zone AO on a community's flood
insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths determined to be from one to
three feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where
velocity flow may be evident.
   Area of special flood hazard. See Special flood hazard area (SFHA).
   Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
   Base flood elevation (BFE) means a determination of the water surface
elevations of the base flood as published in the flood insurance study. When
the BFE has not been provided in a special flood hazard area, it may be
obtained from engineering studies available from a federal, state, or other
source using FEMA-approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when
combined with the freeboard, establishes the regulatory flood protection
elevation.
   Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   Building. See Structure.
   Certified local government (CLG) programs are approved by the U.S.
Department of the Interior in cooperation with the state department of cultural
resources through the state historic preservation officer as having met the
requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended in
1980.
   Chemical storage facility means a building, portion of a building, or
exterior area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or
chemically reactive products.
   Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   Disposal means, as defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on
any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid
waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into
any waters, including groundwaters.
   Elevated building means a non-basement building which has its lowest
elevated floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls,
posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
   Encroachment means the advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or
alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   Existing manufactured home park or manufactured home subdivision means a
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was
completed before the initial effective date of the floodplain management
regulations adopted by the community.
   Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) means an official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which the special flood
hazard areas and the floodways are delineated. This official map is a
supplement to and shall be used in conjunction with the flood insurance rate
map (FIRM).
   Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community,
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the
special flood hazard areas have been defined as Zone A.
   Flood insurance means the insurance coverage provided under the National
Flood Insurance Program.
   Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued
by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, on which both the special flood
hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community are
delineated.
   Flood insurance study (FIS) means an examination, evaluation, and
determination of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if
appropriate), flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The flood insurance study
report includes flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) and flood boundary and
floodway maps (FBFMs), if published.
   Flood zone means a geographical area shown on a flood hazard boundary map or
flood insurance rate map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the
area.
   Floodplain means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from
any source.
   Floodplain administrator is the individual appointed to administer and
enforce the floodplain management regulations.
   Floodplain development permit means any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
   Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and
enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but
not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain
management regulations, and open space plans.
   Floodplain management regulations means this chapter and other zoning
ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances, and other applications of police power. The term
"floodplain management regulations" describes federal, state or local
regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for preventing
and reducing flood loss and damage.
   Floodprone area. See Floodplain.
   Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation
facilities, structures, and their contents.
   Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   Freeboard means the height added to the base flood elevation (BFE) to
account for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge openings, and the
hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. The base flood elevation
plus the freeboard establishes the regulatory flood protection elevation.
   Functionally dependent facility means a facility which cannot be used for
its intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, limited
to a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo
or passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term "functionally dependent
facility" does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service
facilities.
   Hazardous waste management facility means, as defined in G.S. chapter 130A,
article 9, a facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment,
recycling, recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste.
   Highest adjacent grade (HAG) means the highest natural elevation of the
ground surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls
of the structure.
   Historic structure means any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
      (3)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks in
communities with a certified local government (CLG) program; or
      (4)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a
historic district designated by a community with a certified local government
(CLG) program.
   Lowest adjacent grade (LAG) means the elevation of the ground, sidewalk or
patio slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion
of the building.
   Lowest floor means lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than
a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
   Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels)
of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   Market value means the building value, not including the land value and that
of any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. Market value may
be established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.
   Mean sea level means the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as
corrected in 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in
1988, or other vertical control datum used as a reference for establishing
varying elevations within the floodplain, to which base flood elevations (BFEs)
shown on a FIRM are referenced. Refer to each FIRM panel to determine datum
used.
   New construction means structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of the initial floodplain management
regulations and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
   Non-encroachment area means the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot as designated in the flood insurance study report.
   Post-FIRM means construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred on or after the effective date of the initial flood
insurance rate map.
   Pre-FIRM means construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred before the effective date of the initial flood insurance
rate map.
   Principally above ground means that at least 51 percent of the actual cash
value of the structure is above ground.
   Public safety and/or nuisance means anything which is injurious to the
safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable
number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the
customary manner, of any navigable lake, river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   Recreational vehicle (RV) means a vehicle, which is:
      (1)   Built on a single chassis;
      (2)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection;
      (3)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck; and
      (4)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   Reference level is the top of the lowest floor for structures within special
flood hazard areas designated as Zone A1-A30, AE, A, A99 or AO.
   Regulatory flood protection elevation means the base flood elevation plus
the freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations (BFEs)
have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus two feet of
freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has been established,
this elevation shall be at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   Remedy a violation means to bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the
chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
   Salvage yard means any nonresidential property used for the storage,
collection, and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including, but not
limited to, vehicles, appliances and related machinery.
   Solid waste disposal facility means any facility involved in the disposal of
solid waste, as defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(35).
   Solid waste disposal site means, as defined in G.S. 130A-290(a)(36), any
place at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill,
or any other method.
   Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means the land in the floodplain subject to
a one percent or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as
determined in section
14-7.
   Start of construction includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site,
such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of
temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or
not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start
of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
   Structure means a walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas,
liquid, or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground.
   Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
during any one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value
of the structure before the damage occurred. (See definition of substantial
improvement.) The term "substantial damage" also means flood-related damage
sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for
which the cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average,
equals or exceeds 25 percent of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
   Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place
during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include either:
      (1)   Any correction of existing violations of state or community health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
ensure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
   Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.
   Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in articles II and III of this chapter
is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is
provided.
   Water surface elevation (WSE) means the height, in relation to mean sea
level, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of
riverine areas.
   Watercourse means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. The
term "watercourse" includes specifically designated areas in which substantial
flood damage may occur.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 2, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-6. Lands to which this chapter applies.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction, including extra-territorial jurisdictions (ETJs), if applicable,
of the county and within the jurisdiction of any other community whose
governing body agrees, by resolution, to such applicability.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 3, § A, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-7. Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas.
   (a)   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the
cooperating technical state (CTS) agreement between the state and FEMA in its
flood insurance study (FIS) and its accompanying flood insurance rate maps
(FIRM), for the county dated September 19, 2007, which are adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this chapter, including revisions to:
      (1)   FIRM panel 372075700K, dated March 18, 2008.
      (2)   FIRM panel 3720577600K, dated October 16, 2008.
      (3)   FIRM Index 37117CINDOC, dated October 16, 2008.
   (b)   The initial flood insurance rate maps are as follows for the
jurisdictional areas at the initial date: Martin County Unincorporated Area,
dated July 16, 1991.
 
Town of Hamilton      January 1, 1987
Town of Robersonville July 1, 1987
Town of Williamston   August 19, 1987
 
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 3, § B, 9-12-2007; Ord. of 10-8-2008)
Sec. 14-8. Establishment of floodplain development permit.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the
provisions of section
14-7.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 3, § C, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-9. Compliance.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 3, § D, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-10. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 3, § E, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-11. Interpretation.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
      (1)   Considered as minimum requirements;
      (2)   Liberally construed in favor of the board of commissioners; and
      (3)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 3, § F, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-12. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land
outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will
be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability
on the part of the county or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 3, § G, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-13. Penalties for violation.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a
misdemeanor. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any
of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined an amount as
specified by the board of commissioners from time to time, or imprisoned for
not more than 30 days, or both. Each day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the
county from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or
remedy any violation.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 3, § H, 9-12-2007)
Secs. 14-14—14-44. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 14-45. Designation of floodplain administrator.
   The building inspector, hereinafter referred to as the floodplain
administrator, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions
of this article.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 4, § A, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-46. Floodplain development application, permit and certification
requirements.
   (a)   Application requirements. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the floodplain administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall
be presented to the floodplain administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
         a.   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of
development/disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and
other development;
         b.   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map as determined in section
14-7, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard
area;
         c.   Flood zone designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in section
14-7;
         d.   The boundary of the floodway or non-encroachment area as
determined in section
14-7;
         e.   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in
section
14-7, section
14-47, or section
14-74;
         f.   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development;
         g.   The certification of the plot plan by a registered land surveyor
or professional engineer.
      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
special flood hazard area including, but not limited to:
         a.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the proposed reference
level (including basement) of all structures;
         b.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any
nonresidential structure in Zone AE, A or AO will be floodproofed; and
         c.   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any proposed
utility systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
      (3)   If floodproofing, a FEMA floodproofing certificate with supporting
data and an operational plan that includes, but is not limited to,
installation, exercise, and maintenance of floodproofing measures.
      (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter are
met. These details include, but are not limited to:
         a.   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation
on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls);
         b.   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with section
14-73(4)c when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AO, AE,
and A1-30.
      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      (7)   Certification that all other local, state and federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of section
14-73(6) and (7), are met.
      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on
plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation.
   (b)   Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
      (1)   A description of the development to be permitted under the
floodplain development permit.
      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in section
14-7.
      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
reference level and all attendant utilities.
      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
protection of all public utilities.
      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse, as
applicable.
      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AO, AE or A1-30.
   (c)   Certification requirements.
      (1)   Elevation certificates.
         a.   A FEMA elevation certificate is required prior to the actual
start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the floodplain administrator a certification of the elevation of the
reference level, in relation to mean sea level. The floodplain administrator
shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such
review shall be corrected by the permit holder prior to the beginning of
construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required
corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit.
         b.   A FEMA elevation certificate is recommended after the reference
level is established. Within seven calendar days of establishment of the
reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit
to the floodplain administrator a certification of the elevation of the
reference level, in relation to mean sea level. Any work done within the seven-
day calendar period and prior to submission of the certification shall be at
the permit holder's risk. The floodplain administrator shall review the
certificate data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be
corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further work being
permitted to proceed. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make
required corrections shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
         c.   A final as-built FEMA elevation certificate is required after
construction is completed and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the floodplain
administrator a certification of final as-built construction of the elevation
of the reference level and all attendant utilities. The floodplain
administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and
prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance. In some instances,
another certification may be required to certify corrected as-built
construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required
corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a certificate of
compliance/occupancy.
      (2)   Floodproofing certificate. If nonresidential floodproofing is used
to meet the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements, a FEMA
floodproofing certificate, with supporting data, an operational plan, and an
inspection and maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of any
new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
floodplain administrator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation
of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to mean sea
level. Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The
floodplain administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational
plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such
review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause
to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in accordance
with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy.
      (3)   Placement of a manufactured home in a floodprone area. If a
manufactured home is placed within Zone A, AO, AE, or A1-30 and the elevation
of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade, an engineered
foundation certification is required in accordance with the provisions of
section
14-73(3)b.
      (4)   Alteration of watercourse. If a watercourse is to be altered or
relocated, a description of the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation;
a professional engineer's certified report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map showing the location
of the proposed watercourse alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by
the permit applicant prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit.
      (5)   Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located
within Zone A, AO, AE or A1-30, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing
certification requirements specified in subsection (c)(1) and (2) of this
section:
         a.   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of section
14-73(6)a;
         b.   Temporary structures meeting requirements of section
14-73(7); and
         c.   Accessory structures less than 150 square feet meeting
requirements of section
14-73(8).
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 4, § B, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-47. Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
   The floodplain administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties:
      (1)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits
for all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to ensure that
the requirements of this article have been satisfied.
      (2)   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas
to ensure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been
received.
      (3)   Notify adjacent communities and the state department of crime
control and public safety, division of emergency management, state coordinator
for the national flood insurance program prior to any alteration or relocation
of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
      (4)   Ensure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained.
      (5)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment areas
unless the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of section
14-76 are met.
      (6)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the
reference level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with section
14-46(c).
      (7)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which
all new and substantially improved structures and utilities have been
floodproofed, in accordance with the provisions of section
14-46(c).
      (8)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of all
public utilities in accordance with the provisions of section
14-46(c).
      (9)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of section
14-46(c) and section
14-73(2).
      (10)   Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed
as to the exact location of boundaries of the special flood hazard areas,
floodways, or non-encroachment areas (for example, where there appears to be a
conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article.
      (11)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data has not been provided in
accordance with section
14-7, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation (BFE)
data, along with floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a
federal, state, or other source, including data developed pursuant to section
14-74(2)b, in order to administer the provisions of this article.
      (12)   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is provided but no floodway
or non-encroachment area data has been provided in accordance with section
14-7, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-
encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source in
order to administer the provisions of this article.
      (13)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure
or the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood hazard area is
above the base flood elevation, advise the property owner of the option to
apply for a letter of map amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. Maintain a copy of the
letter of map amendment (LOMA) issued by FEMA in the floodplain development
permit file.
      (14)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the
administration of this article and make these records available for public
inspection, recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act
of 1974, as amended.
      (15)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant
to a floodplain development permit progresses, the floodplain administrator
shall make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that
the work is being done according to the provisions of this chapter and the
terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the floodplain administrator has
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
      (16)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation
of this article, the floodplain administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the
specific work to be stopped, the specific reason for the stoppage, and the
condition under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order
constitutes a misdemeanor.
      (17)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The floodplain
administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit by notifying the permit holder in writing stating the reason for the
revocation. Permits shall be revoked for any substantial departure from the
approved application, plans, and specifications; for refusal or failure to
comply with the requirements of state or local laws; or for false statements or
misrepresentations made in securing the permit. Any floodplain development
permit mistakenly issued in violation of an applicable state or local law may
also be revoked.
      (18)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard
areas within the jurisdiction of the community. The floodplain administrator
and each member of his inspections department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
      (19)   Follow through with corrective procedures of section
14-48.
      (20)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance
requests.
      (21)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not be limited
to, the FIS report, FIRM and other official flood maps and studies adopted in
accordance with section
14-7, including any revisions thereto including letters of map revision, issued
by FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of mapping needs.
      (22)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including letters
of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) and letters of map revision (LOMR).
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 4, § C, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-48. Corrective procedures.
   (a)   Violations to be corrected. When the floodplain administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his duty to notify
the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or occupant
shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
   (b)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action. If the owner of
a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
floodplain administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal service,
stating:
      (1)   That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
      (2)   That a hearing will be held before the floodplain administrator at
a designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      (3)   That following the hearing, the floodplain administrator may issue
an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
   (c)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the floodplain administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of this chapter he shall issue an order
in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation within a
specified time period, not less than 60 calendar days, nor more than 180
calendar days. Where the floodplain administrator finds that there is imminent
danger to life or other property, he may order that corrective action be taken
in such lesser period as may be feasible.
   (d)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the floodplain administrator and the clerk within ten days
following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order
of the floodplain administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall
hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or
revoke the order.
   (e)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished at the
discretion of the court.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 4, § D, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-49. Variance procedures.
   (a)   The county board of commissioners, as established by the county,
hereinafter referred to as the appeal board, shall hear and decide requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter.
   (b)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal
such decision to the court, as provided in chapter 7A of the North Carolina
General Statutes.
   (c)   Variances may be issued for:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the
definition as stated in section
14-5, provided provisions of subsection (i)(2), (3), and (5) of this section
have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public
safety.
      (3)   Any other type of development, provided it meets the requirements
of this section.
   (d)   In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under section
14-5 as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (e)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.
   (f)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
chapter.
   (g)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation (BFE) and the
elevation to which the structure is to be built and that such construction
below the base flood elevation increases risks to life and property, and that
the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood
elevation will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance. Such
notification shall be maintained with a record of all variance actions,
including justification for their issuance.
   (h)   The floodplain administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and
the state upon request.
   (i)   Conditions for variances.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or
non-encroachment area if the variance would result in any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit
approval.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         a.   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         b.   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         c.   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (j)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas, provided that all of
the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community.
      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood
hazard area.
      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to
at least the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local
laws.
      (5)   The county has notified the secretary of the state department of
crime control and public safety of its intention to grant a variance at least
30 calendar days prior to granting the variance.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 4, § E, 9-12-2007)
Secs. 14-50—14-71. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sec. 14-72. General standards.
   In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are required:
      (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement of the structure.
      (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
      (3)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
      (4)   Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as
to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding to the regulatory flood protection elevation. These
include, but are not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/
kitchen fixtures, ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable
boxes, hot water heaters, and electric outlets/switches.
      (5)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
      (6)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
      (7)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
      (8)   Any alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvements to a
structure, which is in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, shall
meet the requirements of new construction as contained in this chapter.
      (9)   Nothing in this article shall prevent the repair, reconstruction,
or replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of the
ordinance from which this article is derived and located totally or partially
within the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, provided there
is no additional encroachment below the regulatory flood protection elevation
in the floodway, non-encroachment area, or stream setback, and provided that
such repair, reconstruction, or replacement meets all of the other requirements
of this article.
      (10)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in section
14-49(j). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory
flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of
section
14-46(c).
      (11)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
      (12)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall
have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
      (13)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall
have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
      (14)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall
have received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344.
      (15)   When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard
area, the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
      (16)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest base flood
elevation shall apply.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 5, § A, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-73. Specific standards.
   In all special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation (BFE) data has
been provided, as set forth in section
14-7, or section
14-74, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of section
14-72, are required:
      (1)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall
have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in section
14-5.
      (2)   Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in section
14-5. Structures located in Zones A, AE, AO, and A1-30 may be floodproofed to
the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of actual elevation, provided
that all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation, are watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify that the standards of this subsection are satisfied.
Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator as set
forth in section
14-46(c), along with the operational and maintenance plans.
      (3)   Manufactured homes.
         a.   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that
the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in section
14-5.
         b.   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the state regulations for manufactured homes adopted by the
commissioner of insurance pursuant to G.S. 143-143.15. Additionally, when the
elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less above
the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers or
engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches in
height, an engineering certification is required.
         c.   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of subsection (4) of this section.
         d.   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within floodprone areas. This
plan shall be filed with and approved by the floodplain administrator and the
local emergency management coordinator.
      (4)   Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed areas, of new construction and
substantially improved structures, which are below the lowest floor:
         a.   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall
only be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior
door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion
of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms,
except to enclose storage areas;
         b.   Shall be constructed entirely of flood-resistant materials at
least to the regulatory flood protection elevation;
         c.   Shall include, in Zones A, AO, AE, and Al-30, flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
            1.   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
            2.   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
            3.   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit;
            4.   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the adjacent grade;
            5.   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
            6.   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above.
      (5)   Additions/improvements.
         a.   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
            1.   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any
more nonconforming than the existing structure.
            2.   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
         b.   Additions to post-FIRM structures with no modifications to the
existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall shall require
only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
         c.   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
            1.   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or
improvements only must comply with the standards for new construction.
            2.   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (6)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:
         a.   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days and be fully
licensed and ready for highway use (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway
use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by
quick disconnect type utilities, and has no permanently attached additions); or
         b.   Meet all the requirements for new construction.
      (7)   Temporary nonresidential structures. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the floodplain administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
in the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood warning
notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the
floodplain administrator for review and written approval:
         a.   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to one
year;
         b.   The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible
for the removal of the temporary structure;
         c.   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);
         d.   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the
entity responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
         e.   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside
the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
      (8)   Accessory structures. When accessory structures (sheds, detached
garages, etc.) are to be placed within a special flood hazard area, the
following criteria shall be met:
         a.   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);
         b.   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
         c.   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
         d.   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
         e.   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
the provisions of section
14-72(1);
         f.   All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of section
14-72(4); and
         g.   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection
elevation in conformance with the provisions of section
14-73(4)c.
   An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square feet that
satisfies the criteria outlined above does not require an elevation or
floodproofing certificate. Elevation or floodproofing certifications are
required for all other accessory structures in accordance with section
14-46(c).
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 5, § B, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-74. Standards for floodplains without established base flood
elevations.
   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as approximate Zone A and
established in section
14-7, where no base flood elevation (BFE) data has been provided by FEMA, the
following provisions, in addition to the provisions of section
14-72, shall apply:
      (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements or new development shall be permitted within a distance of 20
feet, each side, from top of bank or five times the width of the stream,
whichever is greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a
registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such
encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
      (2)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be determined based on the following criteria:
         a.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is available from other
sources, all new construction and substantial improvements within such areas
shall also comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter and shall be
elevated or floodproofed in accordance with standards in sections
14-72 and
14-73.
         b.   When floodway data is available from a federal, state, or other
source, all new construction and substantial improvements within floodway areas
shall also comply with the requirements of sections
14-73 and
14-76.
         c.   All subdivision, manufactured home park and other development
proposals shall provide base flood elevation (BFE) data if development is
greater than five acres or has more than 50 lots/manufactured home sites. Such
base flood elevation (BFE) data shall be adopted by reference in accordance
with section
14-7 and utilized in implementing this chapter.
         d.   When base flood elevation (BFE) data is not available from a
federal, state, or other source as outlined above, the reference level shall be
elevated or floodproofed (nonresidential) to or above the regulatory flood
protection elevation, as defined in section
14-5. All other applicable provisions of section
14-73 shall also apply.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 5, § D, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-75. Standards for riverine floodplains with BFE but without established
floodways or non-encroachment areas.
   Along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided by FEMA or is available
from another source but neither floodway nor non-encroachment areas are
identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS report,
the following requirements shall apply to all development within such areas:
      (1)   Standards of sections
14-72 and
14-73; and
      (2)   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated,
no encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting
technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 5, § E, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-76. Floodways and non-encroachment areas.
   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located within
the special flood hazard areas established in section
14-7. The floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas
due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris
and potential projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards
outlined in sections
14-72 and
14-73, shall apply to all development within such areas:
      (1)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless:
         a.   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not
result in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice and presented to the floodplain administrator
prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or
         b.   A conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) has been approved by
FEMA. A letter of map revision (LOMR) must also be obtained upon completion of
the proposed encroachment.
      (2)   If subsection (1) of this section is satisfied, all development
shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this
chapter.
      (3)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted, except replacement
manufactured homes in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision,
provided the following provisions are met:
         a.   The anchoring and the elevation standards of section
14-73(3); and
         b.   The no encroachment standard of subsection (1) of this section.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 5, § F, 9-12-2007)
Secs. 14-77—14-95. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 14-96. Effect on rights and liabilities under the existing flood damage
prevention ordinance.
   (a)   This article in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the
provisions of the flood damage prevention ordinance enacted December 23, 1987,
as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to re-enact and
continue to enforce without interruption of such existing provisions, so that
all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are reserved and may be
enforced. The enactment of this article shall not affect any action, suit or
proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the flood damage prevention
ordinance of the county enacted on December 23, 1987, as amended, which are not
reenacted herein are repealed.
   (b)   The date of the initial flood damage prevention ordinance for each
municipal jurisdiction within Martin County is as follows:
 
Town of Hamilton      December 2, 1987
Town of Robersonville June 7, 1974
Town of Williamston   February 2, 1981
 
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 6, § A, 9-12-2007)
Sec. 14-97. Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof
for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the floodplain
administrator or his authorized agents before the effective date of the
ordinance from which this chapter is derived; provided, however, that when
construction is not begun under such outstanding permit within a period of six
months subsequent to the date of issuance of the outstanding permit,
construction or use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 2007-4, art. 6, § B, 9-12-2007)
Chapter 16
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 16-1—16-18. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. FIREARMS
Sec. 16-19. Unlawful discharge of firearm.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm (pistol, shot
gun, or rifle) at any time within the area of the county hereinafter described:
Beginning at the intersection of the western edge of U.S. Highway #17 between
Williamston, North Carolina, and Washington, North Carolina, and the northern
edge of the right-of-way of N.C. Rural Road #1118, thence along the northern
edge of the right of way of N.C. Rural Road #1118 in a westerly direction to
the eastern edge of the right of way of N.C. Rural Paved Road #1119, thence
along the eastern edge of the right-of-way of N.C. Rural Paved Road #1119 in a
southerly direction to a point where said N.C. Rural Paved Road #1119
intersects Dog Branch, thence along the run of Dog Branch in a northerly
direction to where said Dog Branch intersects the southern edge of the right-
of-way of N.C. Rural Paved Road #1001, thence along the southern edge of the
right-of-way of said N.C. Rural Paved Road #1001 in an eastwardly direction to
the western edge of the right-of-way of U.S. Highway #17, thence along the
western edge of said U.S. Highway #17 a southerly direction to the point of
beginning.
(Ord. No. 1976-1, § 1, 11-1-1976)
Sec. 16-20. Penalty.
   Any person convicted of violating the provisions of this article shall be
fined a sum as shall be determined by the board of commissioners from time to
time or imprisoned for a period of not to exceed 30 days or both, in the
discretion of the court.
(Ord. No. 1976-1, § 2, 11-1-1976)
Sec. 16-21. Enforcement.
   All lawful peace officers of the county and state, including wildlife game
protectors, are hereby authorized to aid in the enforcement of this article.
(Ord. No. 1976-1, § 3, 11-1-1976)
Sec. 16-22. Exceptions.
   This article is passed pursuant to G.S. 153A-129 and is not to apply to law
enforcement officers, defense of personal property, or the use of firearms
pursuant to chapter 113, subsection 3 of the General Statutes of North
Carolina. The penalty provisions of this article are pursuant to G.S. 14-4.
(Ord. No. 1976-1, § 4, 11-1-1976)
Sec. 16-23 Discharge of firearms prohibited.
   (a)   Near schools. It is unlawful for any person to discharge a rifle,
handgun or other firearm within 300 yards of any school property.
   (b)   Exceptions. This section does not apply to the taking of birds or
animals pursuant to G.S. ch. 113, subch. IV; use of firearms in defense of
persons or property; or use of firearms by law enforcement officers in the
performance of duty.
Chapter 18
SOLID WASTE 1
 
Notes
  Editor's note(s) —Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) Editor's note(s)—, adopted December 1, 2014,
  amended chapter 18Editor's note(s)— in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former
  chapter 18Editor's note(s)—, §§ 18-1Editor's note(s)——18-3, 18-25Editor's note(s)——18-
  28, 18-60Editor's note(s)——18-66, 18-91Editor's note(s)——18-95, 18-119Editor's note
  (s)——18-125, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for
  complete derivation.
1 State law reference(s) —Solid waste management, G.S. 130-166.16 et seq.; local
  government solid waste responsibilities, G.S. 130A-309.09A; county may establish and
  operate solid waste collection and disposal facilities outside city corporate limits,
  G.S. 153A-292; location of garbage collection containers on highway rights-of-way,
  G.S. 136-18.3; authority of the county to regulate the storage, collection,
  transportation, use and disposal of solid waste, G.S. 153A-136; authority to levy
  taxes to provide solid waste collection and disposal services, G.S. 153A-149(c)(31);
  solid waste management, 15A N.C. Admin. Code 13B.0101 et seq.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 18-1. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Brown goods means furniture including upholstered pieces and mattresses.
   Cart means a roll-out container furnished by the prime contractor for the
storage and disposal of solid waste.
   Collection means the act of removing solid waste or recyclable materials
from a point of generation to a central storage point or to a disposal site and
from a central storage point to a disposal site.
   Commercial entity means a non-residential customer such as a business,
commercial, governmental, civic, religious, industrial, or manufacturing
entity.
   Commercial structure means a structure that uses dumpster equipment.
   Construction and demolition waste means waste building materials, packaging
and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition
operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures.
   Contractor means a person who is in the business of the collection,
transportation and disposal of solid waste or recyclable materials.
   Curbside means the location adjacent to but no more than ten feet from the
edge of a roadway providing access to a residence or hand commercial
establishment.
   Customer means the beneficiary of services provided under this chapter
within the county and its municipalities.
   Date of record means January 1, the statutory date on which property is to
be listed for taxation.
   Dumpster means stationary solid waste containers which require mechanical
pick-up by customized loading vehicles, including roll-off containers.
   Excluded structure means a subject structure which, as of the date of
record, was certified by the building inspector as being uninhabitable, for
which was certified by the power company that electrical service was
disconnected, or for which was certified by the tax assessor that the structure
is suitable for storage only.
   Extra services means solid waste collection services rendered in addition to
once-per-week curbside collection for carts. These services may include any
service relating to the collection of solid waste and recyclables which may be
agreed upon between the prime contractor and a customer authorized to receive
such solid waste collection services from the prime contractor pursuant to an
agreed upon rate. Charges for extra services billed customers by the prime
contractor shall be subject to reasonable review and approval of the county.
The customer may use a contractor of their choice in lieu of the prime
contractor.
   Hand commercial establishment means any commercial entity generating less
than one cubic yard of solid waste weekly and uses a cart for solid waste
collection. Any hand commercial establishment that requires more than one cart
may arrange for more than one such cart as described in section
18-63.
   Hazardous waste means a solid waste, or combination of solid wastes, which,
because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics may:
      (1)   Cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or
an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or
      (2)   Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or
the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of,
or otherwise managed.
   Improved property means real property which contains a subject structure or
a commercial structure.
   Industrial solid waste means solid waste generated by industrial processes
and manufacturing.
   Ordinance means the county ordinance relating to the contracting for private
solid waste and recyclable material collectors and the collection and disposal
of solid waste and recyclable materials within the county.
   Person means an individual, corporation, company, association, partnership,
unit of local government, state agency, federal agency or other legal entity.
   Prime contractor means the contractor with whom Martin County has contracted
for provision of solid waste collection and recycling services within the
county.
   Recycling means any process by which solid waste or materials, which would
otherwise become solid waste, are collected, separated or processed, and reused
or returned to use in the form of raw materials or products.
   Recycling container means a container furnished by the prime contractor for
collection of specified recyclable materials at the curb.
   Recyclable material means (i) aluminum and bi-metal cans, steel (including
tin plated steel) cans; (ii) category 1 plastic beverage bottles (PET),
category 2 plastic dairy/milk and beverage bottles (HDPE) , and plastic
containers with a neck (except for motor oil or pesticide); (iii) newsprint
(including advertising inserts); (iv) mixed paper (copy paper, notebook paper,
office & computer paper, junk mail, shoe, soap and cereal boxes); (v) glass
containers (clear, green and brown); (vi) magazines (slick, shiny pages not
over one-fourth inch thick); (vii) any other items which based on market and
demand may be accepted by the prime contractor's recycling program.
   Solid waste means all material customarily referred to as garbage, or
refuse, and other discarded material, including solid, semi-solid materials or
materials resulting from community activities, but does not include (i)
hazardous waste materials; (ii) solid or dissolved materials in domestic
sewage; (iii) solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows;(iv)
industrial discharges which are point sources subject to permits under Section
402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended (86 STAT. 880); (v)
source, special nuclear, or by-product materials as defined by the Atomic
Energy Act of 1954, as amended (86 STAT. 923); (vi) construction and demolition
waste;(vii) vehicular tires; (viii) white goods; (ix) brown goods; (x) yard
waste.
   Subject structure means a primary structure used as a residence, mobile
home, apartment, hand commercial establishment, school, church, rest home,
nursing home, country club, governmental office, professional office or other
primary structure at which regular activities results in the generation of
solid waste or recyclables.
   White goods means any and all household or commercial machines or
appliances.
   Yard waste means leaves, limbs and grass clippings but not stumps, rocks,
dirt, or construction materials.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-2. Purpose.
   (a)   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to protect public health
and private property by contracting for the collection and disposal of solid
waste and the collection of recyclable materials to responsible persons or
businesses equipped to render adequate and continuing service throughout the
county and to regulate the collection and disposal of solid waste and
recyclable materials by all improved property owners within the county as
defined in section
18-1. The services rendered are to be under the supervision and regulation of
the county, both as to the means and method of collection, and also as to the
sanitary disposition of solid waste.
   (b)   It is also the purpose and intent of this chapter to provide a means
for the imposition and collection of an availability fee from all improved
property owners within the county and all of its municipalities annually in a
sum sufficient to enable the county to contract for and pay responsible persons
or businesses for the collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste
and recyclable materials within the county.
   (c)   The board, pursuant to the authority vested in it under G.S. 153A-45
and G.S. 153A-46, reserves the right to amend this chapter from time to time
when such amendment would be in the best interest of the citizens and residents
of the county.
   (d)   Additionally, the board may, upon the determination that its solid
waste collection, transportation and disposal plan and contract for same, are
not serving the needs and best interests of the public, repeal this chapter in
its entirety, or that portion of the chapter it deems necessary, and make
provisions for governmental or other free enterprise operations or franchised
operations of the solid waste collection business.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-3. Scope of chapter.
   This chapter shall govern the collection, transportation and disposal of
recyclable materials and solid waste throughout all of the county pursuant to
the provisions of G.S. 130A-309.09. Additionally, this chapter is made
applicable to all municipalities within the county under G.S. 153A-122, as all
municipalities within the county, through their governing bodies have adopted a
resolution permitting this chapter to be extended to the territory within that
municipality.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Secs. 18-4—18-24. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Sec. 18-25. Waste disposal by owners of improved property.
   Each improved property owner located within the county shall dispose of
solid waste and recyclable materials in the manner provided in this article.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-26. Curbside collection.
   The county through its prime contractor shall furnish one cart and one
recycling container per subject structure and provide for the curbside
collection of solid waste and recyclable materials at a minimum of one
collection per week.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-27. Extra carts.
   A customer utilizing the cart service may request additional carts by
contacting the tax assessor, and shall be billed for such as provided in
section
18-63.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-28. Extra services.
   The prime contractor shall make available to the owners of all improved
property, for rental or purchase, dumpsters for the storage and collection of
solid waste at each such improved property. Fees for the lease, rental or
purchase of such equipment and collection of such solid waste shall be paid
directly from the customer to the prime contractor or contractor of their
choice.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Secs. 18-29—18-59. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. FEES AND COLLECTION
Sec. 18-60. Availability fee imposed.
   There shall be an annual availability fee imposed to recover the costs of
collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste and recyclables in the
county. This fee shall be imposed countywide and is imposed for having the
service available. This fee shall be collected by the county.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-61. Fees for disposal.
   The amounts to be charged as availability fees for solid waste and
recyclables disposal shall be established and adjusted as necessary by the
board of commissioners, shall be recorded in the official minutes of the board
meeting at which the availability fees were adopted, and shall appear on a fee
schedule as established from time to time.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-62. Use of fee revenue.
   The total revenue derived from the solid waste and recyclable disposal
availability fee shall be set aside to cover the cost of solid waste and
recyclables collection, transportation and disposal incurred by the county.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-63. Billing for additional carts.
   An improved property owner who requires weekly service that exceeds the
capacity of a single cart, but does not require the capacity of a dumpster, may
request additional carts. A separate fee for each additional cart will be
assessed and billed in the manner provided in sections
18-64 and
18-65.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-64. Availability fee assessed.
   (a)   The owner of each improved property shall be assessed and billed an
availability fee for each subject structure.
   (b)   Availability fees will not be assessed or billed for excluded
structures or commercial structures. The tax assessor may require proof of
dumpster rental or purchase for any commercial structure.
   (c)   The provisions of G.S. 105-312 shall not apply to the availability
fee. In the event that the tax assessor discovers that an availability fee was
not assessed and billed for the current or prior years, it may be assessed and
billed for the current and immediately prior year of omission only.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-65. Billing of availability fee with property taxes.
   In accordance with G.S. 153A-293, the availability fee for solid waste and
recyclables disposal imposed under G.S. 153A-292 shall be billed with property
taxes, shall be payable and subject to interest in the same manner as property
taxes, and in the case of nonpayment, shall be collected in any manner by which
delinquent personal or real property taxes can be collected. The fees and
accumulated interest are a lien on the real property described in the bill that
includes the fee.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-66. Exemptions from fee.
   Certain exemptions from the availability fee may be established by the board
of commissioners when no benefit is derived by the property owner. Requests for
such exemption must be submitted to the tax assessor in writing during the
fiscal year the fee is billed and approved by the board of commissioners with
such action by the board of commissioners being recorded in the official
minutes of the meeting wherein the action was taken as well as the reason for
such exemption as described under the provisions of state statutes governing
availability fees.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-67. Releases and refunds.
   Notwithstanding G.S. 105-381(a)(2) and G.S. 105-381(a)(3), requests for
release (if unpaid) or refund (if paid) of an availability fee must be
presented to the tax assessor in writing within one year of the date that the
tax bill on which the availability fee was charged became delinquent.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Secs. 18-68—18-90. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. PENALTIES AND REMEDIES
Sec. 18-91. Criminal violation and penalty.
   A violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine as shall be determined by the board of
commissioners from time to time or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or
both, in the discretion of the court.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-92. Civil penalty.
   A violation of any of the provisions of this article shall also subject the
offender to a civil penalty in the amount as determined by the board of
commissioners from time to time. If a person fails to pay this civil penalty
within ten days after being cited for a violation, the county may seek to
recover the penalty by filing a civil action in the nature of debt.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-93. County may seek legal or equitable remedies.
   The county may seek to enforce this article through any appropriate legal or
equitable action and relief.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-94. County alternatives to enforce article.
   The county may seek to enforce this article by using any one or any
combination of the foregoing and/or by using any available contractual
remedies.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-95. Fee schedule.
   The fee schedule for solid waste collection and disposal, and recyclables
disposal, shall be as determined from time to time by the board of
commissioners.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Secs. 18-96—18-118. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. HAZARDOUS WASTE
Sec. 18-119. Short title.
   The ordinance, from which this article is derived, shall be known and may be
cited and referred to as "The 704 Tank Placard System."
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-120. Intent and purpose.
   (a)   It is the intent and purpose of Title III of the Superfund Amendment
and Reauthorization Act (hereinafter referred to as "SARA") of 1986, that all
emergency response forces be provided with information pertaining to the
possible hazards to which they may be exposed should an emergency requiring
their assistance arise.
   (b)   In accordance with SARA, owners/operators using, processing and/or
storing hazardous materials of specified amounts must provide the local fire
chief, the county Title III emergency planning committee, and the state
emergency response commission, a list of these materials or the material safety
data sheets (MSDSs) with specific safety data regarding each hazardous material
on hand in their facility. Citizens may also obtain this information upon
request to the local Title III emergency planning committee.
   (c)   It is further intended through this article that the hazard levels of
the contents of each aboveground containment tank be posted on the tank and
reasonably visible to emergency responders, in order that these personnel shall
be more cognizant of the dangers to health, life and property presented, and
the emergency procedures that should be initiated, to limit or reduce these
dangers.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-121. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Aboveground storage tank, for the purpose of this article, means any
container designed specifically to store or contain liquids or gases, with a
capacity of 500 gallons or more, and of which ten percent or more of the
surface area is above ground level and is readily visible in its normally-
installed configuration.
   Emergency response forces means any individual or composite force or members
of these forces who are chartered and/or recognized as having the
responsibility and the primary authority in responding to potential, imminent
or existing situations where there may be or has been a threat to life or
damage to property. These include, but are not necessarily limited to, fire,
emergency medical services, rescue units, law enforcement, and emergency
management personnel, departments, agencies or teams.
   National Fire Protection Association 704 Hazard Identification System means
a system recommended for identifying the hazard levels, if any, of the contents
of fixed storage tanks and containers. Tanks containing no hazardous materials,
under this system, also require placards to this effect, since responders
sometimes have no readily accessible means of making this determination unless
the tank is so marked.
704 decal or placard means a diamond-shaped emblem containing four smaller
symmetrical diamonds, one in each of the left, top, right, and bottom corners
of the design. The left diamond is blue in color, overprinted with a number
denoting in a numerical sequence from zero (no hazard) to four (extreme hazard)
the degree of hazard to health. The top diamond is red in color, and denotes in
the same manner and sequence the flammability level of the contents. The right
diamond is yellow in color, and denotes the reactivity (explosivity) level of
the contents. The bottom diamond is white, and with the use of symbols and
abbreviated words instead of numbers, provides pertinent additional hazard
information.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-122. Contents hazard level marking and identification requirements.
   (a)   It is required under this article that a NFPA 704 hazard
identification decal or placard shall be affixed to all aboveground storage or
containment tanks, except those containing fuel or compressed gases for heating
or cooking purposes in an occupied dwelling home, or fuel or compressed gases
for farm tobacco curing or grain, bean or nut drying systems, with a capacity
of 500 gallons or more. The decal shall be of a size and located on the tank at
a point which is readily visible to emergency response forces and commensurate
with tank design. A number indicating the level of hazard will be affixed or
imprinted within each of the three areas (blue, red, and yellow) designed for
such, and any approved additional information applicable shall be affixed or
imprinted within the designated fourth (white) area of the decal or placard.
   (b)   Hazard level numbers and additional information used in the white
field shall be in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association
"Fire Protection Guide on Hazardous Materials."
Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-123. Violations.
   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions of
this article, or to willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any authorized person
in the enforcement of the provisions of this article. Violation of this article
is punishable by a fine in an amount as shall be determined by the board of
commissioners from time to time or 30 days' imprisonment.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-124. Enforcement.
   The board of commissioners does hereby appoint the county sheriff as the
person having primary responsibility and authority for enforcement of the
provisions of this article.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Sec. 18-125. Conflicting ordinances, orders, rules and regulations suspended.
   At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated
pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede all other
county ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be
inconsistent therewith.
(Ord. of 12-1-2014(2) )
Chapter 20 ROADS, BRIDGES, AND
OTHER PUBLIC PLACES 1
 
Notes
  State law reference(s)—Public road defined for counties, G.S. 153A-238; naming
1 roads and assigning street numbers in counties, G.S. 153A-239.1; counties
  relieved of responsibility for roads and bridges in state highway system, G.S.
  136-97.
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 20-1—20-18. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ROAD NAMES AND ADDRESSES
Sec. 20-19. Authority.
   The provisions of this article are adopted under authority granted by G.S.
153A-239.1.
(Ord. No. 2001-8, § 1, 9-12-2001; Ord. - -)
Sec. 20-20. Intent.
   The intent of this article is to provide a uniform system of assigning
addresses for properties and structures throughout the county's jurisdiction in
order to facilitate and enhance expeditious individual address location, public
safety, and decreased emergency response time.
(Ord. No. 2001-8, § 2, 9-12-2001; Ord. - -)
Sec. 20-21. Jurisdiction.
   The jurisdiction of this article includes the entire geographic area of the
county, but excludes areas of jurisdiction of incorporated municipalities
unless any municipality requests that this article apply also within their
jurisdiction and present a valid resolution as evidence of same
(Ord. No. 2001-8, § 3, 9-12-2001; Ord. - -)
Sec. 20-22. Naming; numbering system.
   (a)   Each mile of roadway, path, or lane, or portion thereof, providing
access to three or more occupied dwelling units and/or active businesses, shall
be assigned a name for identification. Each lot adjoining a named roadway shall
be numbered within a designated grouping, beginning with 1,000 at the
designated beginning of any named road. The lot numbers of any address within
one mile from the beginning point shall consist of one plus three numbers, in
thousandths of a mile or every 5.28 feet. The first number in the second mile
shall be two plus three in thousandths, and so on chronologically.
   (b)   The standard frontage distance unit for addressing purposes shall be
5.28 feet per unit. Address numbering shall increase by one unit for each
distance of 5.28 feet, whether the lot be improved property, field, woodland,
etc. Address even numbers shall be assigned to lots on the right side of the
road from the beginning point, and odd numbers to lots on the left side from
the beginning point
(Ord. No. 2001-8, § 4, 9-12-2001; Ord. - -)
Sec. 20-23. Road name (and number, where applicable) signs.
   The county, in conjunction with the State Department of Transportation where
applicable, will provide and maintain road name signs for all roads named
within the requirements of this article and located in the unincorporated areas
of the county in accordance with G.S. 153A-239.1.
(Ord. No. 2001-8, § 5, 9-12-2001; Ord. - -)
Sec. 20-24. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Address means the combination of lot number and road name assigned to a
particular location which uniquely identifies that location, and the postal
district designation.
   Lot frontage unit means a standard interval in feet along the frontal border
of a given lot or area to which numbers may be assigned consecutively. The
standard lot frontage unit adopted in the county for the E-911 mapping system
is 5.28 feet.
   Official road names mean the names listed in the county road name files, and
which have been approved by the State Department of Transportation (DOT), are
hereby declared as the official names for roads in the county.
   Private road means any road or roadway which is not maintained with public
funds.
   Road or roadway means a public or private one-way or multiple-lane route
used for ingress or egress or route of transportation between specific points
and/or areas. This article does not include driveways to individual single-
occupancy locations, but does include access routes to three or more occupied
dwellings and/or active businesses.
(Ord. No. 2001-8, § 6, 9-12-2001; Ord. No. 2006-6, § 1, 7-12-2006; Ord. - -)
Sec. 20-25. Approved method for naming, renaming or changing the name of a
public road in the county.
   (a)   Requests for assignment of a name or for a name change must include a
petition for such action bearing the signatures of not less than 51% of the
owners whose property adjoins the affected road. The petition shall bear
evidence of the approval of the fire chief and the emergency medical service
squad captain/president of the affected district prior to submission to the
county commissioners. The request for road name assignment or a road name
change must be submitted in writing to the tax assessor. The requestor must
provide three proposed names which will be submitted by the tax assessor to the
county board of commissioners for their consideration and approval of an
official name assignment. New road names should not include names after people,
first or last or consist of road names similar to ones already in the county.
   (b)   All costs involved in changing a road name, including, but not limited
to, blades and posts, installation, map changes, and advertising for the
required public hearing, shall be borne by those petitioning for the name
change. A deposit in an amount as shall be determined by the board of
commissioners from time to time, will be submitted with the petition, all but
the costs involved in advertising for the public hearing to be refunded if the
name change is not approved and/or effected.
   (c)   There is no fee for requesting a name to be applied to an unnamed
public or private road; however, the petitioning procedure shall remain the
same.
   (d)   The tax assessor will review requests and petitions and consult with
the E-911 committee, as needed, to determine if all procedural requirements
have been met and that proposed name does not duplicate any other name of an
existing road.
   (e)   Any road, public or private, that provides access to three or more
occupied dwellings, including mobile homes, and/or active businesses, shall be
named.
(Ord. No. 2001-8, § 7, 9-12-2001; Ord. No. 2006-6, § 2, 7-12-2006; Ord. - -)
Sec. 20-26. Display of assigned addresses.
   (a)   The assigned address number shall be displayed at the end of the
driveway or easement nearest the road which provides access, so as to be
clearly visible from both directions of road travel.
   (b)   The assigned address number shall be displayed on the front of any
normally occupied dwelling and/or business building or structure, so as to be
clearly visible, if the structure is more than 100 feet from any access road.
   (c)   Displayed address numerals of a single-family dwelling unit shall be
no less than three inches in height. Numerals for multiple-family units,
industrial offices and single-structure businesses or offices shall be no less
than six inches in height. All numbers shall be in contrast to the color on
which posted and of reflective material.
   (d)   Mobile home lots established after the date of adoption of the
ordinance from which this section was adopted shall have sequential address
numbers throughout the park or division. Each lot will have a separate address
number assigned. The number of each lot must be clearly displayed in the manner
described above. Mobile home lots established prior to the date of the
ordinance from which this section is derived will be assigned the same road
name with different lot numbers.
   (e)   Addresses shall be displayed on existing buildings within 12 months.
(Ord. No. 2001-8, § 8, 9-12-2001; Ord. - -)
Sec. 20-27. New structure address assignments.
   (a)   The owner, occupant or person in charge of any new structure requiring
an address in the unincorporated areas of the county shall apply for same
through the tax assessor's office. Applicant must complete the E-911 address
application; provide a project plan, which can be obtained by the Building
Inspections Department, and proof of a passed perk test from the Martin County
Health Department and turn in to the tax assessor’s office. Once the
application, project plan, and perk test documentation has been approved by the
building inspector and the tax assessor, an address will be assigned.
   (b)   Final approval for occupancy shall be withheld for any principal
structure until a proper address for the premises has been procured and the
requirements for proper display have been met.
(Ord. No. 2001-8, § 9, 9-12-2001; Ord. No. 2006-6, § 3, 7-12-2006; Ord. - -)
Sec. 20-28. Enforcement.
   The sheriff shall be responsible for the enforcement of the requirements of
this article.
(Ord. No. 2001-8, § 10, 9-12-2001; Ord. - -)
Sec. 20-29. Amendments.
   (a)   Petitions for amendment to this article may be filed by any individual
citizen, department, or agency of the county.
   (b)   The provisions and requirements of this article may be amended by the
county commissioners according to the following procedures:
      (1)   No amendment shall become effective unless it has been proposed by
or shall have been reviewed, and approval recommended by, the tax assessor. The
tax assessor shall have 60 days from date of receipt of request for change or
amendment in which to review the request and to make recommendations to the
commissioners. If the tax assessor fails to report within 60 days, it shall be
deemed to have approved the proposed amendment.
      (2)   The board of county commissioners may issue variances and
exceptions to the requirements of this article; provided they would not be
contrary to the public interest, spirit, and intent of this article, and where
due to special conditions, literal enforcement of the provisions would result
in undue or unnecessary hardship. When granting a variance, the commissioners
may prescribe solutions deemed appropriate and necessary to preserve the intent
of this article. Consideration of the following should be used when granting a
variance or exception:
         a.   Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to
the road involved, and are not applicable to other roads or addresses.
         b.   Literal interpretation of the provisions of this article would
deprive applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other citizens.
         c.   The special conditions and/or circumstances generating the
request for variance are not due to the actions of the applicant.
         d.   Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant
any special privilege that is generally denied to other citizens by this
article.
(Ord. No. 2001-8, § 11, 9-12-2001; Ord. - -)
Sec. 20-30. Provisions as minimum standards.
   The provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements
adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.
Should any requirements of this article differ with the requirements of any
other local, state or federal regulation, the most restrictive, or highest
standard, shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 2001-8, § 11, 9-12-2001; Ord. - -)
Sec. 20-31. Violations.
   Any person, firm, or agent thereof who intentionally violates the terms of
this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalties
thereof.
(Ord. No. 2001-8, § 11, 9-12-2001; Ord. - -)
Sec. 20-32. Liability.
   Any employee, director, officer and/or agent of the county shall not be held
liable for any damage, injury, death or any other loss to persons or property
incurred as a result of any act or omission of any act by such persons, except
for willful or wanton misconduct, in connection with the development, adoption,
implementation, maintenance, or operation of the county E-911 emergency
telecommunications system.
(Ord. No. 2001-8, § 11, 9-12-2001; Ord. - -)
Secs. 20-33—20-52. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. SKATEBOARDING AND SIMILAR ACTIONS
Sec. 20-53. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Skateboarding for the purposes of this article is defined as:
   Coasters orscooters means a footboard mounted upon two or more wheels and by
an upright steering handle. This device is propelled by the user or a motor and
is usually operated in an upright position.
   Roller skates orroller blades means a pair of shoes, mounted upon sets of
wheels most often propelled by the user in an upright, standing position or
kneeling.
   Skateboard means a footboard mounted upon four or more wheels propelled by
the user who sometimes stands, sits, kneels, or lays upon the device while it
is in motion.
(Ord. No. 2011-01, 11-9-2011)
Sec. 20-54. Unlawful actions.
   Prohibition against skateboarding and similar activities as defined herein
upon any county-owned property.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful to skateboard, roller skate, roller blade, use
coasters or scooters or any similar devices upon any county-owned property,
without the express written consent of the board of commissioners.
      (2)   This prohibition shall include all parking area, buildings,
walkways, steps, benches, retaining walls, rails and other structures or inside
any building or structure.
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 1, 11-9-2011)
Sec. 20-55. Exceptions.
   Excluded from this article are those activities that are sponsored by or
approved by county schools or the board of commissioners.
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 2, 11-9-2011)
Sec. 20-56. Penalty.
   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be fined in an amount as shall be determined by the board
of commissioners from time to time, or imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
(Ord. No. 2011-01, § 3, 11-9-2011)
Secs. 20-57—20-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. PROHIBITING UNAUTHORIZED USE OF COUNTY PROPERTY AND FACILITIES
Sec. 20-71. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   Camp or camping means the use of county property for living accommodation
purposes such as sleeping, or making preparations to sleep (including the
laying down of bedding for the purposes of sleeping), or storing personal
belongings, or placing any tent or temporary shelter on county property for
living accommodation purposes.
   County-owned property means any parcel of real property owned by Martin
County including property located within public rights-of-way and sidewalks.
   Facility means something (such as a building or large piece of equipment)
that is built for a specific purpose.
   Temporary shelter means any tent, tarp, canopy, or any type of structure or
cover that provides complete or partial shelter from the elements.
   Tent means a collapsible shelter of fabric (such as nylon or canvas)
stretched and sustained by poles and used for camping outdoors or as a
temporary building.
(Ord. of 09-12-2018(1) , § 1)
Sec. 20-72. Prohibited activity.
   (a)   Unless otherwise expressly permitted in writing by the county manager
or his designee, it is unlawful for any person to camp on any county property
or facility, including property located within public right-of-ways and
sidewalks.
   (b)   Tents, temporary shelters or other camping gear are prohibited on
county property and facilities regardless of whether the tents are occupied
and/or contain bedding or camping gear, except in locations designated in
writing, permitting such activity. It is unlawful for any person to place or
leave any tent, any temporary shelter, or any bedding on county property or
facility unless permission is given in writing by the county manager or his
designee.
   (c)   It is unlawful for any person to light or use a campfire or bonfire on
county property or facility, unless specifically authorized by written
permission to do so by the fire marshal or their deputy.
   (d)   It is unlawful to hang, fasten, or attach any rope, wire, chain, sign,
banner, or electrical device or power cord to any county property or facility,
including but not limited to buildings, vehicles, construction equipment,
memorials, utility poles or artwork outside the intended use of the property/
facility unless express permission to do so has been granted in writing by the
county manager or his designee, with the exception of county employees acting
within the capacity of their job. This article does not apply to any
contractors working under the direction and supervision of Martin County staff.
(Ord. of 09-12-2018(1) , § 2)
Sec. 20-73. Exceptions.
   The Moratoc Park facility and grounds shall be exempt from this article, as
The Moratoc Park rental use rules and guidelines have been established by
Martin County. The Moratoc Park rental use rules and guidelines may be found on
the Martin County website and with the county manager's office.
(Ord. of 09-12-2018(1) , § 3)
Sec. 20-74. Enforcement and penalties.
   Camping on county property or facility, including property located within
public rights-of-way and sidewalks, is a public nuisance. Anyone camping,
attempting to camp, or placing any tent or temporary shelter on county property
or facility in making preparations to sleep, or store personal belongings
without written permission from the county manager or his designee shall be
directed by any duly sworn law enforcement officer or county employee having
authority to do so to cease such activity and to remove any camping gear or
personal belonging from county property or facility. Any duly sworn law
enforcement officer or county employee may summarily remove any tent, temporary
shelter, bedding or personal belongings from county property or facility.
   Lighting or using a campfire or bonfire on county property or facility poses
a potential danger to the public and unless permitted to do so, any person
lighting or using a bonfire on county property or facility shall be directed to
stop, to extinguish any burning material, and to remove same once that can be
safely done. Any duly sworn law enforcement officer or county employee may
summarily extinguish any burning material.
   Upon violation of any provision of this article, violators are subject to
one or more of the following enforcement actions:
      (1)   Duly sworn law enforcement officers with jurisdiction within Martin
County shall have the duty and responsibility to enforce this article by
charging the violator with a misdemeanor and shall also be empowered to issue
citations for civil penalties when in their judgment any provision of this
article has been violated. County employees and others designated in writing by
the county manager shall have the authority to issue citations for civil
penalties when in their judgment and provision of the article has been
violated.
      (2)   The violator may be charged with a misdemeanor punishable in
accordance with the provisions of N.C.G.S. 14-4 with a fine of up to $500.00 or
any other sanctions allowed by law.
      (3)   This article may be enforced by an appropriate equitable remedy
issuing from a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. of 09-12-2018(1) , § 4)
Secs. 20-75—20-90. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. PROHIBITING WEAPONS IN COUNTY BUILDINGS
Sec. 20-91. Definitions.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
   County government building means any building or office owned and/or
operated by Martin County, and includes, but is not limited to, the Martin
County Governmental Center, Social Services/Annex Building, Building
Inspections/Veteran's Services, Martin County Transit, and Martin County Adult
and Aging Services.
   Deadly weapon means any tool such as a gun, rifle, shotgun, knife, blade,
stun gun, or explosive that has the potential and intent to cause harm. The
only weapons in exception are ordinary pocket knives (as defined and permitted
by N.C.G.S. 14-269), which are defined as small knives designed for carrying in
a pocket or purse that have their cutting edge and point entirely enclosed by
the handle, and may not be opened by a throwing, explosive, or spring action.
(Ord. of 09-11-2019(1) , § 1)
Sec. 20-92. Prohibition.
   It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to carry a deadly weapon
within a Martin County government building. As part of this prohibition, it is
unlawful for anyone to carry a concealed handgun, regardless of if they have
been issued a concealed handgun permit.
   Deadly weapons are only permitted on county property if they are properly
stored in a locked vehicle, and any firearms are contained within a closed
compartment of the vehicle or in a carrying case affixed to the vehicle.
(Ord. of 09-11-2019(1) , § 2)
Sec. 20-93. Exceptions.
   The following persons are exempt from this prohibition:
   (a)   Law enforcement officers of the county, state, or nation while in
discharge of their official duties;
   (b)   Any judge or magistrate, with the proper concealed handgun permit;
   (c)   The district attorney, assistant district attorney, or an investigator
employed by the office of the district attorney, with the proper concealed
handgun permit;
   (d)   Members of the U.S. Armed forces and other federal employees while in
discharge of their official duties;
   (e)   Members of the National Guard or militia when called into actual
service and within the discharge of their official duties.
(Ord. of 09-11-2019(1) , § 3)
Sec. 20-94. Enforcement and penalties.
   Any person in violation of this article shall be guilty of a Class 1
misdemeanor.
(Ord. of 09-11-2019(1) , § 4)
Secs. 20-95—20-114. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLES ON COUNTY-OWNED PROPERTY 2
 
Notes
  Editor's note(s)—Ordinance adopted September 9, 2020, set out provisions
2 intended for use as Article VI, §§ 20-95—20-100. To provide for additional
  provisions to Article V, and at the discretion of the editor, these sections
  have been renumbered as §§ 20-115Editor's note(s)——20-121.
Sec. 20-115. Introduction.
   The commissioners of Martin County, being aware of an increasing number of
abandoned vehicles on county property, said vehicles impeding the public's
ability to access vital county services, and in order to promote the protection
of public health and safety, pursuit to the grant of power contained in G.S.
153A-132(a), do hereby enact the following article.
( Ord. of 09-09-2020(1) )
Sec. 20-116. Definitions.
   Terms (1), (2), and (3) in this section are defined by G.S. 153A-132(b).
Terms (4), (5), and (6) in this section are defined by G.S. 20-210.9. The
following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
      (1)   Motor vehicle includes any machine designed or intended to travel
over land or water by self-propulsion or while attached to self-propelled
vehicle.
      (2)   Abandoned motor vehicle is one that:
         a.   Is left on public grounds or county-owned property in violation
of a law or article prohibiting parking; or
         b.   Is left for longer than 24 hours on property owned or operated by
the county; or
         c.   Is left for longer than two hours on private property without the
consent of the owner, occupant, or lessee of the property; or
         d.   Is left for longer than seven days on public grounds.
      (3)   Junked motor vehicle is an abandoned motor vehicle that also:
         a.   Is partially dismantled or wrecked; or
         b.   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it
originally was intended to move; or
         c.   Is more than five years old and appears to be worth less than
$100.00; or
         d.   Does not display a current license plate.
      (4)   Tow, in any of its forms, includes to remove a vehicle by any means
including towing and to store the vehicle.
      (5)   Towing company means the company, person, or business who towed the
vehicle.
      (6)   Towing fee means the fee charged for towing and storing.
(Ord. of 09-09-2020(1))
Sec. 20-117. Prohibiting abandonment of vehicles.
   No person shall leave unattended any vehicle on Martin County property for
such time and under such circumstances as to cause the vehicle to reasonably
appear to be abandoned.
(Ord. of 09-09-2020(1))
Sec. 20-118. Exception.
   This article shall not apply to:
      (1)   A vehicle stored in an enclosed building;
      (2)   A vehicle stored on premises licensed for the storage of impounded
and/or junked vehicles;
      (3)   A vehicle parked in a paid parking lot or space where the required
fee has been paid.
(Ord. of 09-09-2020(1))
Sec. 20-119. Enforcement.
   This section is adapted in part from G.S. 20-219.11.
   This article will be enforced through the following procedures:
   The Martin County manager, Martin County building inspector and any Martin
County law enforcement officer may issue citations for violation of this
article;
   If the vehicle owner can be located, they will receive two letters of
warning. The first letter will serve as a formal request to relocate the
vehicle, and the owner will have 30 days to move the vehicle before the county
takes additional action. The second letter will be a certified letter
identifying the vehicle as abandoned and that the owner will have ten days to
move the vehicle before it is towed.
   Ten days after sending the certified letter identifying the abandoned
vehicle, the county manager, building inspector or law enforcement officer
shall placard the motor vehicle as abandoned. After the placard has remained on
such abandoned motor vehicle for 48 hours, a directed tow may be ordered. The
towing company will remove the vehicle and relocate the vehicle to a storage
space deemed appropriate by the company.
   Whenever a vehicle with a valid registration plate or registration is towed
as provided in G.S. 20-219.10, the authorizing person shall immediately notify
the last known registered owner of the vehicle of the following:
      (1)   A description of the vehicle;
      (2)   The place where the vehicle is stored;
      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
      (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to have the vehicle returned to
him; and
      (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause
hearing on the towing.
   If the vehicle has a North Carolina registration plate or registration,
notice shall be given to the owner within 24 hours; if the vehicle is not
registered in this state, notice shall be given to the owner within 72 hours.
This notice shall, if feasible, be given by telephone. Whether or not the owner
is reached by telephone, notice shall be mailed to his last known address
unless he or his agent waives this notice in writing.
   Whenever a vehicle with neither a valid registration plate nor registration
is towed as provided in G.S. 20-219.10, the authorizing person shall make
reasonable efforts, including checking the vehicle identification number, to
determine the last known registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him of
the information listed in subsections (1) through (5). Unless the owner has
otherwise been given notice, it is presumed that the authorizing person has not
made reasonable efforts, as required under this subsection, unless notice that
the vehicle would be towed was posted on the windshield or some other
conspicuous place at least seven days before the towing actually occurred;
except, no pre-towing notice need be given if the vehicle impeded the flow of
traffic or otherwise jeopardized the public welfare so that immediate towing
was necessary.
(Ord. of 09-09-2020(1))
Sec. 20-120. Selecting the towing company.
   The towing company chosen to move the vehicle will be determined by the
Martin County Communications Center, which rotates through a list of towing
companies to use in these situations.
(Ord. of 09-09-2020(1))
Sec. 20-121. Procedures after towing.
   This section is adapted in part from G.S. 20-219.11, 20-219.12, 20-219.13,
and 20-219.14.
   The vehicle owner will be responsible for the towing cost; if the owner or
person lawfully entitled to custody of any vehicle does not obtain the
vehicle's release within seven days of its possession by the towing company,
the towing company shall file for a mechanic's lien. Once the company has
obtained the lien, the company shall sell the vehicle to recover the cost of
the tow and storage. The towing company may retain any additional funds
resulting from the vehicle's sale that are left over after the fees are paid.
   The owner or any other person entitled to claim possession of the vehicle
may request in writing a hearing to determine if probable cause existed for the
towing. The request shall be filed with the magistrate in the county where the
vehicle was towed. If there is more than one magistrate's office in that
county, the request may be filed with the magistrate in the warrant-issuing
office in the county seat or in any other office designated to receive requests
by the chief district court judge. The magistrate shall set the hearing within
72 hours of his receiving the request. The owner, the person who requested the
hearing if someone other than the owner, the tower, and the person who
authorized the towing shall be notified of the time and place of the hearing.
   The owner, the tower, the person who authorized the towing, and any other
interested parties may present evidence at the hearing. The person authorizing
the towing and the tower may submit an affidavit in lieu of appearing
personally, but the affidavit does not preclude that person from also
testifying.
   The only issue at this hearing is whether or not probable cause existed for
the towing. If the magistrate finds that probable cause did exist, the tower's
lien continues. If the magistrate finds that probable cause did not exist, the
tower's lien is extinguished.
   Any aggrieved party may appeal the magistrate's decision to district court.
   At any stage in the proceedings, including before the probable cause
hearing, the owner may obtain possession of his vehicle by:
      (1)   Paying the towing fee, or
      (2)   Posting a bond for double the amount of the towing fee. (1983, c.
420, s. 2.)
   The tower may seek to enforce his lien or the owner may seek to contest the
lien pursuant to G.S. ch. 44A. (1983, c. 420, s. 2.)
   Every agency whose law enforcement officers act pursuant to this article,
G.S. 115D-21, 116-44.4, 116-229, 153A-132, or 160A-303 shall by contract or
rules provide compensation to the tower if a court finds no probable cause
existed for the towing. (1983, c. 420, s. 2.)
(Ord. of 09-09-2020(1))
Chapter 22
TAXATION
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 22-1—22-18. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. TAX ON GROSS RECEIPTS DERIVED FROM RETAIL SHORT-TERM LEASE
OR RENTAL OF MOTOR VEHICLES
Sec. 22-19. Tax on gross receipts derived from retail short-term motor vehicle
leases or rentals.
   The county hereby imposes and levies a tax of 1.5 percent of the gross
receipts from the short-term lease or rental of vehicles at retail to the
general public, as authorized by G.S. 153A-156.
(Ord. No. 2000-3, § 1, 8-14-2000)
Sec. 22-20. Administration.
   The county, through its tax collector, will administer and collect from
operators of leasing and rental entities the tax levied hereby. The county tax
collector may promulgate additional lawful rules and regulations necessary for
implementation and collection of the tax.
(Ord. No. 2000-3, § 2, 8-14-2000)
Sec. 22-21. Payment of taxes and filing of returns.
   The taxes levied hereby are due and payable to the county in monthly
installments on or before the 15th day of each month, with each affected
concern to prepare and render a return to the county. These tax proceeds shall
be placed in a segregated account by the collecting entity and are the property
of the county. A return filed for this purpose is not a public record as
defined by G.S. 132-1 and may not be disclosed except as provided by law.
(Ord. No. 2000-3, § 3, 8-14-2000)
Sec. 22-22. Penalties.
   In case of failure or refusal to file a return or pay the tax for a period
of 30 days after the time required for filing the return or paying the tax,
there shall be an additional tax, as a penalty, of five percent of the tax due,
with an additional tax of five percent for each additional month or fraction
thereof until the tax is paid. The county board of equalization and review, for
good cause shown, may consider appeals and adjust any penalty or additional tax
imposed hereunder.
(Ord. No. 2000-3, § 4, 8-14-2000)
Sec. 22-23. Misdemeanor for willful violation.
   Any person, firm, corporation or association who willfully attempts in any
manner to evade a tax imposed herein or who willfully fails to pay the tax or
make and file a return shall, in addition to the penalties provided by law and
herein, be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided by law.
(Ord. No. 2000-3, § 5, 8-14-2000)
Sec. 22-24. Delegation of powers.
   The county tax collector shall exercise the powers authorized to the county
by G.S. 153A-156(f) with the county board of equalization and review exercising
the powers of the tax review board.
(Ord. No. 2000-3, § 6, 8-14-2000)
Chapter 24 TELECOMMUNICATIONS
(RESERVED)
Chapter 25 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I. TERMINOLOGY
Sec. 25-1. General.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide a foundation of
terms, and an understanding of how such terms are to be interpreted as to
provide context and to further define the use of language throughout the entire
chapter. Through this article, administration may further define confusing
language which, if left undefined, could be subject to multiple interpretations
which do not match the original intent. For all definitions of terms which are
not explicitly defined herein, one shall assume the generally understood
meaning provided the context in which the term is used.
   (b)   Internal and external references. 
      (1)   Throughout this chapter, there are several references to specific
statutes and regulations, some of which are internal references to other areas
of this chapter, and other references to outside documents. To aid in
distinguishing between the two, all internal references to other articles or
sections within this chapter, will be preceded with the signifier “~.”
      (2)   Example: “For general rules outlining the interpretation of this
chapter, see ~ Article I. Sec. 25-2.”
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-2. General rules for interpretation.
   (a)   Literal translation. The language of this chapter must be read and
interpreted literally. The regulations contained within this chapter are no
more or less strict than stated.
   (b)   Rules governing the construction of language. For the purposes of
interpreting the general language and sentence construction of this chapter,
the following rules of interpretation apply unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise. In the following table, the various subject matters on the
left shall correspond to the interpretation directly to the right:
Subject Matter Interpretation
Subject       Interpretation
Matter
              Words listed in ~ Sec.
Meaning of    25-3 Abbreviations, Acronyms, and Definitions, shall have the specific meaning assigned,
Words         unless the context explicitly indicates another meaning. Words that are not defined are given
              their common meaning.
Tense         Words used in the present tense include the future tense. The reverse is also true.
Singular and  Words used in the singular include the plural. The reverse is also true.
plural
Mandatory     The words “shall,” “will,” “must” and “may not” are mandatory or compulsory in nature,
terms         implying an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision.
Gender        Language used in reference to a specific gender shall apply to everyone, regardless of a
              specific gender being mentioned.
Days          Any reference to “days” means calendar days unless otherwise specified in the provision.
Reference     Any reference to an article, section, subsection or paragraph means an article, section,
              subsection or paragraph of this chapter unless otherwise specified.
              (a)   Tables, figures, and illustrations may be provided in sections as a way of displaying
              information in a clear and concise manner. The language which is presented in these shall be
Tables,       interpreted in the same fashion and possess the same authority as all other text within the
figures, and  main body of a section.
illustrations (b)   However, if there happens to be accompanying text, for which the table figure or
              illustration’s information was mirrored or based off, then the table’s interpretation or
              language of such table shall be valued only as reference, and the text of the ordinance will
              control in the case there is a discrepancy.
              (a)   All references to other county, state or federal regulations in this chapter are
Current       intended to be references to the most current versions and citations, unless otherwise
versions and  expressly indicated.
citations     (b)    When referenced regulations have been repealed and not replaced by other regulations,
              requirements for compliance are no longer in effect.
Lists and     Certain lists may include language such as “including but not limited to” to imply the list
examples      contains examples only and is not an all-inclusive list. Context shall determine if this is
              the case.
              (a)   Whenever a provision appears requiring a specific officer or employee of the county to
Delegation of perform an act or duty, that provision will be construed as authorizing the officer or
authority     employee to delegate that responsibility to others over whom he or she has authority.
              (b)    Delegation of authority is not allowed when the provisions of this chapter or other
              laws or regulations expressly prohibit such delegation.
Calculations  Unless otherwise specified within this chapter, all calculations that result in a part or
and rounding  fraction of a whole number must be rounded up to the next highest whole number.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-3. Abbreviations, acronyms, and definitions.
   (a)   Acronyms table.
Acronyms Full Meaning (See Definitions Table for Explanation)
Acronyms Full Meaning (See Definitions Table for Explanation)
BOC      Board of Commissioners
CLG      Certified Local Government
DEQ      Department of Environmental Quality
NCDOT    North Carolina Department of Transportation
NCGS     North Carolina General Statutes
RV       Recreational vehicle
SPFHA    Special flood hazard area
UDO      Unified Development Ordinance
 
   (b)   Definitions Table.
Term Definition
Term           Definition
Abutting       Having property lines in common. Lots are also considered to be abutting if they are
               directly opposite each other and separated by a street or alley (also see adjacent).
Access         An easement which allows ingress and egress (entry and exit) between the real estate
easement       and a public road by means of a private road or driveway.
Adjacent       Having a common border such as a lot line or street right-of-way (also see abutting).
               Decisions made in implementation, administration, or enforcement of development
Administrative regulations that involve the determination of facts and the application of objective
Decision       standards set forth in this chapter; these are sometimes referred to as ministerial
               decisions and administrative determinations.
               The individual responsible for performing certain administrative functions of this
Administrator  chapter. The specific administrator regarding any section or function of this chapter
               may vary. See ~ Article III.
Appeal         A request for a review by the Board of Adjustment of an administrator’s
               interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
Applicant      Any person or entity that files any application, requests any administrative action,
               or approval as allowed under this chapter. Also referred to as “petitioner.”
Area of
special flood  See special flood hazard area (SFHA).
hazard
Board of       The governing body of the County of Martin, North Carolina.
Commissioners
               One or more lots of record in one undivided ownership with sufficient total area,
Buildable lot  exclusive of easements, flood hazards, water bodies, well and septic tank fields;
               sufficient total dimensions; and sufficient access to permit construction thereon of
               a principal building together with its required parking and buffer yards.
Building       Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy.
               (a)   The vertical distance from grade to the highest finished roof surface in the
Building       case of flat roofs or to a point at the average height of the highest roof having a
height         pitch.
               (b)    Height of a building in stories does not include basements, except as
               specifically provided for in this chapter.
Certified      Programs are approved by the U.S. Department of the Interior in cooperation with the
local          North Carolina Department of Cultural Resources through the State Historic
government     Preservation Officer as having met the requirements of the National Historic
(CLG)          Preservation Act of 1966 as amended in 1980.
               The Building Inspector for the county. In addition to the Building Inspector, the
Code           Director of Health or his or her designated representative also shall be considered
Enforcement    enforcement officers for the purpose of enforcing all public health provisions of
Officer        this chapter and other applicable health codes adopted by the Martin-Tyrrell-
               Washington District Health Department.
               A public or private water supply approved by the Martin-Tyrrell-Washington District
Community or   Health Department that serves a community that is not an incorporated municipality.
public water   This includes unincorporated communities, subdivisions, and/or mobile home parks
supply         having ten or more connections. Any water supply furnishing potable water to ten or
               more residences or businesses or combination of businesses or residences.
Comprehensive  A comprehensive plan that has been officially adopted by the governing board pursuant
plan           to G.S. 160D-501.
               A lot which occupies the interior angle at the intersection of two street lines. The
Corner lot     street line forming the least frontage shall be deemed the front of the lot except
               where the owner designates otherwise.
County         The governing body; Board of Commissioners of Martin County, North Carolina.
Cul-de-sac     A short street, having but one end open to traffic and the other end being
               permanently terminated with a vehicular turnaround provided.
               A gift, by the owner, of a right to use land for stated purposes. A dedication shall
Dedication     be made with a written instrument, in recordable form, and is completed with an
               acceptance and recordation.
Department of  The North Carolina Department of Environmental Quality is an agency of the government
Environmental  of North Carolina that focuses on the preservation and protection of natural
Quality (DEQ)  resources and public health.
Developer      Any person, firm, trust, partnership, association, or corporation engaged in
               development or proposed development within the county.
               Includes the following:
               (a)   The construction, erection, alteration, enlargement, renovation, substantial
               repair, movement to another site, or demolition of any structure.
Development    (b)   The excavation, grading, filling, clearing, or alteration of land.
               (c)   The subdivision of land as defined in G.S. 160D-802.
               (d)   The initiation or substantial change in the use of land or the intensity of use
               of land.
Development    An administrative or quasi-judicial approval made pursuant to G.S. ch. 160D that is
approval       written and that is required prior to commencing development or undertaking a
               specific activity, project, or development proposal.
Disclosure     A statement prepared and signed by the subdivider and the buyer of the subject real
statement      estate, fully and completely disclosing the status (whether public or private) of the
               street upon which the lot fronts.
Double         A continuous (through) lot of the same depth as the width of a block, containing two
frontage lot   tiers of lots and which is accessible from both streets upon which it fronts.
Drainage       An easement that grants the right of water drainage to pass in open channels or
easement       enclosed structures.
Easement       A grant of one or more of the property rights, by the property owner, to, or for use
               by, the public, a corporation, or other entities.
Elevated       A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground level
building       by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Encroachment   The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation, buildings, structures, or
               development into an area of land in which such development is not permitted by right.
Evidentiary    A hearing to gather competent, material, and substantial evidence to make findings
hearing        for a quasi-judicial decision required by a development regulation adopted under this
               chapter. See also quasi-judicial decision.
               A home meeting the North Carolina Residential Building Code with support and
Family care    supervisory personnel that provides room and board, personal care, and habilitation
home           services in a family environment for six or less resident handicapped persons,
               pursuant to G.S. 168-21.
               A physical barrier or enclosure consisting of wood, stone, brick, block, wire, metal,
Fence or wall  or similar material, used as a boundary or means of protection or confinement, but
               not including a hedge or other vegetation.
Flood zone     A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map
               that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the area.
               The vertical distance of any building or structure, as measured from the highest
Height         ground level at the structure foundation to the uppermost point of the structure,
               unless otherwise stated.
               The adoption, amendment, or repeal of a regulation under this chapter or an
Legislative    applicable local act. The term also includes the decision to approve, amend, or
decision       rescind a development agreement consistent with the provisions of G.S. 160D, article
               10.
Legislative    A hearing to solicit public comment on a proposed legislative decision. Also known as
hearing        a public hearing.
               A parcel of land whose boundaries have been established by some legal instrument such
Lot            as a recorded deed or a recorded map and which is recognized as a separate legal
               entity for purposes of transfer of title. The word “lot” includes plot, parcel, or
               tract.
Lot, corner    A corner lot is located at the intersection of two or more streets, the intersection
               angle is no more than 135 degrees.
Lot, interior  An interior lot has one frontage on a street or two opposite sides on two streets,
               excluding corner lots.
               The front of a lot shall be construed to be the portion nearest the street. For the
Lot frontage   purposes of determining yard requirements on corner lots and through lots, all sides
               of a lot adjacent to streets shall be considered frontage, and yards shall be
               provided as indicated under yards in this section.
Lot            The depth of a lot is the distance measured in the mean direction of the sidelines of
measurement    the lot from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line.
               The width of a lot is the greatest mean width measured at right angles to its depth.
               A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds,
Lot of record  Martin County, or a lot or parcel described by metes and bounds, the description of
               which has been so recorded.
Lot, through   A through lot has frontage on two parallel streets or highways and isn’t a corner
               lot. This lot may also be called a double frontage lot.
Manufactured   A “manufactured home” or “mobile home” in G.S. ch. 160D. Defined in G.S. 143-145(7).
home
Manufactured   A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
home park      lots for rent or sale.
Mobile         A piece of land within a mobile manufactured home park:
manufactured   (a)   Whose boundaries are in accordance with this chapter;
home space     (b)   That is designed and improved in accordance with the requirements of this
               chapter to accommodate a single mobile manufactured home.
Mobile
manufactured
home park or
travel         A permit issued by the enforcement officer to a developer for construction of a
trailer/RV     mobile manufactured home park or travel trailer/RV park.
park
construction
permit
New            A structure for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective
construction   date of this chapter.
               A lot, structure, sign, or use of land, which is now prohibited under the terms of
Nonconforming  this chapter but was lawful at the date of this chapter's enactment, or any amendment
               or revision thereto.
Nonconforming  Any structure, tree or use of land which does not conform to a regulation prescribed
use            in this chapter or any amendment thereto, as of the effective date of such
               regulation.
Planning Board The Planning Board of the county, established pursuant to G.S. 160D-301.
Plat           A surveyed map, or plan of a parcel of land that is to be or has been subdivided.
Public hearing See legislative hearing.
               A decision involving the finding of facts regarding a specific application of a
               development regulation requires the exercise of discretion when applying the
Quasi-judicial standards of the regulation. The
decision       term includes, but is not limited to, decisions involving variances, special use
               permits, and appeals of administrative determinations. See also “evidentiary
               hearing.”
               A vehicle, which is:
Recreational   (a)   Built on a single chassis.
vehicle (RV)   (b)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
               (c)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living
               quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
               The required distance between a building or structure and a lot line.
               (a)   Setback, front yard: The required distance between a street right-of-way line
               and the front line of a building or structure.
Setback        (b)   Setback, rear yard: The required distance between a building or structure and
               the rear lot line of the lot containing the building or structure.
               (c)   Setback, side yard: The required distance between a building or structure and
               the side lot line of the lot containing the building or structure.
Special flood  The land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of being flooded in any
hazard areas   given year.
(SFHA)
               (a)   Any permanently dedicated public right-of-way, which has been accepted for
               maintenance by the North Carolina Department of Transportation.
               (b)   Any other open area providing the principal means of access for vehicles or
Street         pedestrians from a public right-of-way to a building or use of land and which is at
               least 25 feet in width and is covenanted by its owner(s) to remain open and
               unobstructed throughout the life of any building or use which depends thereon to
               satisfy any requirement of this chapter.
Structural     Any roofed, canopied, enclosed porch and/or room or structure which is used in
additions      connection with a mobile manufactured home. A concrete slab porch, with no roof shall
               not be considered a structural addition.
               Anything constructed or erected (fixed or mobile) on the ground or attached to
Structure      something having a fixed location on the ground, among other things, structures
               include buildings, mobile homes, walls, fences, billboards, and poster panels.
Subdivider     Any person, partnership, firm, entity, or corporation who subdivides or develops any
               land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined.
               A subdivision is any division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
               building sites, or other divisions when any of those divisions are created for sale
Subdivision    or development, either immediately or in the future. The definition of a subdivision
               also includes any division of land that involves the dedication of a new street or
               change in existing streets.
Travel         Any site or tract of land upon which are located the minimum number of travel trailer
trailer/RV     spaces or land area required by this chapter, regardless of whether a charge is made.
park
Unified        Local policy instrument that combines traditional development regulations by
Development    streamlining and coordinating the development process of permits and approval by
Ordinance      eliminating outdated policies.
(UDO)
               A relaxation of the terms of this chapter by the Board of Adjustment to a person from
               the requirements of this chapter where unusual or unique circumstances peculiar to
               the property exist and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal
Variance       enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used
               in this chapter, a variance is authorized only for height, area, and size of
               structure or size of yards and open spaces; establishment or expansion of a use
               otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be
               granted because of the presence of nonconformities.
               An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the
Yard, front    full width of the lot, and situated between the street and the front line of the
               building, projected to the sidelines of the lot (exclusive of steps).
               An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the
Yard, rear     full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line
               of the building projected to the sidelines of the lot. No accessory building shall be
               located within five feet of the rear lot line (exclusive of steps).
               An open, unoccupied space on the same lot as a principal building, situated between
Yard, side     the building and the side lot line and extending from the rear line of the required
               front yard to the front line of the required rear yard (exclusive of steps).
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Secs. 25-4-25-10. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 25-11. Title.
   This document shall officially be known as the “Unified Development
Ordinance of Martin County, North Carolina,” and it may be cited or referred to
as the “Unified Development Ordinance,” “Ordinance,” or “UDO” within this
document.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-12. Authority.
   This chapter establishes the county’s land use regulatory authority and any
special legislation enacted for the county by the North Carolina General
Assembly. The provisions of this chapter are adopted under authority granted by
the General Assembly of North Carolina, including G.S. chs. 63, 153A, 160D.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-13. Purpose and intent.
   The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of the county. The intent of this chapter is, more
specifically, to:
   (a)   Provide guidelines and regulations concerning certain development
related activities within the county as mentioned herein.
   (b)   To promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of
the county in general and the residents and occupants of mobile home and travel
trailer parks in particular.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-14. Relationship to adopted plans.
   (a)   Plans shall be adopted by the Board of Commissioners with the advice
and consultation of the Planning Board. Adoption and amendment of a
comprehensive or land-use plan is a legislative decision and shall follow the
process mandated for text amendments set by G.S. 160D-601. Plans adopted under
G.S. ch. 160D shall be advisory in nature without independent regulatory
effect. Plans adopted under G.S. ch. 160D do not expand, diminish, or alter the
scope of authority for development regulations.
   (b)   If a plan is deemed amended by G.S. 160D-605 by virtue of adoption of
an amendment that is inconsistent with the plan, that amendment shall be noted
in the plan. However, if the plan is one that requires review and approval
subject to G.S. 113A-110, the plan amendment shall not be effective until that
review and approval is completed. The comprehensive plan or land-use plan shall
be reasonably maintained by the county.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-15. Conflicting ordinances and codes.
   (a)   Conflict with state or federal regulations. If any provisions of this
chapter are inconsistent with those of the state or federal government, the
more restrictive provisions shall govern unless the state or federal regulation
is intended to preempt the local regulation. The restrictive provision is the
one that imposes greater restrictions or more stringent controls. Regardless of
any other provision of this chapter, no land may be developed or used, and no
structure may be erected or maintained in violation of any state or federal
regulation.
   (b)   Conflict with local regulations. If the provisions of this chapter are
inconsistent with one another, or if they conflict with provisions found in
other adopted ordinances or regulations of the county, the more restrictive
provision governs. The more restrictive provision is the one that imposes
greater restrictions or more stringent controls.
   (c)   Conflict with private agreements and contracts. This chapter is not
intended to repeal, abrogate, annul, impair, or interfere with any with any
existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions, agreements or permits
previously adopted or issued pursuant to law. The county has no responsibility
for monitoring or enforcing private agreements or contracts.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-16. Transitional provisions.
   (a)   Effect on building permits and vested rights. Unless the property
owner consents in writing, this chapter does not apply to the completion of the
development of building or uses for which either:
      (1)   Building permits have been issued prior to the effective date of
this chapter, so long as the permits remain valid, unexpired, and unrevoked; or
      (2)   A vested right has been established pursuant to G.S. 160D-108 and
such right remains valid and unexpired.
   (b)   Other approvals granted prior to the effective date. Variances,
subdivision plats, site plans and other similar development approvals that are
current and valid as of the effective date of this chapter will remain valid
until their expiration date if applicable. Development may be completed in
accordance with such approvals even if such building, development, or structure
does not fully comply with the provisions of this chapter. If development is
not commenced and diligently pursued in the time allowed under the original
approval or any extension granted, then the development or structure must meet
the standards of this chapter in effect at the time of any re-application.
   (c)   Applications in-process prior to the effective date. Applications for
building permits, variances, subdivision plats, site plan approvals and other
similar development approvals, that were submitted in complete form and are
pending approval at the time of the effective date of this chapter, must be
reviewed wholly under the terms of the previous adopted regulations in effect.
Any re-application for an expired approval must meet the standards of this
chapter in effect at the time of re-application.
   (d)   Violations continue. Violations of the any previous ordinance which
are in violation of this chapter will continue to be a violation and will be
subject to penalties and enforcement action pursuant to ~ Article X,
Enforcement and Penalty. The adoption of this chapter does not affect nor
prevent any pending or future action to abate violations of previously adopted
regulations.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-17. Jurisdiction and severability.
   If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction of either
the State of North Carolina or the United States, then said decision shall in
no way affect, impair, or invalidate the validity of the remaining portions of
this chapter.
   (a)   General applicability and jurisdiction. The provisions of this chapter
shall apply to the use and development of all land within Martin County, North
Carolina, unless such use or development is expressly exempted by this chapter.
   (b)   Application to government units. Except as stated herein, the
provisions of this chapter shall apply to:
      (1)   The development and use of land owned by the county.
      (2)   The development and use of land owned by a municipality.
      (3)   The development and use of land owned by public colleges and
universities.
      (4)   The development and use of buildings owned by the State of North
Carolina and its political subdivisions.
      (5)   To the extent permitted by law, the development and use of land
owned or held in tenancy by the government of the United States.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Secs. 25-18-25-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES
Sec. 25-31. General.
   (a)   Purpose. This section establishes review and decision authority among
the several entities responsible for upholding the regulations and procedures
outlined herein. Specific requirements for each type of application or permit
are described in ~ Article IV Review Procedures.
   (b)   Special called meetings. If an applicant initiates or requests a
“special called” meeting of any board or committee, the applicant may be
required to pay a set fee, as outlined by the fee schedule, for each such
meeting.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-32. Conflict of interest for board members and staff.
   (a)   No member of an appointed board, Board of Commissioners, or staff
shall use their position for their private gain. Members of appointed boards,
Board of Commissioners, or staff are expected to minimize conflicts of
interest, disclose ethical, legal, financial, and other conflicts, and remove
themselves from decision-making when appropriate. Conflicts of interest shall
be disclosed as per G.S. 160D-109.
   (b)   Members of appointed boards and the Board of Commissioners shall not
vote on any advisory or legislative decision regarding a development regulation
where the outcome could have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable
financial impact on a member and prohibits a board member from voting on any
amendment if the landowner of the property subject to a petition or the
applicant for text amendment is a person with whom the member has a close
familial, business or other associational relationship. A “close familial
relationship” means a spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, or
grandchild. The term includes the step, half, and in-law relationships. See
G.S. 160D-109(f).
   (c)   A member of the board shall give notice to the chair 48 hours prior to
the hearing on matters involving any potential conflict of interest. If an
objection is raised to a board member’s participation at or prior to the
hearing or vote on a particular matter and that member does not recuse himself
or herself, the remaining member of the board shall be by majority vote rule on
the objection.
   (d)   If a staff member has a conflict of interest, the decision shall be
assigned to the supervisor of the staff person, or such other staff person
designated by the County Manager, Board of Commissioners, or Planning Board.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-33. Board of County Commissioners.
   (a)   General. The County Board of Commissioners is the governing body for
the county government.
   (b)   Membership. The Board consists of five elected officials.
   (c)   Duties and responsibilities. The Board of Commissioners establishes
local ordinances, policies and procedures and determines the immediate and
long-term goals and objectives of the county. In relation to this chapter,
their authority includes, but is not limited to:
      (1)   Legislative decisions as they pertain to this chapter.
      (2)   Decision authority on text amendments.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-34. Planning Board.
   (a)   General. The Planning Board is an appointed body that assists with
land use related regulation of the county.
   (b)   Membership and quorum. The Board shall have a minimum of three
members, with a quorum being 51% of the current members.
   (c)   Duties and responsibilities.
      (1)   Subdivision review and recommendation.
      (2)   Text amendment review and recommendation.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-35. Board of Adjustment.
   (a)   General. The Board of Adjustment, or “BOA,” is an appointed body that
makes quasi-judicial decisions, on an as needed basis, related to certain
procedures in this chapter, and shall follow statutory procedures for all
quasi-judicial development decisions as specified in G.S. 160D-406.
   (b)   Membership and quorum. The Board shall have a minimum of five members,
with a quorum being 51% of the current members.
   (c)   Duties and responsibilities.
      (1)   Variances review and decision.
      (2)   Review and decision for all appeals of administrative decision.
      (3)   Interpretation of the ordinance, if disputed.
      (4)   Any other duties required by the County Manager, or determined by
the Board of Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-36. Planning Administrator.
   (a)   General. The Planning Administrator(s) is the county official(s)
designated by the County Manager to administer planning related aspects of this
chapter and is directed by the Board of Commissioners to aid with the county
planning related responsibilities.
   (b)   Duties and responsibilities. Responsibilities may include but are not
limited to the following:
      (1)   Assisting with the subdivision process.
      (2)   Assisting with the manufactured home park developmental process.
      (3)   Assisting with the travel trailer park developmental process.
      (4)   Reviewing text amendments.
      (5)   Acting as liaison to the Planning Board and Board of Adjustment
during review processes.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-37. Code Enforcement Officer/Building Inspector.
   (a)   General. The role of Enforcement Officer accompanies the
responsibilities of enforcing aspects of this chapter where deemed necessary,
see ~ Article X, Enforcement and Penalties for more information.
   (b)   Duties and responsibilities. Responsibilities may include but are not
limited to the following.
      (1)   Enforcement of violations.
      (2)   May, in addition to the Planning Administrator, act as liaison to
the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-38. Technical Review Committee.
   (a)   General. The Technical Review Committee is a group designated to
provide expertise for development approval review.
   (b)   Membership. Membership can include, but is not limited to:
      (1)   The Planning Administrator.
      (2)   Code Enforcement Officer/Building Inspector.
      (3)   Division of Highways District Engineer.
      (4)   Martin-Tyrrell-Washington District Health Department
(representative).
      (5)   County Tax Assessor/land records.
      (6)   County Public Works Director (County Water and Sewer
Superintendent).
      (7)   Emergency services.
   (c)   Duties and responsibilities. The Committee shall provide
recommendations during developmental processes. The Planning Administrator or a
designated member shall serve as chair.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Secs. 25-39-25-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. REVIEW PROCEDURES
Sec. 25-51. General guidelines.
   (a)   General. This article describes the various types of development
review processes and related procedures.
      (1)   Any application for development approval shall only be considered
submitted if it is complete and any required fee is paid, as set by the current
fee schedule.
      (2)   No permit or certification shall be issued except in conformity of
this chapter, the current adopted building code regulations, and other
applicable regulations.
      (3)   A development approval will be provided in writing and the
application must be made by the person with a property interest or a contract
to purchase the property.
      (4)   Approval runs with the land. Unless provided otherwise by law, all
rights, privileges, benefits, burdens, and obligations created by development
approvals made, pursuant to G.S. ch. 160D, attach to and run with the land.
   (b)   Revocation of development approval. Development approvals may be
revoked by the county by notifying the holder in writing stating the reason for
the revocation. The county shall follow the same development review and
approval process required for issuance of the development approval, including
any required notice or hearing, in the review and approval of any revocation of
that approval.
   (c)   Expiration. Any development approval or permit shall be valid for 12
months from the date of issue, and a building permit is valid for six months
from the date of issue.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-52. Text amendment.
   (a)   General. Proposed amendments may be initiated by the County
Commissioners, Planning Board, Board of Adjustment, or by one or more
interested parties.
   (b)   Submission (step 1/3). A completed application for a text amendment
shall be submitted to the Planning Administrator at least 15 working days
before the Planning Board meeting at which the application is to be considered.
A completed application shall have all the following contents (where
applicable):
      (1)   Date of submission.
      (2)   Applicant name.
      (3)   A description of the proposed amendment.
      (4)   Applicant dated signature.
      (5)   Applicant mailing address.
      (6)   Applicant phone number.
      (7)   Applicant email address (optional).
      (8)   A fee, as set by the current fee schedule, shall be paid to the
county for each application for an amendment to cover the costs of advertising
and other administrative expenses.
   (c)   Planning Board review and recommendation (step 2/3).
      (1)   The Planning Administrator shall confer with the Planning Board and
provide recommendations.
      (2)   The Planning Board may hold separate public hearings for proposals
which stir public controversy provided notice of such hearing is published once
a week for two successive calendar weeks in a local newspaper.
      (3)   If an applicant initiates or requests a special called meeting of
either the Planning Board or Board of Adjustment, the applicant will be
required to pay a fee, as set by the current fee schedule, to the County of
Martin, North Carolina for each such meeting. The fee will be paid prior to any
such meeting being held. The County Board of Commissioners shall hold a public
hearing to consider the proposal. Such public hearings may be adjourned from
time to time or from place to place, as the County Board of Commissioners may
deem advisable without further notice.
      (4)   The Planning Board shall have 30 days from the time the proposed
amendment is submitted to it within which to submit its report.
      (5)   The Planning Board shall provide a recommendation for approval or
disapproval of the proposed amendment.
      (6)   The Planning Board may provide a comment along with the
recommendation.
   (d)   DOC decision (step 3/3).
      (1)   The Board of Commissioners will receive the Planning Board
recommendation at its next regular meeting and shall set a date for a public
hearing (legislative hearing).
      (2)   Before voting on an amendment of this chapter, the Board of
Commissioners shall hold a legislative hearing.
      (3)   Notice of a public hearing shall be given once a week for two
successive calendar weeks in a local newspaper. The notice shall be published
the first time not less than ten days nor more than 25 days before the date
scheduled for the hearing. In computing such a period, the day of publication
is not to be included but the day of the hearing shall be included.
      (4)   The Board of Commissioners shall approve a brief statement
describing whether its action is consistent or inconsistent with an adopted
comprehensive plan or land use plan. The requirement for a plan consistency
statement may also be met by a clear indication in the minutes of the Board of
Commissioners that at the time of action on the amendment the Board of
Commissioners was aware of and considered the Planning Board's recommendations
and any relevant portions of an adopted comprehensive plan or land use plan.
   (e)     Reference chart.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b7b733c2dc5146cfde2246972d63e0f001e6376f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-850.png]
 
(Ord. passed 9-13- 2023)
Sec. 25-53. Subdivision preliminary plat.
   (a)    General. See ~ Article VII for all requirements within the plat plans
for each stage of the process.
   (b)    Sketch plan. The applicant for a subdivision shall submit a sketch
plan of the proposed subdivision to the Planning Administrator for review and
discussion. If the administrator determines enough information has been
provided on the sketch plan, the applicant may submit a preliminary plat.
   (c)   Submission. 
      (1)   The subdivider shall submit all the following to the Planning
Administrator's office at least ten working days prior to a regularly scheduled
Planning Board meeting at which the preliminary plat may be considered.
         a.   Fifteen copies of the completed and signed application.
         b.   Fifteen copies of the completed and signed preliminary plat(s).
         c.   Any supplementary materials required by the Planning
Administrator.
         d.   A filing fee (see fee schedule).
      (2)   The preliminary plat will be added to the Planning Board's agenda
if all submission requirements have been met and the plat contains all required
information.
   (d)   Review and decision. The Planning Board will review the information
and determine one of the following :
      (1)    Approval. Approval shall be noted on five copies of the plat. One
copy shall be retained by the Board of Commissioners, two copies shall be
retained in the Planning Administrator’s Office records and two copies shall be
given to the subdivider.
      (2)   Conditional approval. The Planning Board may prescribe conditions
for the preliminary plat's approval.
      (3)   Disapproval. Reasons for disapproval by the Planning Board shall be
provided to the subdivider in writing along with recommendations for possible
resubmission. Following these recommendations does not guarantee future
approval.
   (e)   Reference chart.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b7b733c2dc5146cfde2246972d63e0f001e6376f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-854.png]
 
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-54. Subdivision final plat.
   (a)   General. The final plat shall constitute only that portion of the
preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at this
time; such portion shall conform to all requirements of this chapter. No final
plat shall be approved unless and until the subdivider shall have installed in
that area represented on the final plat all improvements required by this
chapter.
   (b)   Submission.
      (1)   The final plat, representing either the entire tract or one or more
sections indicated on the preliminary plat, shall be submitted on which the
preliminary plat was approved, otherwise approval of the preliminary plat shall
be null and void, unless a written extension of this time limit is granted by
the Planning Board on or before the one year anniversary of the approval.
      (2)   The subdivider or authorized agent shall submit eight copies of the
final plat to the Planning Administrator’s Office at least ten workdays prior
to the next regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting. The Planning
Administrator will place the final plat on the Planning Board agenda, provided
the plat contains all the information required below.
      (3)   The final plat will be added to the Planning Board's agenda if all
submission requirements have been met and the plat contains all required
information.
   (c)   Review and decision.
      (1)   Final approval will be based on compliance and satisfactory
completion of required improvements. The Planning Board shall appoint the
Building Inspector, or appoint a technical committee, to check the final plat
in the field, and it may appoint an engineer, to check the final plat against
the subdivision preliminary layout for accuracy, charging the costs to the
subdivider. The Planning Board shall review the final plat compliance with the
approved preliminary plat and shall act on the final plat within 60 business
days from the submittal date.
      (2)   The Planning Board may take one of these actions after review of
the final plat:
         a.   Approval. Approval shall be indicated on all copies of the plat
by the signed certificate of approval for recording. approval does not
constitute acceptance of dedications.
         b.   Disapproval. The reasons for disapproval shall be stated in
writing and one copy shall be retained for the Planning Administrator’s Office
records, one copy to the Clerk to the Board of the County Board of
Commissioners, and one copy shall be transmitted to the subdivider. The
subdivider may make such changes that will bring the plat into compliance with
this chapter and resubmit it to the Planning Board for review. The subdivider
may appeal the Planning Board’s decision to the County Board of Commissioners
within 30 days of the decision. The appeal must be submitted in writing to the
Clerk to the Board of Commissioners and the Planning Administrator within this
period.
(d)    Reference chart.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b7b733c2dc5146cfde2246972d63e0f001e6376f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-858.png]
 
(Ord. passed 9-13- 2023)
Sec. 25-55. Subdivision exemption and expedited review process.
   (a)    Exemptions. A plat with a subdivision exemption shall be reviewed for
requirements. If determined to be adequate, the plat shall have a certificate,
stating “this plat is not subject to subdivision approval” which shall be
signed and dated by the Planning Administrator, the chairman of the Planning
Board, or County Manager. The plat may then be recorded in the Office of the
Register of Deeds. See ~ Sec.
25-91(b).
   (b)   Expedited review.
      (1)   Certain submissions only require a plat for approval by the
Subdivision Administrator if they meet all the following criteria:
         a.   It is not exempt per G.S. 160D-802(a)(2).
         b.   There are no more than four lots created.
         c.   The created lots meet the size requirements of this chapter.
         d.   The created lots have a recorded, permanent means of ingress and
egress.
      (2)   A plat with a subdivision qualifying for expedited review shall be
presented to the Planning Administrator for approval. If approved, the plat
shall have the certificate, “This plat meets the subdivision requirements of
the Martin County Unified Development Ordinance,” signed and dated by the
Planning Administrator. The plat may then be recorded in the Office of the
Register of Deeds.
(c)     Reference chart.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b7b733c2dc5146cfde2246972d63e0f001e6376f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-862.png]
 
(Ord. passed 9-13- 2023)
Sec. 25-56. Manufactured/mobile home and travel trailer park process.
   (a)    General. No person shall construct or make any addition to a mobile
home or travel trailer park that alters the number of sites within the park or
affects the facilities required therein until they first secure a permit
authorizing such construction or additions. The construction or addition shall
be in accordance with a copy of the site plans and construction specifications
that must be submitted with the application for a construction and or building
permit.
   (b)   Submission (step 1/3).
      (1)   The application for a mobile home or travel trailer park
construction permit along with one reproducible copy of a plat delineating the
proposed park layout shall be filed with the County Inspections Department at
least ten workdays prior to the regular meeting of the County Planning Board.
The plat will be reviewed by the Planning Board at their regularly scheduled
meeting. The plat should be drawn consistent with the North Carolina Uniform
Map Law and the additional requirements (e.g., scale) contained herein. See the
Appendix for certificates which must be attached to the plat.
      (2)   Any plat of a new mobile home park shall be signed by a
professional surveyor or engineer, and any expansion of an existing mobile home
park must also be represented on a plat bearing the signature of a professional
surveyor or engineer and the plat shall be recorded in the Register of Deeds
office prior to obtaining a construction permit.
      (3)   The proposed plat shall be submitted by the Building Inspector to
the members of the Technical Review Committee for their independent review and
comments prior to submittal to the Planning Board; if comments have not been
received within ten days, the Planning Board shall consider the plat acceptable
unless an extension of time is agreed upon.
   (c)   Review (step 2/3) part 1.
      (1)   All comments, the proposed plan, and any additional information
shall be presented to the Planning Board by the Director of Inspections at
their regularly scheduled meeting. The County Planning Board shall review the
proposed park plan in accordance with the plat requirements and design
standards contained in this chapter, to the greatest extent feasible. The
Planning Board shall review and act on the park plat (with complete supporting
information) within 45 days.
      (2)   Applications and plats for mobile home and travel trailer park
expansions of up to three spaces, may be approved administratively by the
Director of Inspections under the following terms and conditions:
         a.   The Director of Inspections will notify the Planning Board chair
upon receipt of all minor expansion plats within 72 hours of receipt.
         b.   The Director of Inspections shall not approve any plats in less
than ten working days.
         c.   If the chair of the Planning Board determines that the minor plat
is so complex that full Board review is necessary, the plat will be placed on
the agenda for the next regularly scheduled Planning Board meeting.
         d.   Any minor plats originally rejected by the Director of
Inspections may be appealed to the full Board for consideration.
         e.   The Planning Administrator may approve only one minor expansion
plat for any one mobile home or travel trailer park during a 24-month period.
   (d)   Decision (step 2/3) part 2. After considering all available
information, the Planning Board shall approve, approve with conditions
(conditionally), or disapprove the plat.
      (1)   If approved conditionally (with conditions), the conditions and
reasons thereof shall be stated in writing to the developer, and the Planning
Board may require the developer to submit a revised plat.
      (2)   If the Planning Board should disapprove the plat, the reasons for
such action shall be stated in writing and transmitted to the developer. If the
plat is disapproved, the applicant may make such changes as to bring the plat
into compliance with this chapter and resubmit it to the Planning Board. The
developer may appeal against the Planning Board’s decision to the Board of
Adjustment in writing, within 30 days of the date of the Planning Board’s
action. This appeal should be made with notice to the Clerk to the Board of
Commissioners and the Director of Inspections.
      (3)   If approved, the developer may proceed with the installation of
improvements in accordance with the approved plat pursuant to the issuance of a
construction permit by the Building Inspections Office.
   (e)   Issuance of construction permit (step 3/3).
      (1)   After approval of a construction permit application by the Planning
Board or the Board of Adjustments, the Building Inspector shall promptly issue
a construction permit in accordance with the instructions of the Planning Board
or the Board of Adjustments.
      (2)   During construction, all fieldwork shall be in accordance with the
approved plans. It shall be the responsibility of the developer to inform the
Building Inspector of the progress of field work so that timely inspections can
be made.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-57. Variances.
   (a)   General. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide requests for
variances from the requirements of this chapter. Conditions for variances are
divided between the following subsections.
   (b)   Regarding subdivision related variances. Where, because of severe
topographical and/or other non-self-imposed conditions peculiar to the site,
strict adherence to the provisions of this chapter would cause an unnecessary
hardship, the County Board of Adjustment may, authorize a variance to the terms
of this chapter only to the extent that is necessary and not to an extent which
would violate the purpose and intent of this chapter.
   (c)   In passing upon variances. The Appeal Board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and must review the following factors:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community.
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under ~ Article II of this chapter as a functionally dependent facility, where
applicable.
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use.
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area.
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
      (12)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.
      (13)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
chapter.
      (14)   When applicable, any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall
be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood
elevation (BFE) and the elevation to which the structure is to be built and
that such construction below the BFE increases risks to life and property, and
that the issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the BFE will
result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to $25 per $100 of
insurance coverage. Such notification shall be maintained with a record of all
variance actions, including justification for their issuance.
      (15)   When applicable, the Floodplain Manager shall maintain the records
of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and the State of North Carolina upon request.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-58. Appeal of administrative decision.
   (a)   Appeals. Appeals from the enforcement and interpretation of this
chapter and applications for variances, administrative decisions, or
certificates of appropriateness may be taken to the Board of Adjustment by any
person aggrieved or by any office, department, board, or bureau of the county
affected. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the Building Inspector certified to the Board that by reason of
facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause
imminent peril to life and property, in which case proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board
or by a court of record. The aggrieved individual shall have 30 days to file an
appeal and it will be presumed that if the notice of determination was sent by
mail, it was received on the third business day after it was sent.
   (b)   Hearing of the appeal. After receipt of notice of an appeal, the Board
chairman shall schedule the time for a hearing, which shall be at a regular or
special meeting within 36 days from the filing of such notice of appeal. All
enforcement actions, including fines, shall be paused during the appeal
process. If the appeal concerns an administrative decision the official that
made the decision, or their successor if the official is no longer employed,
will appear as a witness in the appeal.
   (c)   Notice. At least one week prior to the date of the hearing, the County
of Martin shall furnish all adjacent property owners with written notices of
the hearing.
   (d)   Fees for appeal. A fee, as set by the current fee schedule, shall be
paid to the County of Martin, North Carolina, for each appeal, to cover the
necessary administrative costs and advertising.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Secs. 25-59-25-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. NONCONFORMITIES
Sec. 25-71. Nonconforming conditions/nonconformities.
   A nonconforming condition occurs when an existing lot, structure, or use of
an existing lot or structure does not conform to one or more of the current
regulations applicable to the area in which the lot or structure is located.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-72. Continuance of nonconforming conditions.
   (a)   Any nonconforming conditions, which were legally existing at the time
of adoption or amendment of this chapter, may be continued so long as it
remains otherwise lawful subject to the conditions provided in this section.
   (b)   Conditions for continuance of nonconforming uses of land. Such
nonconforming use of land shall be subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   No nonconforming use shall be changed to another nonconforming use
unless such use is determined to be of equal or less intensity. In determining
whether a nonconforming use is of equal or less intensity, the Board of
Adjustment shall consider all aspects deemed relevant to the situation.
      (2)   If any nonconforming use of land/structure ceases for any reason
for a continuous period of more than 180 days, any subsequent use of the land
shall comply with the regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-73. Modification of a nonconforming condition.
   No nonconforming condition shall be extended, enlarged, replaced, or
relocated except regarding the following circumstances.
   (a)   Any single-family residential nonconforming use (which may be a
manufactured home) may be enlarged or replaced with a similar single-family
residential structure of the same size or of a larger size, so long as the
enlargement or replacement does not create new nonconformities or increase the
extent of existing nonconformities with respect to setback requirements.
   (b)   The volume, intensity, or frequency of use of property where a
nonconforming use exists may be increased.
   (c)   Any other nonconforming use may be extended, enlarged, or replaced
only upon the decision of the Board of Adjustment. The BOA must find that there
would be no increase in the total amount of lot area devoted to the
nonconforming use, and that no new nonconforming conditions would be created.
   (d)   No nonconforming structure may be enlarged or altered in any way,
which increases its dimensional deficiencies; however, any nonconforming
structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its dimensional
deficiencies. Any enlargement of the structure shall conform to the current
dimensional requirements.
   (e)   Where a nonconforming structure is destroyed or damaged by fire,
flood, wind, other similar causes, the structure may be repaired or restored to
its original dimensions and conditions as long as a building permit for the
repair or restoration is issued within 180 days of the date of the damage,
subject to compliance with the requirements of the North Carolina State
Building Code. After such time passes, the lot or structure would have to
comply with the current regulations of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-74. Preservation of safe or lawful conditions.
   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoration to a
safe or lawful condition of any part of any building declared unsafe or
unlawful by the County Building Inspector or other duly authorized official.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Secs. 25-75-25-80. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. DESIGN STANDARDS
Sec. 25-81. Purpose.
   The purpose of this article is to provide a more in-depth regulatory outline
in relation to general design standards. These regulations shall apply to the
whole county and shall be the minimum requirement unless further restricted
based on the type of development.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-82. Fences, walls, and hedges.
   Fences and walls shall not be located within a public street right-of-way
nor placed or retained in such a manner as to obstruct vision at any
intersection with public or private roads. Nothing in this section shall
preclude, however, the installation of temporary fences around construction
works, erected, or maintained pursuant to the North Carolina Building Code or
soil erosion and sedimentation control requirements. No fences shall be located
within a utility easement without review and approval by the utility provider.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-83. Manufactured/mobile homes.
   (a)   General.
      (1)   No person shall locate, relocate or cause to be located or
relocated any mobile home intended for use as a dwelling, other than one in a
mobile home park with an approved sewage disposal system, or in an area served
by a public or community sewage disposal system without first obtaining an
improvement permit from the Martin-Tyrrell-Washington District Health
Department. Martin-Tyrrell-Washington District Health Department will issue the
permit after deciding that a septic tank or other ground absorption sewage
disposal system can be installed in accordance with local and state health
regulations.
      (2)   After the improvements permit has been issued and the work has been
completed on the ground absorption sewage disposal system, the Martin-Tyrrell-
Washington District Health Department will make a final inspection. If it finds
that the system has been properly installed, it will issue a certificate of
completion. A mobile home may not lawfully be occupied until this certificate
has been issued.
      (3)   Any person locating or relocating a mobile home in the county must
secure a building permit. The County Building Inspector shall issue a building
permit upon receipt of an application which includes the name and mailing
address of the owner; description of the mobile home to include the name of the
manufacturer; year of construction, and wind zone; and the proposed location of
the mobile home. This requirement excludes dealers of mobile homes who place
mobile homes upon their sales lot.
   (b)   Design standards. The Building Inspector shall inspect each mobile
home to determine compliance with the following:
      (1)   All mobile homes shall be anchored in a manner approved by the
State of North Carolina Regulations for manufactured homes, published, and
amended by the North Carolina Department of Insurance. The anchoring shall be
completed within six months of the issuance of the building permit. In no event
shall electricity be approved to the structure prior to completion of tie down
and approved inspection of electrical, plumbing, and mechanical systems as well
as underpinning. Compliance with the floodplain certification must also be
approved if a home is in a flood zone.
      (2)   At minimum manufactured homes shall have a vinyl product of a 92-
ounce density (0.042-0.044 gauge) panel, installed per manufacturer’s
instructions. All mobile home skirting/underpinning shall be installed within
90 days of the final inspection by the Building Inspector. However, the county
shall not require a masonry curtain wall or masonry skirting for manufactured
homes located on land leased to the homeowner per G.S. 160D-910.
      (3)   All mobile homes shall be installed according to the manufacturers’
printed instructions and all applicable state and federal regulations. The
mobile home manufacturer’s instructions should be designed by a licensed
architect or engineer. Instructions should be designed by a licensed architect
or engineer. Instructions shall specify the location and required stabilizing
devices (tie-downs, piers, blockings, etc.) on which the design of the
fastening devices attached to the home is based. If such instructions do not
exist, the standards included in the “State of North Carolina Regulations for
Manufactured Homes” shall apply.
      (4)   Compliance with the FEMA floodplain set-up based on an elevation
certificate prepared by a professional surveyor, is required if the location is
determined to be in a floodplain after a site plan review by the Planning
Administrator. The after-construction survey must be completed and approved by
the Floodplain Administrator prior to allowing electricity to be supplied.
      (5)   It shall be unlawful for an individual, partnership, firm or
corporation to allow any electric current for use in any manufactured home to
be turned on or to continue to furnish electricity for use in such mobile home
without having first ascertaining that a label of compliance is attached to
said mobile home, unless owner has satisfactory evidence on file with the North
Carolina Department of Motor Vehicles that the home was manufactured prior to
September 1, 1971.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-84. Residential structures.
   The following regulations shall apply to all residential structures within
the county.
   (a)   Design standards for residential structures. All residential
structures shall meet the following setback requirements from front, side, and
rear lot lines.
 
Yard  Setback from Lot Line
Front 30 feet
Side  10 feet
Rear  20 feet
 
   (b)   Multiple residential structures on a lot.
      (1)   Up to three principal residential structures are permitted on a
single, unsubdivided tract pursuant to a site plan approved by the Planning
Administrator, provided that the tract contains sufficient lot area, lot width,
and building setbacks for each dwelling. The location of the dwellings on the
single tract shall be such that, if the tract is subdivided, each dwelling unit
will be situated on a freestanding lot that meets all the dimensional
requirements. The addition of a fourth residential structure shall warrant
either a subdivision or shall follow the procedure of becoming a manufactured
home park, or travel trailer/RV park.
      (2)   Variances on setback requirements may be granted in situations
where two or more closely spaced residential structures exist on a single lot,
and a subdivision would not be reasonably possible without creating a setback
related nonconformity.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-85. Road access requirements.
   Every building or structure shall be on a parcel that abuts or has legal
access to a public or private road.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Secs. 25-86-25-90. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. SUBDIVISIONS
Sec. 25-91. General.
   (a)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to provide guidelines and
standards for subdivisions within the county. As previously defined, a
subdivision is any division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
building sites, or other divisions when any of those divisions are created for
sale or development, either immediately or in the future. The definition of a
subdivision also includes any division of land that involves the dedication of
a new street or change in existing streets.
   (b)   Exemptions. The following shall not be included within the definition
of a subdivision, nor be subject to the regulations authorized by this article:
      (1)   The combination or recombination of portions of previously
subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased
and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the local
government as shown in its subdivision regulations.
      (2)   The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres where no
street right-of- way dedication is involved.
      (3)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the
widening or opening of streets or for public transportation system corridors.
      (4)   The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is no
greater than two acres into not more than three lots, where no street right-of-
way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or exceed
the standards of the local government, as shown in its subdivision regulations.
      (5)   The division of a tract into parcels in accordance with the terms
of a probated will or in accordance with intestate succession under G.S. ch.
29.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-92. General requirements.
   (a)   Approval of the final plat by the Planning Board is subject to the
subdivider having installed the improvements required by applicable county
ordinances and this chapter. Each subdivision shall contain the improvements in
~ Article VI.
   (b)   Suitability of land. Land subject to periodic flooding, irregular
drainage conditions, excessive erosion or topographical and other reasons
unsuitable for residential use as determined by the appropriate board or
agency, shall not be platted for residential use nor for any other use by a
citizen that will continue or increase the danger to health, safety, or
property unless the hazards can be and are corrected; however, a limited amount
of land that is within an unsuitable zone may be included on a plat so long as
sufficient area for building sites and improvements are included for each lot,
and so long as the area of the unsuitable zone is disclosed to the buyer. The
100-year flood plan established for the county by FEMA and the current adopted
building code require certain elevations.
   (c)   Fill areas. Areas that have been used for the disposal of solid waste
or liquid shall not be subdivided into commercial or residential building
sites. This shall include those areas that have been used for disposal of
trash, demolition waste, chemical waste, and other waste materials. Fill areas
can be accepted when using suitable soils as found in USDA Textural
Classifications or in Unified Soil Classification Systems for fill materials.
Any appropriate soil test or load bearing test may be required by the Building
Inspector.
   (d)   Name duplication. The name of the subdivision or street in the
subdivision shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing
subdivision or street within the county.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-93. Improvements installation.
   (a)   Completion of improvements. Prior to final plat submission or
approval, the subdivider shall complete and dedicate in a manner satisfactory
to the Planning Board, all required improvements as specified either on the
approved preliminary plat or on that portion of the approved preliminary plat
which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at the time. The subdivider
shall certify in writing the dedication of said improvements as shown below.
   (b)   Certificate of dedication and maintenance. The certificate of
dedication and maintenance shall stipulate the following:
      (1)   That all property and improvements are owned by the subdivider and
free of any encumbrances or lien except as enumerated.
      (2)   That the subdivider has freely dedicated or reserved in writing,
all required right-of-way easements, streets, utilities, open spaces, or other
improvements to public or private use as noted on the approved preliminary plat
and has freely established minimum building setback lines. A purchaser of a lot
shown thereon accepts the lot subject to said dedication, reservations, and
restrictions.
      (3)   This certificate shall be filed with the final plat and forwarded
to the Register of Deeds to be recorded.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-94. Design standards.
   (a)   General. The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and the
minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the
subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated.
   (b)   Utilities. All lots to be subdivided must be capable of being served
by on-site wells and septic tank systems or public sanitary sewer and water
facilities or private community water and sewage disposal systems approved by
the appropriate local and state agencies.
   (c)   Individual on-site wells and septic tank systems.
      (1)   Wells should be no closer than approved by the Martin-Tyrrell-
Washington District Health Department to any septic tank or filter field
whether on the same lot or another lot.
      (2)   Water supply and sewage facilities shall comply with applicable
state, county, and municipal public health laws and regulations in all aspects
not specifically mentioned in this chapter.
      (3)   The subdivider, at his/her own expense, shall have the site
investigated under the supervision of the Martin-Tyrrell-Washington District
Health Department and shall present written proof to the Planning Board, or its
appointed agent, that required and appropriate soil tests have been conducted
and that each lot in the subdivision not served by public water and public
sewage disposal systems meets standards set by the Martin-Tyrrell-Washington
District Health Department for individual waste supplies and individual sewage
disposal systems. This action shall be taken prior to approval of the
preliminary plat.
   (d)   Public sanitary sewer and water facilities or private community
sanitary sewer and water facilities.
      (1)   Upon submittal of a preliminary plat, plans and specifications
prepared and sealed by a North Carolina licensed engineer and/or surveyor shall
be provided by the subdivider to the Planning Administrator’s Office showing
necessary sanitary sewer lines, water mains and items accessory to each that
lie wholly within the rights-of-way in the subdivisions. After approval of the
preliminary plat and these plans and specifications by the Planning Board and
applicable agencies, installation of the improvements by the subdivider can
begin. The County Building Inspector or his/her designee shall act as inspector
to see that the approved plans and specifications are faithfully and completely
carried out. Where existing sanitary sewer lines and water mains are within a
reasonable distance, proposed sanitary sewer lines and water mains shall
connect with the existing system in accordance with prescribed and approved
specifications. Where sanitary sewer lines and water mains are not within a
reasonable distance, but plans have been formulated for their installation, the
sanitary sewer lines and water mains may be required at the Board’s discretion.
When sanitary sewer lines and water mains are not within a reasonable distance,
and plans do not exist, the installation of such facilities will not be
required.
      (2)   The use of a private water or sanitary sewage disposal system
approved by the Martin-Tyrrell-Washington District Health Department and other
authorizing agencies will be permitted by the subdivider. The total cost of
installation of any sanitary sewer and water distribution improvements and
accessories is to be borne by the subdivider. Each deed describing a lot within
a subdivision served by a private water or sanitary sewage disposal system
shall state that the system is private in nature and shall state the party or
parties responsible for maintenance of the system.
   (e)   Sedimentation and erosion control. Persons engaged in land disturbing
activities shall take all reasonable measures to protect public and private
property from damage by such activities. Land disturbing activities are defined
in G.S. 113A.52, as amended and supplemented, and may mean any use of land that
results in a change in the natural cover or topography and that may change or
contribute to sedimentation. When any land disturbing activity is to be
undertaken on a tract where more than one contiguous acre is to be uncovered,
the subdivider shall notify the North Carolina Sedimentation Control Commission
to determine whether a sedimentation and erosion control plan is required.
Violators of the North Carolina Sedimentation and Pollution Control Act of 1973
(G.S. 113A.50 et seq.) may be fined pursuant to statute.
   (f)   Blocks. The location, lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be
determined with due regard to: provision of adequate building sites suitable to
the special needs of the type of permitted use contemplated; requirements as to
lot sizes and dimensions; needs for vehicular and pedestrian circulation,
control, and safety of roadway traffic; limitations and opportunities of
topography; and convenient access to adequate water supplies. Blocks shall not
be less than 500 feet, nor more than 1,500 feet, in length.
   (g)   Private roads. Access to lots or parcels formed by a tract of land
constituting a subdivision may be served by a private road. A private road
shall meet the most current design and construction criteria as referenced in
Subdivision Roads Minimum Construction Standards, published periodically by the
North Carolina Department of Transportation, excluding the requirement that the
roads must be paved. The following shall be considered acceptable, minimum
standards of design for private subdivision streets and in no case shall be
less than those of the North Carolina Department of Transportation as
referenced above.
      (1)   Such road shall have a private right-of-way easement in width
required by the North Carolina Department of Transportation.
      (2)   Such road shall be graded and stabilized according to minimum
standards of the North Carolina Department of Transportation.
      (3)   The alignment of such road shall meet applicable standards of the
North Carolina Department of Transportation.
      (4)   Street names, which duplicate or are phonetically similar to
existing street names in the county shall be prohibited. A proposed street,
which is in alignment with an existing street, shall bear the name of the
existing street.
      (5)   Appropriate street name signs, which meet the Division of Highways
policies, shall be installed by the developer at all street intersections.
      (6)   Stop and yield traffic signs shall be installed by the developer at
appropriate street intersections as required by the Division of Highways. Any
supplemental signs deemed necessary to safety and welfare by the Planning Board
shall also be required for installation.
      (7)   The subdivider shall pave the first 25 feet into the subdivision
from the public road.
      (8)   Each deed conveying a lot within a subdivision served by a private
road shall state that the road serving said lot is private in nature, and is
not constructed to the present minimum standards of the North Carolina
Department of Transportation for admission to the State Highway System, thus is
not eligible for state maintenance, unless said road is constructed and paved
according to current Department of Transportation standards, and unless the
requisite number of parties receiving access from the road pursuant to statute
consent, in writing, to the road becoming public. It shall contain the name,
address, and telephone number of the party or parties responsible for
maintenance and shall further state that the county accepts no liability to
provide any maintenance or improvement assistance whatsoever for said road. In
addition, the deed, as a condition precedent to being recorded, shall contain a
signed subdivision streets disclosure statement, signed by both the developer
and initial buyer of each lot, which shall set forth the limitations herein
above set forth, and contain an acknowledgment by the parties that they have
read, understand, and accept the road limitations.
   (h)   Public roads. Access to lots or parcels formed by a tract of land
constituting a subdivision may be served by a public road. Public roads shall
meet the present design and construction criteria as referenced in Subdivision
Roads Minimum Construction Standards, published periodically by the North
Carolina Department of Transportation, including the requirement that the roads
must be paved. The following shall be considered the acceptable minimum
standard of design for new public subdivision streets, and in no case shall be
less than those of the North Carolina Department of Transportation as
referenced above. General requirements include:
      (1)   Such road shall have a public right-of-way easement in a width
required by the North Carolina Department of Transportation.
      (2)   Such road shall be graded, stabilized, and paved according to
accepted policies of the North Carolina Department of Transportation.
      (3)   The alignment of such road shall meet applicable standards of the
North Carolina Department of Transportation.
      (4)   Street names which duplicate or are phonetically similar to
existing street names in the county shall be prohibited. A proposed street,
which is in alignment with an existing street, shall bear the name of the
existing street.
      (5)   Appropriate street name signs, which meet the Division of Highways
policies, shall be installed by the developer at all street intersections.
      (6)   Stop and yield traffic signs shall be installed by the developer at
appropriate street intersections as required by the Division of Highways. Any
supplemental signs deemed necessary to safety and welfare by the Planning Board
shall also be required for installation.
   (i)   Subdivision streets disclosure statement. Each deed describing a lot
within a subdivision served by a public road which is not yet a part of the
state-maintained highway system, shall state that the road serving said lot is
public in nature, and is constructed to present standards of the North Carolina
Department of Transportation for admission to the State Highway System, but is
not yet eligible for state maintenance. It shall reveal the party or parties
responsible for maintenance until the road is taken over by the North Carolina
Department of Transportation and shall further state that the county accepts no
liability to provide any maintenance or improvement assistance for said road.
In addition, a separate subdivision streets disclosure statement shall be
executed by the developer and initial buyer of the lot and filed with the
County Register of Deeds. The subdivision streets disclosure statement shall
set forth the qualifications hereinabove and contain an acknowledgment of the
parties that they have read and understand those qualifications.
   (j)   Certificate for public roads not on the State Highway System. The
developer shall obtain a certificate from a professional engineer, or from the
North Carolina Department of Transportation, that the roads as constructed meet
applicable standards set forth in the North Carolina Department of
Transportation’s Subdivision Roads Minimum Construction Standards. This
certificate shall be filed with the County Planning Administrator prior to the
Planning Board’s approval of the final plat for recordation.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-95. Easements.
   (a)   The subdivider shall convey written easements in recordable form to
the county or appropriate utility company for both underground and overhead
utility installation where needed. Easements shall be a minimum of 30 feet
wide, or wider if required by utility companies, and normally centered along
the front lot lines. Wider easements may be required if the topography along
the proposed right-of-way is such that maintenance equipment cannot reasonably
operate within the 30 feet wide easement, or if primary voltage lines or
transmission lines are within the subdivision. The conveyance of the easement
may be made after the approval of the final plat.
   (b)   Where a subdivision is traversed by a water source, drainage way,
channel or stream, there shall be provided a written storm water easement or
drainage right-of-way in recordable form conforming substantially with the
lines of such watercourse and such further width or construction, or both, as
will be adequate for the purpose of managing storm water runoff in a manner
that will safeguard the health and property of the citizens of the county.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-96. Permanent reference points.
   Prior to the approval of the final plat, permanent reference points shall
have been established in accordance with the requirements set forth in this
section.
   (a)   Subdivision corner tie. At least one corner of the subdivision shall
be designed by course and distance (tie) from a readily discernible reference
marker. If a corner is within 2,000 feet of a U.S. Geodetic Survey or North
Carolina Coordinate Grid System coordinated monument, or Martin County
coordinated system if such exists, then this corner shall be marked with a
monument so designated by computed X and Y coordinates which shall appear on
the map with a statement identifying this monument to an accuracy of at least
1:10,000. When such a monument is not available, the tie shall be made to some
pertinent and readily recognizable landmark or identifiable point, physical
object, or structure. However, if in the opinion of the Planning Board, a
subdivision is of such small size, or if there is an existing tie within a
reasonable distance of the subdivision, this shall not be required.
   (b)   Monuments. Within each block of a subdivision, at least two monuments
designed and designated as control corners shall be installed. The surveyor
shall employ additional monuments, if required. All monuments shall be
constructed of concrete and shall be at least four inches in diameter or square
and not less than three feet in length. A monument shall be set 30 inches in
the ground, unless this requirement is impractical because of unusual
conditions. All monuments shall be shown on the final plat.
   (c)   Property markers. A steel or wrought iron pipe or the equivalent of
not less than three-fourths inches in diameter and at least 30 inches in length
shall be set at all corners, except those located by monuments. A marker shall
also be set at a point of curve, and point of tangency, unless a monument has
already been placed at said points.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-97. Recreational facilities.
   Every subdivider who subdivides or develops land for residential purposes
shall set aside as a common area, a portion of such land for the purpose of
recreation, to serve the residents of the subdivision, if they meet the
following categories:
   (a)   Subdivisions consisting of 25 or more lots shall reserve 20,000 square
feet of recreational area per 25 lots.
   (b)   If 25 or more lots front on the water, then at least half of this
reserved area shall abut the waterfront. Each recreation site shall not be less
than 10,000 square feet, with a minimum width of 35 feet on the waterfront and
shall be suitable for recreational purposes.
   (c)   Subdivisions containing less than 25 lots, any of which front on a
waterway, shall provide a 20-foot easement, located along a property line, to
provide private pedestrian access for owners of non-waterfront lots within the
subdivision.
   (d)   The responsibility for maintenance of recreation areas shall be
revealed in writing by the subdivider prior to the sale of lots. The county
shall not be responsible for maintenance.
   (e)   The Planning Board encourages but does not require that subdivisions
adjoining navigable streams provide public access to the water.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-98. Sketch plan.
   The applicant for a subdivision shall submit a sketch plan of the proposed
subdivision to the Planning Administrator for review and discussion. If the
Administrator determines enough information has been provided on the sketch
plan, the applicant may submit a preliminary plat.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-99. Preliminary plat.
   (a)   Requirements. The preliminary plat shall include:
      (1)   The name of the subdivision.
      (2)   A sketch vicinity map showing the relationship between the proposed
subdivision and surrounding area at an appropriate scale. All preliminary and
final plats shall be at a scale not less than one inch equals 100 feet, and the
scale denoted both graphically and numerically.
      (3)   Site location.
      (4)   A topographic map showing vertical contours five feet or less.
      (5)   Total acreage of tract to be subdivided with the location of
previously subdivided lots within the tract. This must include flood hazard
designation.
      (6)   Name of township, county, and state in which the subdivision is
located.
      (7)   Corporate limits, township boundaries, county lines, and
extraterritorial town planning jurisdiction boundaries, if on the subdivision
tract.
      (8)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all subdividers,
owners, mortgagees, professional surveyors, land planners, and professional
engineers responsible for the subdivision.
      (9)   The registration numbers and seals of the professional engineers
and professional surveyors.
      (10)   Date of survey and plat preparation prepared by North Carolina
professional/licensed engineer and/or surveyor.
      (11)   An accurately positioned north arrow.
      (12)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of adjoining property
owners.
      (13)   The boundaries of the tract or portion thereof to be subdivided
distinctly and accurately represented with all bearings and distances shown,
including the total number of lots, lot size in square feet, and lots numbered
in sequence.
      (14)   The name and location of any adjoining subdivisions of record or
proposed and under review.
      (15)   Minimum building setback lines.
      (16)   Existing buildings or structures, sewers, water lines, water
courses, railroads, bridges, culverts, storm drains, sanitary sewers.
      (17)   The blocks numbered consecutively throughout the subdivision and
the lots numbered consecutively throughout each block.
      (18)   Wooded areas, marshes, swamps, rock outcrops, ponds or lakes,
streams, or stream beds, and any other natural features affecting the site,
including the location of known areas subject to flooding.
      (19)   Proposed roadways, existing and platted streets on adjoining
properties and in the proposed subdivision, right-of-way widths, and pavement
widths.
      (20)   Street names.
      (21)   The location and dimensions of all rights-of-way, utility, or
other easements.
      (22)   Letter of tentative approval of water supply and sewage disposal
plans by appropriate county and state authorities.
      (23)   Type of street dedication; all streets must be designated either
"private" or "public" roads.
      (24)   Letter from the Department of Transportation as to proposed
roadway alignment and proposed construction.
      (25)   A copy of any deed restriction or similar covenants running with
the land, in recordable form.
      (26)   A copy of the deed subdivision streets disclosure statement where
proposed roadways are designated private roads, or where proposed roadways are
public roads not yet a part of the State Highway System.
      (27)   Letter of approval from the County Tax Assessor’s Office.
      (28)   Any other information considered by either the subdivider,
Planning Administrator, Building Inspector, Planning Board or Board of
Commissioners to be pertinent to the review of the plat.
      (29)   Applicable certificates as seen below.
   (b)   Preliminary certificates. Regarding this preliminary subdivision plat,
the County Planning Board makes the following decision. This action shall in no
way be construed as constituting approval for recording.
      (1)   Approval.
      (2)   Conditional approval.
      (3)   Disapproval.
________________, 20___            ___________________________________
Date                     Chairman, Martin County Planning Board
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-100. Final plat.
   (a)   Requirements. In addition to the preliminary plat requirements, the
following requirements must be met for a final plat:
      (1)   Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground
the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line,
block line, and building setback line, whether curved or straight. This should
include the radius central angle, and tangent distance for the center line of
curved property lines that are not boundaries of curved streets. All dimensions
shall be measured to the nearest one tenth of a foot and all angles to the
nearest minute.
      (2)   The plans for utility layouts include sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, water distribution lines, natural gas, telephone, and electric service
where applicable.
      (3)   Improvement permit or letter of approval for water and sewage
systems by appropriate county and state authorities, if any system is to be
installed by subdividers.
      (4)   The accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments, markers,
and control points.
      (5)   The description contained in any map or plat that is to be
professional and that creates or more fully defines a parcel or parcels not
previously plotted on the county large scale cadastral maps and for which a
parcel identifier number does not exist must be sufficiently precise to create
a consistent closed parcel boundary within a plotting accuracy of one-fortieth
of an inch as determined by the county Land Records Office.
      (6)   Applicable certificates in the below section.
   (b)   Final certificates. I hereby certify that the land as shown hereon is:
      (1)   Within the subdivision regulations jurisdiction of the County of
Martin, State of North Carolina.
      (2)   Owned by _______________________________ free and clear of any
encumbrances or liens except as stated below:
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
      (3)   That the subdivider, by the recording of this plat, freely
dedicates or reserves all required right-of-way easements, streets, utilities,
open spaces, or other improvements to public or private use as noted on the
approved preliminary plat and has freely established minimum building setback
lines which conform to existing UDO. A purchaser of a lot shown hereon accepts
the lot subject to said dedication, reservations, and restrictions.
      (4)   The owner/authorized agent consents to the within subdivision and
the recording of same with the appropriate Martin County recording officials.
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
__________________, 20____          _______________________________
Date                      Owner or Authorized Agent
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
The public streets designated hereon are constructed in accordance with the
minimum standards of the Department of Transportation for acceptance of the
subdivision streets on the State Highway System for maintenance. This
certificate of approval shall not be deemed an acceptance of the dedication of
such streets designated herein.
__________________, 20____          _______________________________
Date                      District Engineer, Division of Hwy
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
State of North Carolina, County of _______________________________
I, _______________________________ certify that this map was:
      (1)   Drawn by me;
      (2)   Drawn under my supervision; from
      (3)   An actual survey by me;
      (4)   An actual survey made under my supervision;
With the deed description recorded in book _______, page _______, or other as
listed herein: ______________________________; and that the ratio of precision
as calculated by latitudes as departures is _______ (1:7500 as a minimum
standard); that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted
from information found in book _______, page ______.
Witness my hand and seal, this _______ day of _______, 20___.
__________________________________________
Surveyor or engineer, licensed by the State of North Carolina
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
Sworn to and subscribed before me this _______ day of _______, 20___.
                  _______________________________
                  Notary Public
My commission expires:
_______________________________
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to
comply with the subdivision regulations of Martin County by the Martin County
Planning Board and/or Subdivision Review Committee and that it has been
approved for recording in the Office of the Register of Deeds.
______________________, 20____           ______________________________________
Date                      Chairman, Martin County Planning Board
                     or Planning Administrator
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Secs. 25-101-25-110. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
Sec. 25-111. General.
   (a)   Manufactured home register. It shall be the duty of the owner or
operator of a mobile home and/or travel trailer park to keep an accurate
register containing a record of all occupants and owners of mobile homes or
travel trailers located within their park. The register shall be submitted to
the County Tax Assessor’s Office in accordance with G.S. 105-316 and shall be
available for inspection at all times by the County Building Inspection
Department, the Martin- Tyrrell-Washington District Health Department, and
other government agencies and officials authorized by the Board of
Commissioners. The registry shall be maintained by the County Tax Assessor’s
Office.
   (b)   Inspection. Martin-Tyrrell-Washington District Health Department and
the County Building Inspector are hereby authorized and directed to make such
inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this
chapter upon consent of the park operator. However, such inspections may take
place without the consent of the operator by the use of “administrative search
and inspections warrants” in compliance with applicable North Carolina
Statutes. It shall be the duty of the owners or occupants of mobile homes and
travel trailer parks to give these agencies free access to the park premises at
reasonable times for the purpose of inspection.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-112. Design standards.
   (a)   Land suitability.
      (1)   Land subject to flooding, improper drainage, erosion, or that is
for topographic reasons unsuitable for residential use as determined by the
Planning Board, shall not be developed for mobile home parks if such use would
continue or increase the danger to health, safety, or property, unless the
hazards can be corrected and/or avoided prior to construction. However, tracts
that can meet the requirements of the National Flood Insurance Ordinance may be
developed consistent with the requirements of this chapter and the county flood
ordinance and the written approval of a representative of the North Carolina
Department of Division of Health and Services.
      (2)   Areas which have been used for the disposal of waste, including
solid, liquid, or chemical waste, shall not be developed as a mobile home park.
   (b)   Site development.
      (1)   The amount of land for each mobile home space served by an
individual well and septic tank shall be determined by the Martin-Tyrrell-
Washington District Health Department after an investigation of soil
conditions. Parks to be served by public water and sewage disposal systems
shall have adequate area in each space to provide for the mobile home, resident
vehicles and required setbacks.
      (2)   Each mobile home space shall contain a minimum of 7,000 square feet
and have iron markers placed at each corner. Lots should be marked and
identified in a logical sequence with reflective numbers or letters at least
four inches high and two inches wide.
      (3)   There shall be at least 15 feet clearance between mobile homes and
side lot lines. No mobile homes shall be located closer than 35 feet to an
exterior boundary line of the park and no closer that 15 feet to the edge of
any interior transportation right-of-way.
      (4)   Rights-of-way and street design requirements follow:
      (5)   Interior roads and parks of less than 14 spaces shall be all
weather roads constructed of gravel packed to a depth of three inches and
graded with proper drainage consistent with the North Carolina Department of
Transportation standards for unpaved roads.
      (6)   In parks of 14 or more spaces, the minimum right-of-way and
pavement widths, minimum thickness of base and surface course to be used shall
meet the required pavement designs as described in the North Carolina
Department of Transportation Minimum Construction Standards for Subdivision
Roads.
      (7)   Intersection with a public roadway shall be designed to facilitate
free movement of traffic and reviewed and approved on the application plat by
the North Carolina Department of Transportation, Division of Highways.
      (8)   Dead end streets shall not serve more than 14 lots and the closed
end shall have a cul-de-sac bulb with not less than a 96-foot diameter in the
right-of-way (per NCDOT standard) and 35 foot radius in the travel path to
allow for emergency vehicle operations and turnaround.
      (9)   Parking space sufficient to accommodate at least two automobiles
shall be required for each mobile home space. The parking area shall have a
stone or gravel base with a minimum of three inches of compact thickness.
      (10)   The area of the mobile home space shall be improved to provide an
adequate foundation for the placement of the mobile homes and provide anchors
and tie-down facilities in every mobile home space.
      (11)   Parks must provide sufficient screening, in the form of natural
growth or fencing to shield the park from adverse effects of adjacent public
roadways, industrial or commercial use, or other incompatible development. All
areas that may be considered unsafe for children must be fenced with a solid
fence of least five feet in height.
      (12)   The park shall be graded and seeded to prevent ponding or
accumulation of water according to the Department of Natural Resources and
Community Development erosion and sedimentation plan. Any uninhabited lots
shall be maintained and kept clear of debris.
      (13)   Identification signs for mobile home or travel trailer parks shall
not exceed four by eight feet at the entrance of the park and placed in
compliance with the Department of Transportation Standards. Signs must be
approved and permitted by the Planning Director and the Building Inspector.
      (14)   In all mobile home parks accommodating or designed to accommodate
16 or more mobile homes, there shall be one or more recreation areas of at
least 12,000 square feet which are easily accessible to all park residents.
Recreation areas shall be located free of traffic hazards and shall not be
about a roadway for a distance of at least 35 feet. The area shall be
relatively flat, well drained, and suitable for recreation.
   (c)   Water supply, sewage disposal, electrical and refuse collection
facilities.
      (1)   Each mobile home space shall be equipped with plumbing and
electrical connections for sufficient capacity.
      (2)   Electrical connections and wiring shall be in accordance with the
National Electric Code as amended from time to time.
      (3)   Each mobile home space shall be provided with and shall be
connected to a sewage disposal and water supply system as approved by the
Martin-Tyrrell-Washington District Health Department and county utilities.
      (4)   Parks with more than 15 spaces shall provide space for a solid
waste container site in accordance with the Department of Transportation
regulations. This shall be at no cost to the county and shall be shown on the
original plat for the park. The mobile home or travel trailer park owner is
responsible for all solid waste disposal fees generated by the park residents.
      (5)   The park owner of any size shall be responsible for refuse
collection where suitable collection is not available from governmental
agencies.
   (d)   Structural additions. The allowance of any type of structural
additions must be approved by the Planning Board along with the original site
plan and design by the owner/developer. If allowed by the original design plan
within the park, the park owner shall sign an agreement to be brought, along
with information required to obtain a building permit which will conform to all
volumes of the North Carolina Building Code. Any such structure shall meet the
setback requirements in ~ Sec.
25-84(a).
   (e)   Management. In each mobile home park, the owner or authorized agent
shall be in charge of keeping the mobile home park, its facilities, and
equipment in good repair and in clean, orderly, safe and sanitary condition so
as not to create a public nuisance at all times.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-113. Final plat.
   (a)   Requirements. The plat shall be drawn at a scale not smaller than one
inch to 100 feet. The plat shall contain the following information, for all
park sizes:
      (1)   Name of proposed park.
      (2)   General location map with township, municipality, county, and state
of proposed park.
      (3)   Name, address, and phone number of developer.
      (4)   Scale represented numerically and graphically.
      (5)   Date of plat preparation and name of surveyor or engineer.
      (6)   Show adjacent properties noting the legal owner’s name and the
location of existing streets.
      (7)   Dimensions and bearings of exterior property lines of proposed
park.
      (8)   Topographic features, including two horizontal and vertical
concrete monuments.
      (9)   Proposed streets showing horizontal alignment, and unique name or
number.
      (10)   Mobile home spaces are well defined and sufficient for delineation
on the ground.
      (11)   Travel trailer spaces well defined and dimensioned.
      (12)   Proposed surface water drainage plan.
      (13)   Location of existing and proposed permanent structures.
      (14)   Location, purpose, and dimensions of areas to be used for purposes
other than for mobile home or travel trailer sites.
      (15)   Location and intensity of area lights and evidence that a power
company will provide service to the park. All parks are required to have at
least one area light per acre.
      (16)   Plans for water supply and sewage disposal system, showing the
location, size, and the number of hookups to each system to comply with the
Laws and Rules for Sanitary Sewage Collection Treatment and Disposal (Section
190D of the North Carolina Administrative Code) and the standard of the Martin
County Waterworks.
      (17)   Designation of areas subject to flooding from Flood Insurance Rate
Maps located in the Inspections Department.
      (18)   Any other information considered by either the developer, the
Building Inspector, the Director of Public Works if within a municipality,
Water Department Director, or the Planning Board to be pertinent to the
application.
      (19)   Show screening and/or fencing plan details on the plat.
      (20)   Any proposed solid waste containers must be depicted on the plat.
      (21)   When a plot is for a park expansion, it must show the existing
area as well as the proposed addition.
      (22)   A list of any structural additions that may be allowed on-site
that may meet setbacks.
      (23)   The certificates are listed below.
   (b)   Final certificates. I hereby certify that the land as shown hereon is:
      (1)   Within the manufactured home park regulations jurisdiction of the
County of Martin, State of North Carolina.
      (2)   Owned by _______________________________ free and clear of any
encumbrances or liens except as stated below:
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
      (3)   That the developer, by the recording of this plat, freely dedicates
or reserves all required right-of-way easements, streets, utilities, open
spaces, or other improvements to public or private use as noted on the approved
plat and has freely established minimum building setback lines which conform to
existing UDO.
      (4)   The owner/authorized agent consents to the manufactured home park
and the recording of same with the appropriate Martin County recording
officials.
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________, 20____       _______________________________
Date                      Owner or Authorized Agent
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
The public streets designated hereon are constructed in accordance with the
minimum standards of the Department of Transportation for acceptance of the
manufactured home park streets on the State Highway System for maintenance.
This certificate of approval shall not be deemed an acceptance of the
dedication of such streets designated herein.
__________________________, 20____       _______________________________
Date                      District Engineer, Division of Hwy
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
State of North Carolina, County of _______________________________
I, _______________________________ certify that this map was:
      (1)   Drawn by me;
      (2)   Drawn under my supervision; from
      (3)   An actual survey by me;
      (4)   An actual survey made under my supervision;
With the deed description recorded in book _______, page _______, or other as
listed herein: ______________________________; and that the ratio of precision
as calculated by latitudes as departures is _______ (1:7500 as a minimum
standard); that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted
from information found in book _______, page ______.
Witness my hand and seal, this _______ day of _______, 20___.
_______________________________
Surveyor or engineer, licensed
by the State of North Carolina
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
Sworn to and subscribed before me this _______ day of _______, 20___.
                     _______________________________
                     Notary Public
My Commission Expires:
                                                              
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
I hereby certify that the plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the
manufactured home park regulations of Martin County by the Martin County
Planning Board and/or Review Committee and that it has been approved for
recording in the Office of the Register of Deeds.
__________________________, 20___       _______________________________
Date                     Chairman, Martin County Planning Board
                     or Planning Administrator
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Secs. 25-114-25-120. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. TRAVEL TRAILER/RV PARKS
Sec. 25-121. General.
   (a)   Register. It shall be the duty of the owner or operator of a mobile
home and/or travel trailer park to keep an accurate register containing a
record of all occupants and owners of mobile homes or travel trailers located
within their park. The register shall be submitted to the County Tax
Supervisor’s Office in accordance with G.S. 105-316 and shall be available for
inspection at all times by the County Building Inspection Department, the
Martin-Tyrrell-Washington District Health Department, and other government
agencies and officials authorized by the Board of Commissioners. The registry
shall be maintained by the County Tax Office.
   (b)   Inspection. Martin-Tyrrell-Washington District Health Department and
the County Building Inspector are hereby authorized and directed to make such
inspections as are necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this
chapter upon consent of the park operator. However, such inspections may take
place without the consent of the operator using “administrative search and
inspections warrants” in compliance with applicable North Carolina Statutes. It
shall be the duty of the owners or occupants of mobile homes and travel trailer
parks to give these agencies free access to the park premises at reasonable
times for the purpose of inspection.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-122. Design standards.
   (a)   Site suitability.
      (1)   A complete site plan shall be reviewed by the Planning
Administrator along with the Planning Board to determine whether the site is
suitable in accordance with the current floodplain development permit adopted
by the County Commissioners and the county floodplain regulations, and with
erosion control and sedimentation, drainage, and flooding considerations.
      (2)   Areas which have ever been used for the disposal of waste,
including solid, liquid, or chemical waste, shall not be developed as a travel
trailer park.
   (b)   Site development.
      (1)   Every travel trailer space shall contain at least 2,000 square
feet.
      (2)   Parking sufficient to accommodate one motor vehicle and one travel
trailer shall be constructed within each space. No more than one camping
vehicle may be parked in each space. Site plan shall specify whether sites are
drive through or back-in and have sufficient driveway to accommodate safe
vehicle movement.
      (3)   Set-back from public streets shall be a minimum of 35 feet from the
right-of-way.
      (4)   Grading shall prevent water from ponding or accumulating within the
park and shall be a part of the plat/plan presented to the Planning Director.
Each space shall have access by way of an interior street to the public road.
These all-weather roads shall have a minimum width of 35 feet.
      (5)   Proper drainage ditches with sloped and seeded banks shall be
developed into the park.
      (6)   Cul-de-sacs and dead-end roads shall not exceed 1,000 feet in
length measured from the entrance to the center of the turnaround, with a bulb
diameter of 96 feet to allow for emergency vehicles. All intersections of a
public roadway shall be approved by the Division of Highways, Department of
Transportation, before any permits are issued.
      (7)   Each park shall have a central structure that will provide toilet
facilities required by current codes and laws. Vending machines for park
residents may also be housed in this structure or in a shelter near the
recreation area. No exterior advertising is allowed.
      (8)   Swimming pools or bathing areas must be installed, altered,
improved, or used only when found to be in compliance with the Martin-Tyrrell-
Washington District Health Department, and permits issued and work inspected by
the County Building Inspector.
      (9)   Identification signs for travel trailer parks shall not exceed four
feet by eight feet at the entrance of the park, in accordance with the county
sign ordinance.
   (c)   Sanitary facilities.
      (1)   All toilets, shower, lavatory, and laundry facilities shall be
provided and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and always kept in
good repair. They shall be safely and adequately lit. Facilities shall be
easily accessible for wheelchairs and other physical impairments to comply with
all state and Martin-Tyrrell-Washington District Health Department regulations.
      (2)   All buildings shall be constructed in accordance with the North
Carolina State Building Code, as it is amended from time to time, using the
current code at the time of permit issue.
   (d)   Water supply. A safe, adequate, and conveniently located water supply
must be provided for each park. No water supply shall be installed, altered, or
used without the approval of county utilities and Martin-Tyrrell-Washington
District Health Department.
   (e)   Sewage disposal.
      (1)   Sewage dumping stations shall be designed and approved by the
Martin-Tyrrell-Washington District Health Department. Each park shall be
provided with at least one sewage disposal access point.
      (2)   No method of sewage disposal shall be installed, altered, or used
without the approval of the Martin-Tyrrell-Washington District Health
Department. All sewage waste, if not self-contained within the camper unit,
including waste from toilets, showers, bathtubs, lavatories, wash basins,
sinks, and water using appliances not herein mentioned, shall be piped into an
approved sewage disposal access point.
   (f)   Garbage and refuse disposal.
      (1)   The park owner is responsible for refuse collection. Garbage cans
with lids should be provided for each space and located no further than 50 feet
away from any trailer space. Racks or platforms shall be provided to store
containers to prevent tipping and spillage. No garbage shall be left outside a
container.
      (2)   Storage, collection, and disposal of refuse shall be managed as not
to create health hazards, rodent harborage, insect breeding areas, accidents,
fire hazards, or air pollution, or any other situation to cause a public
nuisance.
   (g)   Utilities.
      (1)   The installation and use of electrical service shall comply with
all applicable codes in existence at the time of installation. The County
Electrical/Building Inspector shall approve all installation and use if the use
should be different that when installed.
      (2)   Only one mobile home, or constructed building shall be allowed
within a travel trailer park to be used as an office or the residence of
persons responsible for the operation and maintenance of the travel trailer
park. Accessory buildings used for storage, recreation, and maintenance may be
allowed as shown and approved from the original plat.
   (h)   Park expansion. When expansion of the existing park is proposed, the
developer shall provide the Planning Administrator, for the review of the
Planning Board, with an improvement plan showing the existing area and the
proposed addition, to include a completed site plan as outlined in the
permitting section of this chapter, along with payment of the fee as set by the
current fee schedule.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-123. Final plat.
   (a)   Requirements. The plat shall be drawn at a scale not smaller than one
inch to 100 feet. The plat shall contain the following information, for all
park sizes:
      (1)   Name of proposed park.
      (2)   General location map with township, municipality, county, and state
of proposed park.
      (3)   Name, address, and phone number of developer.
      (4)   Scale represented numerically and graphically.
      (5)   Date of plat preparation and name of surveyor or engineer.
      (6)   Show adjacent properties noting the legal owner’s name and the
location of existing streets.
      (7)   Dimensions and bearings of exterior property lines of proposed
park.
      (8)   Topographic features, including two horizontal and vertical
concrete monuments.
      (9)   Proposed streets showing horizontal alignment, and unique name or
number.
      (10)   Mobile home spaces are well defined and sufficient for delineation
on the ground.
      (11)   Travel trailer spaces well defined and dimensioned.
      (12)   Proposed surface water drainage plan.
      (13)   Location of existing and proposed permanent structures.
      (14)   Location, purpose, and dimensions of areas to be used for purposes
other than for mobile home or travel trailer sites.
      (15)   Location and intensity of area lights and evidence that a power
company will provide service to the park. All parks are required to have at
least one area light per acre.
      (16)   Plans for water supply and sewage disposal system, showing the
location, size, and the number of hookups to each system to comply with the
Laws and Rules for Sanitary Sewage Collection Treatment and Disposal (Section
190D of the North Carolina Administrative Code) and the standard of the Martin
County Waterworks.
      (17)   Designation of areas subject to flooding from Flood Insurance Rate
Maps located in the Inspections Department.
      (18)   Any other information considered by either the developer, the
Building Inspector, the Director of Public Works if within a municipality,
Water Department Director, or the Planning Board to be pertinent to the
application.
      (19)   Show screening and/or fencing plan details on the plat.
      (20)   Any proposed solid waste containers must be depicted on the plat.
      (21)   When a plot is for a park expansion, it must show the existing
area as well as the proposed addition.
      (22)   The certificates as shown below.
   (b)   Required certificates. I hereby certify that the land as shown hereon
is:
      (1)   Within the travel trailer/RV park regulations jurisdiction of the
County of Martin, State of North Carolina.
      (2)   Owned by _______________________________ free and clear of any
encumbrances or liens except as stated below:
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
      (3)   That the developer, by the recording of this plat, freely dedicates
or reserves all required right-of-way easements, streets, utilities, open
spaces, or other improvements to public or private use as noted on the approved
plat, and has freely established minimum building setback lines which conform
to existing UDO.
      (4)   The owner/authorized agent consents to the within travel trailer/RV
park and the recording of same with the appropriate Martin County recording
officials.
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
__________________________, 20____       _______________________________
Date                      Owner or Authorized Agent
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
The public streets designated hereon are constructed in accordance with the
minimum standards of the Department of Transportation for acceptance of the
travel trailer/RV park streets on the State Highway System for maintenance.
This certificate of approval shall not be deemed an acceptance of the
dedication of such streets designated herein.
__________________________, 20____      _________________________________
Date                      District Engineer, Division of Hwy
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
State of North Carolina, County of _______________________________
I, _______________________________ certify that this map was:
      (1)   Drawn by me;
      (2)   Drawn under my supervision; from
      (3)   An actual survey by me;
      (4)   An actual survey made under my supervision;
With the deed description recorded in book _______, page _______, or other as
listed herein: ______________________________; and that the ratio of precision
as calculated by latitudes as departures is _______ (1:7500 as a minimum
standard); that the boundaries not surveyed are shown as broken lines plotted
from information found in book _______, page ______.
Witness my hand and seal, this _______ day of _______, 20___.
_______________________________
Surveyor or engineer, licensed
by the State of North Carolina
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
Sworn to and subscribed before me this _______ day of _______, 20___.
                     _______________________________
                     Notary Public
My commission expires:
_______________________________
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __ _ _ _
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
I hereby certify that the plat shown hereon has been found to comply with the
travel trailer/RV park regulations of Martin County by the Martin County
Planning Board and/or Review Committee and that it has been approved for
recording in the Office of the Register of Deeds.
__________________________, 20___       ___________________________________
Date                      Chairman, Martin County Planning Board
                     or Planning Administrator
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Secs. 25-124-25-130. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY.
Sec. 25-131. Section applicability and procedure.
   (a)   General. If any land is used or any building or structure is erected,
removed, demolished, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted,
maintained, which is in direct violation of this chapter, the Enforcement
Officer, or any appropriate authority, in addition to other remedies, may
institute appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful uses or
violations.
   (b)   UDO enforcement. When inspecting, the individual must enter the
premises during reasonable hours and upon presenting credentials. The
individual completing the inspection may enter the premises provided that the
appropriate consent has been given for inspection of areas which are not open
to the public unless an appropriate inspection warrant has been secured.
Actions by the UDO Code Enforcement Officer may include any of the following:
      (1)   Ordering discontinuance or illegal use of land or structure.
      (2)   Ordering removal of illegal construction, alteration, and additions
or changes in structures.
      (3)   Ordering the discontinuance of illegal work being performed on land
and/or structures.
      (4)   Ordering any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure
compliance with or prevent violation of its provisions.
      (5)   Abandonment of intent to repair and need for demolition.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-132. Penalties for violations.
   (a)   General penalties.
      (1)   Any person violating any provision of this chapter may receive a
notice of violation for the offense, outlining the scope of the offense or
illegal nonconformity. If proper steps are not taken to conform to the
ordinance, within 30 days of receiving the notice, the property owner may be
fined $50 a day until proper compliance is met.
      (2)   If a repeat offense* occurs within 24 months of the prior violation
notice, the property owner may receive a notice of violation for the offense,
re-outlining the scope of the offense or illegal nonconformity. If proper steps
are not taken to conform to the ordinance, within 15 days of receiving the
notice, the property owner may be fined $200 a day until proper compliance is
met.
      (3)   The Enforcement Officer may institute a civil action against the
offender seeking enforcement by appropriate equitable remedy, injunction, and
order of abatement, or by any remedy authorized by G.S. 160A-175 and G.S. 160D-
404, as amended.
   *Violations are only considered to be repeated if the violation is
pertaining to the same property, the property/portion of property is under the
same ownership as during the prior violation, and it constitutes the same
reason as a previous violation letter.
   (b)   Regarding subdivisions. Any subdivision that is found to be in
violation of this chapter is subject to the following.
      (1)   The notice of violation shall be sent to the owner, specifying what
violations have been found, what corrective measures must be taken, and that
failure to comply with the ordinance shall result in revocation of the
operating license.
      (2)   Unless an inspection shows the violation to have been corrected or
to satisfactorily be in the process of completion no later than 30 days after
notice of permit violation is given, a notice of a revocation hearing shall be
sent to the offending party.
      (3)   The revocation hearing notice shall indicate the time and place of
the hearing, that the park operator may be represented by counsel and that the
hearing shall be held before the County Board of Commissioners.
      (4)   At the hearing the burden of proof shall be on the enforcement
office, who may also be represented by counsel.
      (5)   Evidence shall be presented, and cross examinations shall be
allowed. Accurate minutes of the hearing shall be kept.
      (6)   The decision of the Board shall be stated in writing and supported
by a statement of its findings of facts and conclusions. If the park is found
to be in violation, the permit for all spaces shall be revoked.
      (7)   If the owner later wishes to correct the violation, he or she shall
be required to re-submit his or her subdivision plans in compliance with this
chapter to gain compliance.
   (c)   Regarding manufactured home and travel trailer/RV parks. Any mobile
manufactured home park or travel trailer/RV park that is found to be in
violation of this chapter will cease entering new leases.
      (1)   The notice of violation shall be sent to the park operator,
specifying what violations have been found, what corrective measures must be
taken, and that failure to comply with the ordinance shall result in revocation
of the operating license.
      (2)   Unless an inspection shows the violation to have been corrected or
to satisfactorily be in the process of completion no later than 30 days after
notice of permit violation is given, a notice of a revocation hearing shall be
sent to the offending party.
      (3)   The revocation hearing notice shall indicate the time and place of
the hearing, that the park operator may be represented by counsel and that the
hearing shall be held before the County Board of Commissioners.
      (4)   At the hearing the burden of proof shall be on the enforcement
office, who may also be represented by counsel.
      (5)   Evidence shall be presented, and cross examinations shall be
allowed. Accurate minutes of the hearing shall be kept.
      (6)   The decision of the Board shall be stated in writing and supported
by a statement of its findings of facts and conclusions. If the park is found
to be in violation, the permit for all spaces shall be revoked.
      (7)   If the owner later wishes to correct the violation, he or she shall
be required to re-submit his or her mobile manufactured home park plan or
travel trailer/RV park plan in compliance with this chapter in order to get an
operating permit.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-133. Complaints regarding violations.
   Whenever a violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have occurred,
the accused may file a written complaint. Such complaint stating fully the
causes and basis thereof shall be filed with the Building Inspector. He or she
shall record properly such complaints, immediately investigate, and act thereon
as provided by this chapter.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-134. Legal proceedings/enforcement.
   (a)   When this chapter makes unlawful a condition existing upon or use made
of real property, it may be enforced by injunction and order of abatement, and
the General Court of Justice for a mandatory or prohibitory injunction and
order of abatement commanding the defendant to correct the unlawful condition
upon or cease the unlawful use of the property. The action shall be governed in
all respects by the laws and rules governing civil proceedings, including the
Rule of Civil Procedure in general.
   (b)   In addition to an injunction, the court may enter an order of
abatement as part of the judgment in the cause. An order of abatement may
direct that building or other structures on the property be closed, demolished,
or removed; that fixture, furniture, or other movable property be removed from
buildings on the property; that grass and weeds be cut; that improvements or
repair be made; or that any other action be taken that is necessary to bring
the property into compliance with the ordinance.
   (c)   If the defendant fails or refuses to comply within an injunction or
with an order of abatement within the time allowed by the court, he or she may
be cited for contempt and the county may execute the order of abatement.
   (d)   If the county executes the order, it has a lien on the property, in
the nature of a mechanic’s and material’s man’s lien, for the costs of
executing the order. The defendant may secure cancellation of an order of
abatement by paying all costs of the proceedings and posting a bond for
compliance with the order. The bond shall be given with sureties approved by
the Clerk of Superior Court in an amount approved by the judge before who the
matter was heard and shall be conditioned on the defendant’s full compliance
with the terms of the order of abatement within the time fixed by the judge.
Cancellation of an order of abatement does not suspend or cancel an injunction
issued in conjunction with the order.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Sec. 25-135. Judicial review.
   Any person aggrieved or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the Board
of Adjustment, or any office, department, board, or bureau of the county, under
this chapter, may petition the superior court for a review of such decision.
   (a)   State law references: Judicial review, G.S. 63-34.
   (b)   State law references: Enforcement and remedies, G.S. 63-35.
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
APPENDIX I. AMENDMENTS TABLE.
 
Effective Date Description of Amendment
9/13/2023      Adoption of the Unified Development Ordinance
 
(Ord. passed 9-13-2023)
Chapter 26 RENEWABLE ENERGY INFRASTRUCTURE
Sec. 26-01. Purpose.
   (a)   The purposes of this chapter are as follows:
      (1)   To facilitate the siting, construction, installation, and operation
of solar energy facilities in the county in a manner that ensures the
protection of the health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens, while
also avoiding adverse impacts to adjacent land uses and property owners;
      (2)   To protect and enhance the economic viability and interests of the
citizens and residents of the county who have made substantial financial
investments in homes, businesses, and industry in the county;
      (3)   To preserve the dignity and aesthetic quality of the environment of
the county; and
      (4)   To preserve the physical integrity of land in close proximity to
residential areas.
   (b)   This chapter is not intended to abridge safety, health, or
environmental regulations contained in other applicable codes, standards, or
ordinances. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to nullify any
provisions of any state or federal law.
   (c)   This chapter does not address residential solar use, or a small solar
array that is on a farm or other business exclusively for on-site energy usage.
(Ord. of 12-10-2025)
Sec. 26-02. Authority.
   This chapter is hereby adopted under the authority and provisions of G.S.
153A-121 and 160D-702.
(Ord. of 12-10-2025)
Sec. 26-03. Definitions.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Abandonment means any solar energy facility that ceases to produce energy on
a continuous basis for 12 months will be considered abandoned.
   Accessory equipment means any equipment serving or being used in conjunction
with a SEF. The term includes utility or transmission equipment, power
supplies, generators, batteries, equipment buildings, and storage sheds,
shelters, or similar structures.
   Applicant means the SEF owner/SEF operator, or the person(s), entity, or
company submitting an application for a solar energy development permit on
behalf of the SEF owner/operator.
   Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls,
and designated or intended for the shelter, support, enclosure, or protection
of persons, animals, or chattels.
   Concentrated solar power (CSP). See thermal solar conversion.
   Conservation area means such areas including natural areas protected by law,
such as wetlands that meet the definition in the Clean Water Act, 33 USC §§
1251 et seq; shoreland areas; water bodies; riparian buffers; populations of
endangered or threatened species, or habitat for such species; archaeological
sites, cemeteries, and burial grounds; important historic sites; other
significant natural features and scenic viewsheds; and existing trails or
corridors that connect the tract to neighboring areas.
   Decommissioning plan means a document that details the planned shut down and
removal of a solar energy facility from operation or use.
   Electrical transmission tower means a tall structure, usually a steel
lattice tower, which was set up for the purpose of transmitting and receiving
power, and is used to support high voltage overhead power lines.
   Fence means a continuous barrier extending from the surface of the ground to
a uniform height of not less than six feet from the ground at any given point,
constructed of chain link.
   Gate means a door or other device attached to a fence which, when opened,
provides a means of ingress and egress of persons and things for which it was
intended, and which, when closed, forms a continuous barrier as part of the
fence to which it is attached.
   Improved area means an area containing perimeter fencing, solar panels,
electrical inverters, storage buildings, and access roads.
   Photovoltaic solar conversion (PV) means an active solar energy system in
which sunlight is converted directly into electricity through the photovoltaic
process of converting light (photons) into electricity (voltage).
   Property owner means the person(s), entity, or company having fee simple
ownership of the property where the solar energy facility is located.
   Protected building means all residential, commercial, and institutional
buildings within 300 feet of a solar energy facility, excluding accessory
buildings such as storage sheds.
   Public road means any road or highway which is now or hereafter maintained
by the North Carolina Department of Transportation as part of the state highway
system. Setbacks for improved areas shall be measured from the back of the road
right-of-way.
   Repair means the replacement of existing work with the same kind of material
used in the existing work, not including additional work that would change the
structural safety of the structure or that would affect or change required
existing facilities, or that would be in violation of a provision of law or
this chapter. The term repair shall not apply to any change in construction.
   Residence means a building used as a dwelling for one or more families or
persons.
   Responsible party/parties means the SEF owner/SEF operator, as defined in
this section.
   SEF owner/SEF operator means the person(s), entity, or company that engages
in or runs a solar energy facility.
   Solar array means an active solar energy system that converts sunlight into
electricity using either thermal or photovoltaic methods. Such a system has
multiple solar collectors, and might include transformers, generators,
batteries, and other appurtenant structures and/or facilities.
   Solar collector or solar panel means a device that converts sunlight into
electricity using either thermal or photovoltaic methods.
   Solar energy facility (SEF) means a commercial electricity generating
facility (PV or CSP), the primary purpose of which is to supply electricity.
This consists of one or more solar arrays and other accessory structures,
equipment, and buildings, including substations, battery storage, electrical
infrastructure, generators, transmission lines, and other appurtenant
structures and/or facilities. Also known as solar farms.
   State means the State of North Carolina.
   Thermal solar conversion means an active solar energy system that converts
sunlight into electricity by using mirrors or lenses to collect and concentrate
heat to a small area in order to drive a heat engine, usually a conventional
steam generator. For a commercial application this is called concentrated solar
power (CSP).
   Utility pole means a structure owned and/or operated by a public utility,
municipality, electric membership corporation, or rural electric cooperative
that is designed specifically for and used to carry lines, cables, or wires for
telephone, cable television, or electricity, or to provide lighting.
(Ord. of 12-10-2025)
Sec. 26-04. Permit required.
   (a)   Solar energy facilities shall be subject to the requirements and
permitting process of this chapter, in addition to other applicable local,
state, and federal laws. This chapter shall apply to all areas of the county
except those lands lying within the jurisdiction of any municipality, unless
such municipality formally requests the county enforce these regulations within
the municipality's area of jurisdiction.
   (b)   Solar energy facilities must obtain a development permit from the
Planning Department prior to applying for building permits from the Inspections
Department, in accordance with the procedures outlined in this chapter.
(Ord. of 12-10-2025)
Sec. 26-05. Permit requirements.
   (a)   General. Before a building permit may be submitted for an SEF, a solar
energy facility development permit must first be approved by the Planning
Board.
   (b)   Permit application. Throughout the permit process, the applicant shall
promptly notify the County Planner of any changes to the information contained
in the permit application. Changes that do not materially alter the initial
site plan may be administratively accepted. The completed application for a SEF
shall consist of an electronic filing or eight paper copies, which contain at
least the following.
      (1)   Summary. A narrative overview of the SEF, including its generating
capacity.
      (2)   Inventory. A tabulation describing the:
         a.   Number, specifications, and type of each proposed solar array,
including their generating capacity;
         b.   Dimensions and respective manufacturers; and
         c.   Accessory buildings and accessory equipment.
      (3)   Vicinity map. Identification of the property on which the proposed
SEF will be located. Sketch vicinity map showing relationship between SEF and
the surrounding area.
      (4)   Site plan. A plan which shows all of the following:
         a.   Planned location of each solar array;
         b.   All property lines within 300 feet of the property lines of the
proposed site;
         c.   Each array's setback distance from the closest SEF boundary, the
setback of improved areas from each property line, and the separation distance
between the SEF boundary and each protected building, as identified in §
26-6(a);
         d.   Access road and turnout locations;
         e.   Substation(s) and accessory equipment, accessory buildings, and
structures;
         f.   Electrical cabling from the SEF to the substation(s) and from the
substation(s) to where the electricity will leave the site, and associated
transmission lines;
         g.   Location of any underground power lines on the site;
         h.   Conservation areas, including natural areas protected by law,
such as wetlands that meet the definition in the Clean Water Act; shoreland
areas; water bodies; riparian buffers; populations of endangered or threatened
species (federal or state), or habitat for such species; flyways;
archaeological sites, cemeteries, and burial grounds; important local historic
sites; existing healthy, native forests consisting of at least one acre of
contiguous area; other significant natural features and scenic view sheds;
existing trails or corridors that connect the tract to neighboring areas;
         i.   Location and width of any driveways or private roads serving the
SEF; and
         j.   A landscaping and fencing plan that shows proposed screening and
buffering of the improved area, including all arrays, buildings, and other
accessory buildings or accessory equipment on the site. This shall include the
size, location, spacing, and species of required evergreen bushes as identified
in §
26-6(b) and (c).
      (5)   Miscellaneous. The applicant shall provide the following
information to the
Planning Board:
         a.   Certification that the proposal is for an International
Electrical Congress (IEC) solar array that is designed to meet all North
Carolina Building Codes;
         b.   Certification that the solar arrays pass the Environmental
Protection Agency's Toxicity Characteristic Leaching Procedure (TLCP) test;
         c.   Signed copies of all original leases and/or easements and
agreements for the SEF;
         d.   Copies of any required state and federal permits, licenses, and
the like. This shall include permits and/or approvals issued by the North
Carolina Utilities Commission; and
         e.   Other relevant studies, reports, certifications, and approvals as
may be reasonably requested by the Planning Board to ensure compliance with
this chapter.
      (6)   Maintenance plan.
         a.   Equipment inspections and maintenance. The applicant shall detail
inspection and maintenance procedures that will be taken to keep the SEF
operating quietly, efficiently, and not polluting land, water, or air;
         b.   Fence maintenance. The applicant shall detail inspection and
maintenance procedures that will be taken to keep fencing and gates in good
condition until the facility is decommissioned;
         c.   Landscaping. The applicant shall detail inspection and
maintenance procedures that will be taken to keep the required vegetative
buffer and planting area maintained, including keeping vegetation healthy,
neat, and orderly in appearance, and free of litter and debris. The applicant
shall detail maintenance procedures for keeping grasses or other ground cover
trimmed or mowed; and
         d.   Road maintenance. The applicant shall detail inspection and
maintenance procedures that will be taken to keep private roads and driveways
serving the SEF graded, free of potholes, and passable in all weather.
      (7)   Abandonment and decommissioning plan.
         a.   Abandonment. An SEF that ceases to produce energy on a continuous
basis for 12 months will be considered abandoned unless the current responsible
party (or parties) with ownership interest in the SEF provide substantial
evidence (updated every six months after 12 months of no energy production) to
the County Planner of the intent to maintain and reinstate the operation of
that facility. It is the responsibility of the responsible party (or parties)
to remove all equipment and facilities and restore the parcel to its condition
prior to development of the SEF.
            1.   Upon determination of abandonment, the County Planner shall
notify the party (or parties) responsible they must remove the SEF and restore
the site to its condition prior to development of the SEF within 365 days of
notice by the County Planner; and
            2.   If the responsible party (or parties) fails to comply, the
County Planner may remove the SEF, sell any removed materials, and restore the
site to the condition it was in prior to development of the SEF, using the
performance guarantee provided by divisions b. and c. below. If necessary, the
County Planner may initiate judicial proceedings or take any other steps
legally authorized against the responsible parties to recover the costs
required to remove the SEF and restore the site to the condition prior to
development.
         b.   Decommissioning plan. A decommissioning plan signed by the party
responsible for decommissioning and the property owner addressing the following
shall be submitted with the permit application:
            1.   Anticipated life of the SEF;
            2.   Defined conditions upon which decommissioning will be
initiated (for example, end of land lease, no power production for 12 months,
and the like);
            3.   Removal of all non-utility owned equipment, conduit,
structures, fencing, solar panels, roads, and foundations;
            4.   Restoration of the property to the condition prior to
development of the SEF;
            5.   Time frame for completion of decommissioning activities, not
to exceed one year;
            6.   Description and copy of any lease or other agreement with the
property owner regarding decommissioning;
            7.   Name and address of the person or party responsible for
decommissioning;
            8.   Plans and schedule for updating the decommissioning plan;
            9.   A verifiable means of determining if the decommissioning plan
needs to be activated due to cessation of use for 365 days, such as a letter
from the electric utility stating that it will notify the Planning Department
within ten business days if electricity is not received from an array within
the SEF for 365 days;
            10.   Before the final solar energy facility development permit is
issued, provide evidence that the decommissioning plan was recorded with the
Register of Deeds to the County Planner or his/her designee; and
            11.   Estimated decommissioning costs including contingency costs
of at least 25% (in current dollars), as provided by an appropriately
experienced, state-licensed engineer, under seal.
         c.   Performance guarantee.
            1.   Prior to the issuance of a solar energy facility development
permit, the applicant must provide the county with a form of surety equal to
125% of the entire cost of decommissioning under the plan, as estimated by a
state-licensed engineer under seal, approved by the County Manager and County
Attorney, either through cash, a surety performance bond, irrevocable letter of
credit, or other instrument readily convertible into cash at face value, either
with the county or in escrow with a financial institution designated as an
official depository of the county. Surety performance bonds must renew
automatically, include a minimum 90-day notice to the county prior to
cancellation, and be from a company on the U.S. Department of Treasury's
listing of certified companies. Irrevocable letters of credit must be for the
entire estimated life of the SEF.
            2.   This surety shall be retained by the county to cover the cost
of the decommissioning requirements herein. Following initial submittal of the
surety, the cost calculation for decommissioning shall be reviewed every five
years, and adjusted accordingly based upon an updated estimate of a state-
licensed engineer under seal, of the estimated decommissioning costs. Failure
to comply with any requirement of this section shall result in the immediate
termination and revocation of all prior approvals and permits; further, the
county shall be entitled to make immediate demand upon, and/or retain any
proceeds of, the surety, which shall be used for decommissioning and/or removal
of the solar energy facility, even if still operational.
(Ord. of 12-10-2025)
Sec. 26-06. Design standards.
   (a)   Setback and separation requirements.
      (1)   The fence which secures the SEFs improved areas shall be setback at
least 100 feet from all property lines and all public rights-of-way. Solar
arrays and other equipment shall be setback at least 25 feet from the interior
fence line of the SEF. SEFs shall be separated by a minimum distance of 300
feet from all residential, commercial, and institutional buildings, with the
exception of accessory buildings such as storage sheds. Such minimum setbacks
for a SEF shall be measured from the required fence of the facility.
      (2)   The property owner of an affected building may, for itself but not
on behalf of another protected building, waive all or any portion of the
separation requirements set forth herein. The 100 foot setback distance from
all property lines and all public rights-of-way would still apply in the event
of a waiver. Said waiver shall be in writing and shall be in the form of an
easement, with the SEF as the servient estate, and the protected building as
the dominant estate. The waiver/easement shall state any conditions or site
plan modifications to the regulated use mutually agreed upon by the SEF, the
owner of the protected building, and the County Planner, as consideration for
the granting of the easement. In no event shall any conditions or site plan
modifications decrease the SEF’s responsibilities under this chapter. The
waiver shall be signed and acknowledged by the record owners of the fee
interest of the protected building, and by the owner of the fee interest of the
SEF, and, if different, by all of the property owners of the property on which
the SEF is located. The waiver shall further be signed by the County Planner,
whose signature shall serve as a certification that the requirements of this
division have been met.
      (3)   Following recordation in the County Register of Deeds, the
separation requirements of this division between said protected building and
the SEF shall be deemed amended to conform to the provisions of the waiver. The
easement granted by said waiver shall be appurtenant to and run with the land
and shall be binding on the parties, their heirs, successors, and assigns;
provided, that the same shall by its express provisions terminate at such time
as the SEF ceases to have a valid development permit for the operation of the
SEF which is the subject of the waiver.
   (b)   Fencing. A fence shall be required around the entire perimeter of the
SEF to secure its improved areas. The location of the fence shall be determined
by the required setbacks and separation requirements outlined in division (a).
All solar arrays and other equipment must be located inside the required fence.
The fence must be a minimum of six feet in height and shall be constructed of
chain link. Angled barbed wire shall run along the top of the fence for the
entire perimeter of the fence for security purposes. The gate for ingress and
egress to the SEF must be locked for security purposes.
   (c)   Vegetative buffer.
      (1)   A vegetative buffer shall be installed in front of the fence within
the required setback of the SEF for the entire perimeter of the SEF other than
sections buffered by woodlands. The vegetative buffer shall consist of a row of
evergreen bushes, planted no more than eight feet apart, which are at least six
feet tall at the time of planting, and which will reach at maturity a minimum
height of 15 feet within three years of planting. The bushes may be trimmed,
but to no lower than a height of 15 feet.
      (2)   The evergreen bushes must provide full screening from two feet
above ground level to the required 15 foot height. The evergreen bushes must
grow to a minimum of eight feet in width at the base, or the spacing between
bushes must be reduced.
      (3)   The evergreen bushes should be installed according to established
planting techniques, including establishing a well-prepared planting area. The
vegetative buffer must be maintained, including keeping vegetation healthy,
neat, and orderly in appearance, and free of litter and debris. Species native
to Eastern North Carolina are recommended. Where adequate vegetative screening
exists on the parcel where the SEF is located, the existing vegetative buffer
may be used to satisfy the requirements of this section, with the approval of
the Planning Board.
   (d)   Ground cover. Soil with adequate vegetative cover must be maintained
under and around the panels in order to reduce runoff and erosion. Native
grasses and wildflowers are encouraged to be used as ground cover for the SEF.
Benefits of using native grasses and wildflowers include improved erosion
control, pesticide avoidance, stormwater infiltration, wildlife habitat, and
reduced overall maintenance. In addition, native flowering plants provide a
food source and habitat for wild native bees. Promoting habitat for native bees
and other pollinators can have a positive ecological impact on disturbed sites,
as well as a positive economic impact on neighboring insect pollinated crops.
Once established, these naturalized meadows are more drought tolerant and
require little to no fertilization. See the North Carolina Wildlife Resources
Commission's publication titled, "Recommendations for Establishing Native
Pollinator Habitat on Solar Farms in North Carolina" for more details.
   (e)   Environmental impacts. SEFs must meet all requirements of the state
and the federal government, and provide copies of all required state and
federal permits, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Stormwater permit from the State Department of Environmental
Quality;
      (2)   Erosion and sedimentation control permit from the State Department
of Environmental Quality;
      (3)   Certificate of public convenience and necessity from the State
Utilities Commission; and
      (4)   Section 404 wetlands permit from U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
where applicable.
   (f)   Roads. The minimum right-of-way width of private roads and driveways
serving the SEF shall be 50 feet. Private roads and driveways shall be
constructed to meet all of the North Carolina Department of Transportation's
(NC DOT) design standards, except for applying crushed stone for paving. A
driveway permit must be obtained from NC DOT, and a copy of said permits shall
be provided to the Planning Board. The SEF owner shall be responsible for road
maintenance, including keeping roads and driveways serving the SEF graded, free
of potholes, and passable in all weather.
   (g)   Lighting and electrical emissions. The design and construction of SEFs
shall not produce light emissions, either direct or indirect (reflective), that
would interfere with pilot vision and/or traffic control operations as stated
in the most recent Air Installation Compatible Use Zone (AICUZ) report, as well
as low level military training routes as then utilized by any branch of the
U.S. Department of Defense. The design and construction of SEFs shall not
produce electrical emissions that would interfere with aircraft communication
systems or navigation equipment as stated in the most recent AICUZ report, as
well as low level military training routes as then utilized by any branch of
the U.S. Department of Defense.
   (h)   Power lines. On-site power lines between solar panels and inverters
shall be placed underground and must meet all requirements of the North
Carolina Electrical Code.
   (i)   Solar panel height. The height of solar panels shall not exceed the
height of the required vegetative buffer, as identified in division (c).
(Ord. of 12-10-2025)
Sec. 26-07. Permit fees.
   A non-refundable application fee of $500 shall be submitted with each
application for a solar energy development permit.
(Ord. of 12-10-2025)
Sec. 26-08. Planning Board decision.
   (a)   Public hearing. The input of local citizens shall be solicited by the
Planning Board in at least one public hearing on the permit application.
   (b)   Approval. In order for the Planning Board to grant a solar energy
facility development permit, all the requirements of this chapter must be
satisfied. The Planning Board shall have the authority to decide, based on
majority vote, whether to grant approval of a solar energy facility development
permit.
   (c)   Expiration of approval. A solar energy facility development permit
shall expire if construction has not begun within 365 days of issuance of the
permit. A solar energy facility development permit shall automatically expire
if there are any changes in ownership, cessation of the corporation,
partnership, or transfer to another person. In this case, the new SEF owner(s)
shall have 60 days to submit a new permit application meeting the requirements
of §
26-05 of this chapter. (Ord. of 12-10-2025)
Sec. 26-09. Appeals.
   (a)   Ability to appeal. Any aggrieved SEF owner or developer may file an
appeal to the Board of Commissioners relating to the interpretation or
application of this chapter.
   (b)   Time limit and notice. Any appeal must be filed within 45 days of the
decision. Written notice which states the basis or grounds for appeal shall be
provided to the Clerk to the Board or the County Manager.
   (c)   Public meeting. The appeal shall be heard during a regular meeting of
the Board of Commissioners within 90 days of the receipt of the appeal notice.
   (d)   Decision. Appeals shall be decided by majority vote of the Board of
Commissioners. The Board shall provide a written decision regarding the appeal
which includes findings of fact, rationale for the decision, and a summary of
evidence or testimony presented. The burden of providing substantial evidence
or testimony is upon the person or entity who filed the appeal.
(Ord. of 12-10-2025)
Sec. 26-10. Variances.
   A variance from the provisions of this chapter may be authorized by the
Planning Board, provided that all of the following criteria are met:
   (a)   Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of this
chapter. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of the
variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property;
   (b)   The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from
personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are
common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for
granting a variance;
   (c)   The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or
property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that
circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be
regarded as a self-created hardship; and
   (d)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and
intent of this chapter, such that public safety is secured and substantial
justice is achieved.
(Ord. of 12-10-2025)
Sec. 26-11. Enforcement and remedies for violations.
   (a)   Enforcement. The enforcement officer shall be the County Planner or
his/her designee. The enforcement officer shall review site plans and make
appropriate recommendations to the Planning Board. The enforcement officer
shall also visit the SEFs regulated by this chapter as needed, and if the
facility does not conform to this chapter, shall discuss with the SEF owner
and/or SEF operator the steps needed to bring the SEF into compliance. If these
steps are not taken, the enforcement officer shall notify the SEF owner in
writing of the steps that must be taken to bring the facility into compliance.
If the SEF owner or SEF operator still fails to bring the facility into
compliance with this chapter, the enforcement officer, after consultation with
the County Manager, shall initiate the necessary steps to enforce this chapter
in accordance with §
26-13. The enforcement officer shall also assist the SEF owners and/or SEF
operators in making plans to comply with this chapter.
   (b)   Remedies. This chapter may be enforced by an appropriate equitable
remedy issued from a court of competent jurisdiction. It may be enforced by
injunction and order of abatement. The county may apply for a mandatory or
prohibitory injunction and order of abatement commanding the violator to
correct any unlawful condition upon or cease the unlawful use of the property.
The county may request an order of abatement as part of a judgment in the case,
and may request the court to close, demolish, or remove buildings or other
structures or take any other action that is necessary to bring the SEF into
compliance with this chapter. This chapter may be enforced by any one or more
of the remedies authorized herein.
(Ord. of 12-10-2025)
Sec. 26-12. Applicability.
   This chapter shall apply to all SEFs proposed or constructed after its
effective date. Modifications to an existing SEF that increases the area by
more than 20% of the original footprint or changes the solar panel type shall
be subject to this chapter. This chapter shall apply to all areas of the county
except those lands lying within the jurisdiction of any municipality, unless
such municipality formally requests the county enforce these regulations within
the municipality's area of jurisdiction.
(Ord. of 12-10-2025)
Sec. 26-13. Penalty.
   (a)   Violation shall be a misdemeanor. Any person, firm, corporation, or
other entity who constructs, maintains, or operates, or who controls the
maintenance of a SEF in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to prosecution, and if convicted, shall be punished by
a fine not to exceed $500, or by imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both,
in the discretion of the court.
   (b)   Each day that said SEF is constructed, maintained, or operated in
violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. of 12-10-2025)
Appendix A
AIRPORT HEIGHT 1
AIRPORT HEIGHT ORDINANCE
MARTIN COUNTY, NORTH CAROLINA
   An ordinance regulating and restricting the height of structures and objects
of natural growth, and otherwise regulating the use of property, in the
vicinity of the Martin County Airport by creating the appropriate zones and
establishing the boundaries thereof; providing for changes in the restrictions
and boundaries of such zones; defining certain terms used herein; referring to
the Martin County Airport Height Ordinance Map which is incorporated in and
made a part of this ordinance; providing for enforcement; establishing a Board
of Appeals; and imposing penalties.
   This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by the Martin
County Board of Commissioners. It is hereby found that an obstruction has the
potential for endangering the lives and property of users of the Martin County
Airport, and property or occupants of land in its vicinity; that an obstruction
may affect existing and future instrument approach minimums of the Martin
County Airport; and that an obstruction may reduce the size of areas available
for the landing, takeoff, and maneuvering of aircraft, thus tending to destroy
or impair the utility of the Martin County Airport and the public investment
therein. Accordingly, it is declared:
      1.   That the creation or establishment of an obstruction has the
potential of being a public nuisance and may injure the region served by the
Martin County Airport;
      2.   That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, public
safety, and the general welfare that the creation or establishment of
obstructions that are a hazard to air navigation be prevented; and,
      3.   That the prevention of these obstructions should be accomplished, to
the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without
compensation.
   This ordinance repeals all prior airport zoning regulations in effect prior
to October 8, 2014. This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, annul,
impair or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements, rules, regulations, or permits previously adopted or issued
pursuant to law. Whenever regulations imposed by this ordinance are less
restrictive than regulations imposed by any governmental authority through
regulations, rule or restriction, the regulations imposed by that authority
shall govern. Regardless of any other provisions, no land shall be developed or
used, and no structure shall be erected or maintained in violation of any state
or federal regulations.
   It is further declared that the prevention of the creation or establishment
of hazards to air navigation, the elimination, removal, alteration or
mitigation of hazards to air navigation, or the marking and lighting of
obstructions are public purposes for which a political subdivision may raise
and expend public funds and acquire land or interests in land.
   It is hereby ordained by the County of Martin as follows:
 
Notes
  Editor's note(s)—Ord. of 10-8-2014(1) Editor's note(s)—, adopted October 8, 2014,
  repealed the former Appendix A, §§ 1—16, and enacted a new Appendix A as set out
  herein. The former Appendix A pertained to the county airport zoning ordinance
  adopted July 31, 1971. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.
  Editor's note(s)—Printed herein is the airport height ordinance adopted October 8,
  2014. Obvious misspellings and punctuation errors have been corrected without
1 notation. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets.
  Federal law references—Preservation of local zoning authority concerning wireless
  telecommunications facilities, 47 USC 322(c)(7); limited federal preemption of
  state and local zoning laws affecting amateur radio facilities, Memorandum Opinion
  and Order, PRB-1, 101 FCC 2d 952 (1985) and 47 CFR 97.15(b); Religious Land Use
  and Institutionalized Persons Act, 42 USC 2000cc et seq.
  State law reference(s)—Grant of zoning power to counties, G.S. 153A-340; zoning
  regulations for manufactured housing, G.S. 153A-341.1.
SECTION I. SHORT TITLE
   This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Martin County Airport
Height Ordinance.
(Ord. of 10-8-2014(1))
SECTION II. DEFINITIONS
   As used in this Ordinance, unless the context otherwise requires:
      1.   AIRPORT—Shall refer to the Martin County Airport.
      2.   AIRPORT ELEVATION—The highest point of an airport's usable landing
area measured in feet from sea level. The Martin County Airport elevation
equals seventy-six (76) feet above mean sea level (MSL).
      3.   APPROACH SURFACE—A surface longitudinally centered on the extended
runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary
surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set
forth in Section IV of this Ordinance. In plan the perimeter of the approach
surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
      4.   APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL, CONICAL, AND AIRPORT PROTECTION
ZONES—These zones are set forth in Section III of this Ordinance.
      5.   BOARD OF APPEALS—A Board consisting of five (5) members appointed by
the Martin County Commissioners as provided in NCGS 63-33(c). The Martin County
Airport Commission and the Airport Manager will serve as the Board of Appeals
of the Martin County Airport.
      6.   CONICAL SURFACE—A surface extending outward and upward from the
periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal
distance of four thousand (4,000) feet.
      7.   ENFORCEMENT OFFICER shall mean an individual with authority to
enforce this ordinance, either the County Manager or his designee.
      8.   HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION—An obstruction determined to have a
substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the
navigable airspace.
      9.   HEIGHT—For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones
set forth in this Ordinance and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be
mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
      10.   HORIZONTAL SURFACE—A horizontal plane one hundred fifty (150) feet
above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan
coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
      11.   MSL—Mean Sea Level.
      12.   NONCONFORMING USE—Any pre-existing structure, object of natural
growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this
Ordinance or an amendment thereto.
      13.   NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY—A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in
nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned.
      14.   OBSTRUCTION—Any structure, growth, or other object, including a
mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in Section IV of this
Ordinance.
      15.   PERSON—An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint stock association, or governmental entity; includes a
trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar representative or any of them.
      16.   PRIMARY SURFACE—A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When
the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends
two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or
when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard
surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the
primary surface is set forth in Section III of this Ordinance. The elevation of
any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest
point on the runway centerline.
      17.   RUNWAY—A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and take-
off of aircraft along its length.
      18.   STRUCTURE—An object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by man, including but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes,
smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines.
      19.   TRANSITIONAL SURFACES—These surfaces extend outward at ninety (90)
degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a
slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of
the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and
conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision
approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical
surface, extend a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet measured horizontally
from the edge of the approach surface and at ninety (90) degree angles to the
extended runway centerline.
      20.   TREE—Any object of natural growth.
(Ord. of 10-8-2014(1))
SECTION III. AIRPORT ZONES
   In order to carry out the provisions of this Ordinance, there are hereby
created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying
beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces, and
conical surfaces as they apply to the Martin County Airport. Such zones are
shown on the Martin County Airport Height Ordinance Map consisting of one (1)
sheet, prepared by MICHAEL BAKER ENGINEERING, INC., and dated September, 2011,
which is attached to this Ordinance and made a part hereof. An area located in
more than one (1) of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone
with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby
established and defined as follows:
      1.   Approach Zone (AHD-A).
         a.   Runway 3—The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the
width of the primary surface and is five hundred (500) feet wide. The approach
zone expands outward uniformly to a width of three thousand five hundred
(3,500) feet at a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet from the
primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the
runway.
         b.   Runway 21—The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the
width of the primary surface and is five hundred (500) feet wide. The approach
zone expands outward uniformly to a width of three thousand five hundred
(3,500) feet at a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet from the
primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the
runway.
      2.   Transitional Zone (AHD-T). The transitional zones are the areas
beneath the transitional surfaces.
      3.   Horizontal Zone (AHD-H). The horizontal zone is established by
swinging arcs of ten thousand (10,000) feet radii from the center of each end
of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by
drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the
approach and transitional zones.
      4.   Conical Zone (AHD-C). The conical zone is established as the area
that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward to a
height of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation.
      5.   Airport Protection Zone (AHD-P). The airport protection zone is
established at an elevation of four hundred twenty-six (426) feet above mean
sea level.
(Ord. of 10-8-2014(1))
SECTION IV. AIRPORT ZONE HEIGHT LIMITATIONS
   Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, no structure shall be
erected, altered, or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any
zone created by this Ordinance to a height in excess of the applicable height
limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are
hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows:
      1.   Approach Zone (AHD-A).
         a.   Runway 3—Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and
extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet along the
extended runway centerline.
         b.   Runway 21—Slopes thirty-four (34) feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface
and extending to a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet along the
extended runway centerline.
      2.   Transitional Zone (AHD-T). Slopes seven (7) feet outward for each
foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary
surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of one hundred
fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation which is seventy-six (76) feet
above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established
height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at
the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending
to where they intersect the conical surface.
      3.   Horizontal Zone (AHD-H). Established at one hundred fifty (150) feet
above the airport elevation or at a height of two hundred twenty-six (226) feet
above mean sea level.
      4.   Conical Zone (AHD-C). Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone at one hundred (150)
feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred
fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation.
      5.   Airport Protection Zone (AHD-P). Established at an elevation of
three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation to a height of four
hundred twenty-six (426) feet above mean sea level and extending outside the
conical zone throughout the county.
      6.   Excepted Height Limitations. Nothing in the Ordinance shall be
construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or
growth of any tree to a height up to one hundred (100) feet above the surface
of the land.
(Ord. of 10-8-2014(1))
SECTION V. USE RESTRICTIONS
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, no use may be made
of land or water within any zone established by this Ordinance in such a manner
as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to
distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of
pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport,
create bird strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with
the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
(Ord. of 10-8-2014(1))
SECTION VI. NONCONFORMING USES
   1.   Regulations Not Retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this
Ordinance shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other
change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations
as of the effective date of this Ordinance, or otherwise interfere with the
continuance of nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any
change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the
construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of
this Ordinance, and is diligently prosecuted.
   2.   Marking and Lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this
Section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby
required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such
markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Enforcement Officer to
indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the
presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be
installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the County of Martin.
(Ord. of 10-8-2014(1))
SECTION VII. PERMITS
   1.   Future Uses. Except as specifically provided in a, b, and c hereunder,
no material change shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be
erected or otherwise established, and no tree shall be planted in any zone
hereby created unless a permit therefore shall have been applied for and
granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the
permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined
whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations
herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit
shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be granted unless a variance has been approved in accordance
with Section VII, 4.
      a.   In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and
conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than
one hundred (100) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when,
because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, such tree or
structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones.
      b.   In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a
horizontal distance of not less than four thousand two hundred (4,200) feet
from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than one hundred (100) feet of vertical height above the ground,
except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit
prescribed for such approach zones.
      c.   In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond
the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree
or structure less than one hundred (100) feet of vertical height above the
ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour,
or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for
such transition zones.
   Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as
permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration of any
structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits
established by this Ordinance except as set forth in Section IV, 6.
   2.   Existing Uses. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming use,
structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation that it was on
the effective date of this Ordinance or any amendments thereto or than it is
when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all
applications for such a permit shall be granted.
   3.   Nonconforming Uses Abandoned or Destroyed. Whenever the Enforcement
Officer determines that a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or
more than eighty (80) percent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed,
no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed
the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations.
   4.   Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any
structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use property, not in accordance
with the regulations prescribed in this Ordinance, may apply to the Board of
Appeals for a variance from such regulations. The application for variance
shall be accompanied by a determination from the Federal Aviation
Administration as to the effect of the proposal on the operation of air
navigation facilities and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Such
variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or
enforcement of the regulations will result in unnecessary hardship and relief
grant, will not be contrary to the public interest, will not create a hazard to
air navigation, will do substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the
spirit of this Ordinance. Additionally, no application for variance to the
requirements of this Ordinance may be considered by the Board of Appeals unless
a copy of the application has been furnished to the Federal Aviation
Administration and the North Carolina Division of Aviation for advice as to the
aeronautical effects of the variance. If the Federal Aviation Administration or
the North Carolina Division of Aviation does not respond to the application
within sixty (60) days after receipt, the Board of Appeals may act on its own
to grant or deny said application.
   5.   Obstruction Marking and Lighting. Any permit or variance granted may,
if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this Ordinance
and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the
owner of the structure or tree in question to install, operate, and maintain,
at the owner's expense, such markings and lights as may be necessary. If deemed
proper by the Board of Appeals, this condition may be modified to require the
owner to permit the County of Martin, at its own expense, to install, operate,
and maintain the necessary markings and lights.
(Ord. of 10-8-2014(1))
SECTION VIII. ENFORCEMENT
   It shall be the duty of the Enforcement Officer to administer and enforce
the regulations prescribed herein. Applications for permits and variances shall
be made to the Enforcement Officer upon a form published for that purpose.
Applications required by this Ordinance to be submitted to the Enforcement
Officer shall be promptly considered and granted or denied. Application for
action by the Board of Appeals shall be forthwith transmitted by the
Enforcement Officer.
(Ord. of 10-8-2014(1))
SECTION IX. BOARD OF APPEALS
   1.   There is hereby created a Board of Appeals to have an exercise the
following powers: (1) to hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by the Enforcement Officer in the enforcement
of this Ordinance; (2) to hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of
this Ordinance upon which such Board of Appeals under such regulations may be
required to pass; and (3) to hear and decide specific variances.
   2.   The Board of Appeals shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the
Martin County Commissioners and each shall serve for a term of three (3) years
until a successor is duly appointed and qualified. Of the members first,
appointed, one (1) shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, two (2) for a
term of two (2) years, and two (2) for a term of three (3) years. Members shall
be removable by the appointing authority for cause, upon written charges, after
a public hearing.
   3.   The Board of Appeals shall adopt rules for its governance in harmony
with the provisions of this Ordinance. Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall
be held at the call of the Chairperson and at such other times as the Board of
Appeals may determine. The Chairperson or, in the absence of the Chairperson,
the Acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All hearings of the Board of Appeals shall be public. The Board of
Appeals shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member
upon each question; or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which
shall immediately be filed in the office of the Enforcement Officer and on due
cause shown.
   4.   The Board of Appeals shall make written findings of facts and
conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal
conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order,
requirements, decision, or determination which comes before it under the
provisions of this Ordinance.
   5.   The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the Board of
Appeals shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Enforcement Officer or decide in favor of the applicant on
any matter upon which it is required to pass under this Ordinance, or to effect
variation to this Ordinance.
(Ord. of 10-8-2014(1))
SECTION X. APPEALS
   1.   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the
Enforcement Officer made in the administration of the Ordinance, may appeal to
the Board of Appeals.
   2.   All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as
provided by the rules of the Board of Appeals, by filing with the Enforcement
Officer a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The Enforcement
Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Appeals all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
   3.   An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from unless the Enforcement Officer certifies to the Board of Appeals,
after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts
stated in the certificate a stay would in the opinion of Enforcement Officer
cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not
be stayed except by the order of the Board of Appeals on notice to the
Enforcement Officer and on due cause shown.
   4.   The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals,
give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the
same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person
or by agent or by attorney.
   5.   The Board of Appeals may, in conformity with the provisions of this
Ordinance, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision, or determination as may be appropriate under the
circumstances.
(Ord. of 10-8-2014(1))
SECTION XI. JUDICIAL REVIEW
   Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected, by any decision of the Board
of Appeals, may appeal to Superior Court as provided in NCGS 160A-393.
(Ord. of 10-8-2014(1))
SECTION XII. PENALTIES
   Each violation of this Ordinance or of any regulation, order, or ruling
promulgated hereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by
a fine of not more than two hundred ($200.00) dollars; and each day a violation
continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. of 10-8-2014(1))
SECTION XIII. CONFLICTING REGULATIONS
   Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this Ordinance and any other regulations applicable to the same
area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or
trees, and the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation
or requirement shall govern and prevail.
(Ord. of 10-8-2014(1))
SECTION XIV. SEVERABILITY
   If any of the provisions of this Ordinance or the application thereof to any
person or circumstances are held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect
other provisions or applications of the Ordinance which can be given effect
without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions
of this Ordinance are declared to be severable.
(Ord. of 10-8-2014(1))
SECTION XV. EFFECTIVE DATE
   Whereas, the immediate operation of the provisions of this Ordinance is
necessary for the preservation of the public health, public safety, and general
welfare, an EMERGENCY is hereby declared to exist, and this Ordinance shall be
in full force and effect from and after its passage by the Martin County
Commissioners and publication and posting as required by law. Adopted by the
Martin County Commissioners this 8th day of October, 2014.
(Ord. of 10-8-2014(1))
Martin County Height Restrictions Map
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b7b733c2dc5146cfde2246972d63e0f001e6376f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-743.png]
 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE
ORDINANCES
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of the county used in this
Code. Repealed or superseded laws at the time of the Codification and any
omitted materials are not reflected in the table.
Ordinance Number Date Section Section this Code
Ordinance Number      Date       Section     Section this Code
—                   7-23-1971  One         App. A, § One
                                 Two         App. A, § Two 
                                 Three       App. A, § Three 
                                 Four        App. A, § Four 
                                 Five        App. A, § Five 
                                 Six         App. A, § Six 
                                 Seven       App. A, § Seven 
                                 Eight       App. A, § Eight 
                                 Nine        App. A, § Nine 
                                 Ten         App. A, § Ten 
                                 Eleven      App. A, § Eleven 
                                 Twelve      App. A, § Twelve 
                                 Thirteen    App. A, § Thirteen 
                                 Fourteen    App. A, § Fourteen 
                                 Fifteen     App. A, § Fifteen 
                                 Sixteen     App. A, § Sixteen
1976-1                11-1-1976  1           16-19
                                 2           16-20
                                 3           16-21
                                 4           16-22
1985-1                10-7-1985  1.5         6-1
                                 1.6         6-2
                                 1.7         6-3
                                 2.1         6-27
                                 2.2         6-28
                                 2.2.2       6-29
                                 2.3         6-30
                                 3.1.1       6-49
                                 3.1.2       6-50
                                 3.1.3       6-51
                                 3.1.4       6-52
                                 3.1.5       6-53
                                 3.1.6       6-54
                                 3.1.7       6-55
                                 3.1.8       6-56
                                 3.2         6-57
                                 3.3         6-58
                                 3.4         6-59
                                 4.1         6-77
                                 4.2         6-78
                                 4.3         6-79
                                 4.4         6-80
                                 4.5         6-81
                                 4.6         6-82
                                 5.1         6-108
                                 5.2         6-109
                                 5.3         6-110
                                 5.4         6-111
                                 6.1         6-136
                                 6.2         6-137
                                 6.3         6-138
                                 art. VII    6-160
                                 8.1         6-187
                                 8.2         6-188
                                 8.3         6-189
                                 8.4         6-190
                                 8.5         6-191
1988-1                1-13-1988  I           4-1
                                 II          4-2
                                 III         4-3
                                 IV          4-4
                                 V           4-5
                                 VI          4-6
                                 VII         4-7
                                 VIII        4-8
                                 IX          4-9
                                 X           4-10
                                 XI          4-11
                                 XII         4-12
                                 XIII        4-13
                                 XIV         4-14
                                 XV          4-15
                                 XVI         4-16
                                 XVII        4-17
                                 XVIII       4-18
                                 XIX         4-19
                                 XX          4-20
                                 XXI         4-21
                                 XXII        4-22
                                 XXIII       4-23
                                 XXIV        4-24
                                 XXV         4-25
                                 XXVI        4-26
                                 XXVII       4-27
                                 XXVIII      4-28
                                 XXIX        4-29
                                 XXX         4-30
                                 XXXI        4-31
1988-2                3-1-1988   1           8-1
                                 2           8-2
                                 3           8-3
                                 4           8-4
                                 5           8-5
                                 6           8-6
                                 7           8-7
                                 8           8-8
                                 10          8-9
1988-3                3-1-1988   1           8-37
                                 2           8-38
                                 3           8-39
                                 4           8-40
                                 5           8-41
                                 6           8-42
                                 7           8-43
                                 8           8-44
                                 9           8-45
                                 10          8-46
                                 11          8-47
                                 12          8-48
                                 13          8-49
                                 15          8-50
1988-9                11-7-1988  1           18-119
                                 2           18-120
                                 3           18-121
                                 4           18-122
                                 5           18-123
                                 6           18-124
                                 8           18-125
1989-1                1-18-1989  1           2-85
                                 2           2-86
                                 3           2-87
                                 4           2-88
                                 5           2-89
                                 6           2-90
1989-3                10-2-1989  I           4-1
                                 II          4-2
                                 III         4-3
                                 IV          4-4
                                 V           4-5
                                 VI          4-6
                                 VII         4-7
                                 VIII        4-8
                                 IX          4-9
                                 X           4-10
                                 XI          4-11
                                 XII         4-12
                                 XIII        4-13
                                 XIV         4-14
                                 XV          4-15
                                 XVI         4-16
                                 XVII        4-17
                                 XVIII       4-18
                                 XIX         4-19
                                 XX          4-20
                                 XXI         4-21
                                 XXII        4-22
                                 XXIII       4-23
                                 XXIV        4-24
                                 XXV         4-25
                                 XXVI        4-26
                                 XXVII       4-27
                                 XXVIII      4-28
                                 XXIX        4-29
                                 XXX         4-30
                                 XXXI        4-31
1991-2                6-3-1991   1           2-109
                                 2           2-110
                                 3           2-111
                                 4           2-112
                                 5           2-113
                                 6           2-114
1993-5                5-19-1993  01          6-223
                                 02          6-224
                                 03          6-225
                                 04          6-226
                                 05          6-227
                                 06          6-228
                                 07          6-229
                                 08          6-230
                                 09          6-231
                                 10          6-232
                                 11          6-233
                                 12          6-234
                                 13          6-235
                                 14          6-236
                                 15          6-237
                                 17          6-238
                                 18          6-239
                                 19          6-240
                                 20          6-241
                                 21          6-242
1994-5                7-13-1994  1.1         18-1
                                 2.1         18-2
                                 3.1         18-3
                                 4.1         18-26
                                 4.2         18-27
                                 4.3         18-28
                                 5.1         18-60
                                 5.2         18-61
                                 5.3         18-62
                                 5.4         18-63
                                 5.5         18-64
                                 5.6         18-65
                                 5.7         18-66
                                 6.1         18-91
                                 6.2         18-92
                                 6.3         18-93
                                 6.5         18-94
2000-3                8-14-2000  1           22-19
                                 2           22-20
                                 3           22-21
                                 4           22-22
                                 5           22-23
                                 6           22-24
2001-8                9-12-2001  1           20-19
                                 2           20-20
                                 3           20-21
                                 4           20-22
                                 5           20-23
                                 6           20-24
                                 7           20-25
                                 8           20-26
                                 9           20-27
                                 10          20-28
                                 11          20-29—
                                             20-32 
2001-9-1              10-10-2001 1           4-81
                                 2           4-82
                                 3           4-83
                                 4           4-84
                                 5           4-85
                                 6           4-86
                                 7           4-87
                                 8           4-88
                                 9           4-89
                                 10          4-90
2005-7                11-9-2005  1-100       10-20
                                 1-101       10-21
                                 1-102       10-22
                                 1-103       10-23
                                 1-104       10-24
                                 1-105       10-25
                                 1-106       10-26
                                 1-107       10-27
                                 1-108       10-28
                                 1-109       10-29
                                 1-110       10-30
                                 1-111       10-31
                                 1-112       10-32
                                 1-113       10-33
                                 1-114       10-34
                                 1-115       10-35
                                 1-116       10-36
                                 1-117       10-37
                                 1-118       10-38
                                 1-119       10-39
                                 1-120       10-40
                                 1-121       10-41
                                 1-122       10-42
                                 1-123       10-43
                                 1-124       10-44
                                 1-125       10-45
                                 1-126       10-46
2006-2                6-14-2006  1           4-86
                                 2           4-88
                                 3           4-90
2006-3                6-14-2006  1           18-1
                                 2           18-63
                                 3           18-64
2006-6                7-12-2006  1           20-24
                                 2           20-25
                                 3           20-27
2007-1                1-10-2007  1           4-86
                                 2           4-88
                                 3           4-90
2007-4                9-12-2007  art. 1, § A14-1
                                 art. 1, § B14-2
                                 art. 1, § C14-3
                                 art. 1, § D14-4
                                 art. 2      14-5
                                 art. 3, § A14-6
                                 art. 3, § B14-7
                                 art. 3, § C14-8
                                 art. 3, § D14-9
                                 art. 3, § E14-10
                                 art. 3, § F14-11
                                 art. 3, § G14-12
                                 art. 3, § H14-13
                                 art. 4, § A14-45
                                 art. 4, § B14-46
                                 art. 4, § C14-47
                                 art. 4, § D14-48
                                 art. 4, § E14-49
                                 art. 5, § A14-72
                                 art. 5, § B14-73
                                 art. 5, § D14-74
                                 art. 5, § E14-75
                                 art. 5, § F14-76
                                 art. 6, § A14-96
                                 art. 6, § B14-97
2008-2                5-14-2008  1           12-180
                                 2           12-181
                                 3           12-182
                                 4           12-183
                                 6           12-185
                                 7           12-186
                                 8           12-187
                                 9           12-188
                                 9.5         12-184
                                 10          12-189
                                 11          12-190
                                 12          12-191
2008-5                6-11-2008  I           4-51
                                 II          4-52
                                 III         4-53
                                 IV          4-54
                                 V           4-55
                                 VI          4-56
                                 VII         4-57
                                 VIII        4-58
                                 IX          4-59
                                 X           4-60
                                 XII         4-61
—                   10-8-2008              14-7
2011-01               11-9-2011  1           20-54
                                 2           20-55
                                 3           20-53
                                             20-56
2013-1                8-12-2012  1(1-113)    10-33
2014-1                8-14-2013  101         12-19
                                 102         12-20
                                 103         12-21
                                 104         12-22
                                 105         12-23
                                 106         12-24
                                 201         12-56
                                 202         12-57
                                 203         12-58
                                 204         12-59
                                 205         12-60
                                 301         12-79
                                 302         12-80
                                 303         12-81
                                 304         12-82
                                 305         12-83
                                 306         12-84
                                 307         12-85
                                 308         12-86
                                 309         12-87
                                 310         12-88
                                 401         12-120
                                 402         12-121
                                 501         12-141
                                 502         12-142
                                 503         12-143
                                 504         12-144
                                 505         12-145
                                 506         12-146
                                 507         12-147
                                 508         12-148
                                 601         12-25
                                 602         12-26
—                   6-11-2014              18-64
Ord. of 10-8-14(1)    10- 8-2014 Rpld        App. A, §§ 1—16
                                             App. A, §§
                                 Added       I—
                                             XV 
FY 2015-02            10- 8-2014 1—7       Adopting Ord., p. xiii
Ord. of 12-1-2014(1)  12- 1-2014             4-3
Ord. of 12-1-2014(2)  12- 1-2014 Rpld        ch. 18, §§ 18-1—18-3
                                             18-25—
                                             18-28 
                                             18-60—
                                             18-66 
                                             18-91—
                                             18-95 
                                             18-119—
                                             18-125 
                                             ch. 18, §§
                                 Added       18-1—
                                             18-3 
                                             18-25—
                                             18-28 
                                             18-60—
                                             18-67 
                                             18-91—
                                             18-95 
                                             18-119—
                                             18-125 
Ord. of 4-8-2015(1)   4- 8-2015              4-2,
                                             4-3
                                             4-5
                                             4-12
                                             4-14
                                             4-16,
                                             4-17
                                             4-25
                                             4-27
                                             4-29
                                             4-31
Ord. of 5-13-2015(1)  5-13-2015              4-3
                                             ch. 7, §§
Ord. of 5-13-2015(2)  5-13-2015  Added       7-21—
                                             7-23 
Ord. of 9-13-2017(1)  9-13-2017              10-20—
                                             10-27 
                                             10-29,
                                             10-30
                                             10-32—
                                             10-44 
                                 Dltd        10-45
                                 Rnbd        10-46
                                 as          10-45
Ord. of 08-08-2018(1) 8- 8-2018  IX Added    4-32
Ord. of 09-12-2018(1) 9-12-2018  1—4 Added 20-71—
                                             20-74 
                                             Ch. 20, §§
Ord. of 09-11-2019(1) 9-11-2019  1—4 Added 20-91—
                                             20-94 
Ord. of 09-09-2020(1) 9-9-2020   Added       20-115—
                                             20-121
                      8-9-2023   Added       16-23
                                             12-180—
                                             12-191
                                             20-19—
                                             20-32
                                             25-1 —
                                             25-3,
                                             25-11—
                                             25-17,
                                             25-31—
                                             25-38,
                                             25-51—
                                             25-58,
                                             25-71—
                                             25-74,
                      9-13-2023  Added       25-81—
                                             25-85,
                                             25-91—
                                             25-100,
                                             25-111—
                                             25-113,
                                             25-121—
                                             25-123,
                                             25-131—
                                             25-135,
                                             Appendix I
                      12-10-2025 Added       26-01—
                                             26-13
 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE
This table shows the location within this Code, either in the text or notes
following the text, of references to the North Carolina General Statutes.
G.S. Section Section this Code
G.S. Section                   Section this Code
1-593                          1-2 
1a-1, rule 6(a)                1-2 
ch. 7A                         14-49
7A-227, 7A-228                 6-236
14-4                           1-6
—                            4-31
—                            4-86
—                            6-239
—                            6-242
—                            7-23
—                            8-49
—                            12-23
—                            16-22
—                            20-74
14-269                         20-91
14-288.7                       8-42
14-288.8(c)(5)                 8-42
14-288.13                      Ch. 8 (note)
—                            8-37
14-288.17                      Ch. 8 (note)
14-360 et seq.                 4-3
14-401.13                      7-21
14-409.46                      Ch. 12, Art. III
15-27.2                        4-60
16A-19.21(b)                   8-3
ch. 20                         7-21
20-210.9                       20-116
20-219.10                      20-119
20-219.11                      20-119
—                            20-121
20-219.12                      20-121
20-219.13                      20-121
20-219.14                      20-121
ch. 25A-38—25A-42            7-21
ch. 29                         25-91
42-29, 42-30                   6-236
ch. 44A                        20-121
47-30                          12-56
ch. 63                         25-12
63-34                          25-135
63-35                          25-135
66-250—66-259                7-21
67-1A                          4-59
67-4.1(c)                      4-59
ch. 85B                        7-21
105-164.4(a)(3)                S.L. 2006-127, § 1
105-302                        12-181
105-312                        18-64
105-316                        25-111,
                               25-121
105-378                        S.L. 2011-111, § 2
105-381(a)(2), (3)             18-67
ch. 113, subch. IV             16-23
113A-50 et seq.                25-94
113A-52                        25-94
113A-110                       25-14
115D-21                        20-121
116-44.4                       20-121
116-229                        20-121
130-166.16 et seq.             Ch. 18 (note)
ch. 130A, art. 9               14-5
130A-185                       Ch. 4 (note)
130A-190                       Ch. 4 (note)
130A-196                       4-12
130A-290(a)(6)—130A-290(a)(3614-5
130A-309.09                    18-3
130A-309.09A                   Ch. 18 (note)
ch. 131E, art. 7               10-41
—                            10-42
—                            10-43
131E-155 et seq.               10-45
132-1                          22-21
136-18.3                       Ch. 18 (note)
136-97                         Ch. 20 (note)
ch. 143, art. 56               10-42
—                            10-43
143-136 et seq.                Ch. 6 (note)
143-143.15                     14-73
143-145(7)                     25-3
143-215.6(a)                   12-24
143-215.54(a)                  Ch. 14 (note)
143-215.54A                    Ch. 14 (note)
143-215.56(c)                  Ch. 14 (note)
143-215.57                     Ch. 14 (note)
143B-165                       10-20
ch. 153A                       6-223,
                               25-12
—                            6-236
—                            6-238
153A-11                        Ch. 2 (note)
153A-19                        Ch. 2 (note)
153A-23(d), (e)                4-31
153A-45, 153A-46               18-2
153A-46                        S.L. Ch. 1135
153A-49, 153A-50               Ch. 1 (note)
153A-76 et seq.                Ch. 2 (note)
153A-82                        Ch. 2 (note)
153A-94                        Ch. 2 (note)
153A-101, 153A-102             Ch. 2 (note)
153A-121                       Ch. 2 (note)
153A-121                       26-02
153A-121(a)                    4-81
153A-122                       18-3
153A-125                       7-21
153A-127                       Ch. 4 (note)
153A-129                       16-22
153A-132                       20-121
153A-132(a)                    20-115
153A-132(b)                    20-116
153A-133                       Ch. 12, Art. III
153A-136                       Ch. 18 (note)
—                            S.L. Ch. 1135
153A-149(c)(26)                Ch. 6 (note)
153A-149(c)(31)                Ch. 18 (note)
153A-155                       S.L. 2006-127, § 1
153A-155(g)                    S.L. 2006-127, § 2
153A-156                       22-19
153A-156(f)                    22-24
153A-238                       Ch. 20 (note)
153A-239.1                     Ch. 20 (note)
—                            20-19
—                            20-23
153A-250 et seq.               Ch. 10, Art. II
153A-292                       Ch. 18 (note)
—                            18-65
153A-293                       18-65
153A-309.2                     S.L. 2011-111, § 4
153A-340                       App. A (note)
153A-341.1                     App. A (note)
153A-344.1                     12-25
153A-368                       6-187
159-1 et seq.                  Ch. 2 (note)
160-520.3                      7-21
160A-76                        S.L. Ch. 1135
160A-175                       25-132
                               25-3,
ch. 160D                       25-12,
                               25-14,
                               25-51
160D-108                       25-16
160D-109                       25-32
160D-109(f)                    25-32
160D-301                       25-3
160D-404                       25-132
160D-406                       25-35
160D-501                       25-3
160D-601                       25-14
160D-605                       25-14
160D-702                       26-02
160D-802                       25-3
160D-802(a)(2)                 25-55
160D-910                       25-83
160D, article 10               25-3
160A-303                       20-121
160A-319                       S.L. Ch. 1135
160A-385.1                     12-25
160A-400.14(a)                 6-236
160A-441 et seq.               Ch. 6, Art. IX
166A-19 et seq.                Ch. 8 (note)
166A-19.15                     Ch. 8 (note)
166A-19.20                     8-3
166A-19.22                     8-3
—                            8-37
166A-19.31                     Ch. 8 (note)
168-21                         25-3
 
