MINNESOTT BEACH, NORTH CAROLINA
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-11 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 8-12-2025; and
State legislation current through North Carolina Legislative Service,
2025 Regular Session Laws, Pamphlet No. 2
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
CHARTER
NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL ASSEMBLY
1971 SESSION
CHAPTER 890
   HOUSE BILL 1460 AN ACT TO INCORPORATE THE TOWN OF MINNESOTT BEACH IN PAMLICO
COUNTY.
   Section 1. The community of Minnesott Beach in Pamlico County within the
boundaries hereinafter established is hereby incorporated under the name of the
Town of Minnesott Beach. The Town shall possess all powers and privileges given
to municipalities by the general laws of North Carolina and subject to all the
provisions of Chapter 160 of the General Statutes of North Carolina, except as
may be otherwise provided herein.
   Sec. 2. The corporate limits and boundaries of the Town of Minnesott Beach
in Number 5 Township, Pamlico County, shall be as follows:
In Number Five (5) Township, Pamlico County, BEGINNING at the intersection of
the centerlines of North Carolina Highway 306 and the Bennett Place Road
(Secondary Road 1121), and running westwardly along the centerline of the
Bennett Place Road to the southeast line of the lands of the George Boomer
Heirs; thence southwestwardly with said Boomer Heirs line to the southern
corner of the Boomer Heirs land the western corner of the Hardison Boomer and
Ganus land; thence southeastwardly with Herbert M. Harris, Jr.’s northeast line
about 1,100 feet to his eastern corner; thence southwardly with his east line
about 1,800 feet to Neuse River; thence southeastwardly with the River about
one mile to the Southern corner of the State Highway Commission’s ferry dock
site; thence northeastwardly with the northwest line of said ferry dock site to
the centerline of North Carolina Highway 306; thence northwardly with the
highway centerline to its intersection with the south line extended of W. Paul
Whitley’s lot, just north of the Camp Sea Gull gate; thence eastwardly to and
with said Whitley south line to said Whitley’s southeast corner in the west
line of the Camp Sea Gull property; thence northwardly along the Camp Sea Gull
west line and the east lines of the said Whitley, the G. C. Honeycutt, the
Hosea W. Cahoon, and the T. G. Wall lots to the northeast corner of the T. G.
Wall lot; thence westwardly with the Wall north line to the centerline of North
Carolina Highway 306; thence northwardly with said highway centerline to the
point of BEGINNING.
   In addition to the area defined immediately above, the corporate limits and
boundaries of the Town of Minnesott Beach shall include the following:
TRACT ONE: Beginning in the centerline of the Bennett Place Road (Secondary
Road 1121) and running northwestwardly along the northeast lines of the lands
of Minnesott Beach, Incorporated and the George Boomer heirs to the Boomer
north corner; thence southwestwardly along the northwestern line of the Boomer
heirs land to the western corner of said land; thence southeastwardly with the
southwestern line of said Boomer land to the western corner of the lands of
Minnesott Beach, Incorporated; thence northeastwardly with the northwestern
line of Minnesott Beach, Incorporated to the center line of the Bennett Place
Road; thence northeastwardly with said road center line to the point of
beginning.
TRACT TWO: Beginning in the edge of Neuse River at the southern corner of the
State Department of Transportation’s ferry dock site, and running
southeastwardly with the river to the corner of the lands of Raleigh Y.M.C.A.,
Inc.; thence northwardly along the western line of the lands of Raleigh
Y.M.C.A., Inc., to the corner of the State Department of Transportation’s ferry
dock site; thence southwestwardly with the line of said site to the point of
beginning.
   Any of the above described land heretofore annexed by the Town of Arapahoe
is withdrawn from the corporate limits of that town and included within the
corporate limits of the Town of Minnesott Beach.
(Amended by Chapter 988, House Bill 1731, ratified 3-14-1974)
   Sec 3. The Town shall operate under the council-manager form of government
in accordance with Part 2 of Article 7 of G. S. Chapter 150A and any charter
provisions not in conflict therewith.
(Ord. passed - -)
Cross-reference:
   Adopting Council-Manager form of government, see §
37.01
   Sec. 4. The initial officers of the Town shall be: Mayor, Otis Peele,
Commissioners, Garvin B. Hardison, John Harper, Herbert Purser, R. C.
Flannagan.
   Sec 5. The Initial meeting of the governing body of the Town shall be held
as soon as practicable following the enactment of this charter into law.
Regular and special meetings shall be held thereafter at a time and place fixed
by ordinance.
   Sec. 6. Taxes as authorized by law may be levied and collected by said Town.
   Sec. 7. This act shall be in full force and effect from and after its
ratification.
      In the General Assembly read three times and ratified, this the 16th day
of July, 1971.
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL CODE CONSTRUCTION; GENERAL PENALTY
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time; computing time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinances
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend code; effect of new ordinances
   
10.18   Section histories; section headings; statutory references
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the Town of Minnesott Beach shall
be designated as the Code of Minnesott Beach, North Carolina and may be so
cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS. The Town Manager and Board of Commissioners, or
governing body, of the Town of Minnesott Beach, North Carolina.
      CHARTER. The Charter of the Town of Minnesott Beach, North Carolina.
      CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as
modified by amendment, revision and adoption of new titles, chapters or
sections.
      COMPUTATION OF TIME. The time within which an act is to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and the last day; and if the last day is
Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, that day shall be excluded.
      COUNTY. The County of Pamlico, North Carolina.
      G.S. or GENERAL STATUTES. The latest edition of the GENERAL STATUTES of
North Carolina, as amended.
      GENDER. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine
and neuter.
      GOVERNOR. The Governor of North Carolina.
      JOINT AUTHORITY. All words giving a joint authority to three or more
persons or officers shall be construed as giving the authority to a majority of
persons or officers.
      MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
      MONTH. A calendar month.
      NUMBER. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural
includes the singular number.
      OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in those cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
      OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
      OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named in this code,
they shall mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use
in this town.
      OWNER. Applied to any property, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole
or a part of the property.
      PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
      PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every species of property except real property.
      PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
      PROPERTY. Includes real and personal property.
      REAL PROPERTY. Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
      SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
      SIDEWALK. Any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
      SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
      STATE. The State of North Carolina.
      STREET. Any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard,
parkway, dedicated alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto
within the town and shall mean the entire width of the right-of-way between
abutting property lines.
      SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading
in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have SUBCHAPTERS.
      TENANT or OCCUPANT. When applied to a building or land, shall include any
person who occupies the whole or a part of the building or land, whether alone
or with others.
      TENSE. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well
as the past and present.
      TOWN. The Town of Minnesott Beach, in the County of Pamlico, North
Carolina.
      WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
      YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed.
      ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. One designated by the Board of Commissioners.
Statutory reference:
   Computation of time, see G.S. § 1-593
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this town shall be by the following
rules, unless the construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the
legislative body or of the context of the same ordinance.
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
“and/or,” if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, the
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of an act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, that
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified or renumbered unless the subject matter is changed
or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer or employee of this town exercising the powers, duties or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express the intent, that spelling shall be corrected and the word
or words supplied, omitted or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
the error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state and federal laws,
shall be the official time within this town for the transaction of all
municipal business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME; COMPUTING TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of the act or the giving of the notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   (A)   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in
full force and effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary
implication.
   (B)   Nothing in this code or the ordinance adopting this code shall be
construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following:
      (1)   Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture
incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective
date of this code;
      (2)   Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment
of money for the town or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the town or
any evidence of the town’s indebtedness;
      (3)   Any contract or obligation assumed by the town;
      (4)   Any ordinance fixing the salary of any town officer or employee;
      (5)   Any right or franchise granted by the town;
      (6)   Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating,
relocating, opening, widening, paving and the like, any street or public way in
the town;
      (7)   Any appropriation ordinance;
      (8)   Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or
limited term;
      (9)   Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes
therefor;
      (10)   Any zoning ordinance or zoning map amendment;
      (11)   Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat;
      (12)   Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the town;
      (13)   The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the town not in
conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this code;
      (14)   Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein;
      (15)   Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the
town; and/or
      (16)   Any personnel ordinance.
   (C)   Nor shall any ordinance be construed to revive any ordinance or part
thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by
this chapter; and all ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full
force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.
Statutory reference:
   Statutes not repealed by General Statutes, see G.S. § 164-7
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the legislative body requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCES.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND CODE; EFFECT OF NEW ORDINANCES.
   (A)   (1)   All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend,
repeal or in any way affect this code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system hereof and printed for inclusion herein.
      (2)   When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or division,
or any portion thereof, the repealed portions may be excluded from this code by
omission from reprinted pages.
      (3)   The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in
the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence that the subsequent
ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the town.
   (B)   Amendments to any of the provisions of the code shall be made by
amending provisions by specific reference to the section number of this code in
language substantially similar to the following: “Section                of the
Code of Ordinances, Town of Minnesott Beach, North Carolina, is hereby amended
as follows....” The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (C)   If a new section not heretofore existing in the code is to be added,
language substantially similar to the following shall be used: “The Code of
Ordinances, Town of Minnesott Beach, North Carolina, is hereby amended by
adding a section, to be numbered               , which section shall read as
follows:....” The new section shall then be set out in full as desired.
   (D)   All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed
must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the
case may be.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; SECTION HEADINGS; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance and amending ordinances, if any, are listed
following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-1960;
Ord. 15, passed 1-1-1970; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1980; Ord. 25, passed 1-1-1985)
   (B)   (1)   A statutory cite included in the history indicates that the text
of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example: (G.S. §
160D-111) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-1980; Ord. 20, passed 1-1-1985)
(Ord. passed - -2021)
      (2)   A statutory cite set forth as a “statutory reference” following the
text of the section indicates that the reader should refer to that statute for
further information. Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
   This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or
copying all public records, unless otherwise exempted by state law.
Statutory reference:
      Inspection of public records, see G.S. §§ 132-1 et seq.
   (C)   If a section of this code is derived from the prior code of ordinances
of the town, the prior code section number shall be indicated in the history by
“(1981 Code, §       ).” The history notes following sections and the
references scattered throughout the code are not part of the code, but are
merely for the benefit for the user of the code.
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Violations of the provisions of this code or failure to comply with any of
its requirements shall constitute a misdemeanor as provided by G.S. § 14-4. Any
act constituting a violation of the provisions of this code or failure to
comply with any of its requirements shall also subject the offender to a civil
penalty of $500 which includes administrative fees. If the offender fails to
correct this violation within ten days after being notified of the violation,
the penalty may be recovered in a civil action in the nature of a debt. This
section may also be enforced by any appropriate equitable action authorized by
law, including injunctive relief. Each day that any violation continues,
regardless of the date of notice, shall be considered a separate offense for
the purpose of the penalties and remedies in this section. Any one, all or a
combination of the foregoing penalties and remedies may be used to enforce this
code.
(1981 Code Revision) (Ord. passed - -2021)
Statutory reference:
   For provisions concerning enforcement of ordinances, see G.S. §§ 160D-106
and 160D-404(c)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   LEGISLATIVE
      
31.   ORDINANCES
      
32.   OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
      
33.   FINANCES AND PURCHASING
      
34.   POLICE
      
35.   FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
      
36.   CIVIL EMERGENCY
CHAPTER 30: LEGISLATIVE
Section
   
30.01   Governing body
   
30.02   Meetings
   
30.03   Quorum
   
30.04   Minutes
   
30.05   Presiding official
   
30.06   Committees
§ 30.01 GOVERNING BODY.
   (A)   (1)   The town governing body shall be a Council-Manager form of town
government.
      (2)   The town government shall consist of a Board of Commissioners which
is composed of the Mayor and four Commissioners. The governing body will be
known as the Town Board.
      (3)   All are elected every two years in accordance with the uniform
municipal election laws of the state. The Town Board shall be charged with the
general government and administration of the affairs of the town.
   (B)   The powers and duties of the Town Board shall be as set out in the
General Statutes of the state, the Town Charter and the ordinances of the town.
   (C)   The Mayor and each Commissioner shall, before entering upon the duties
of office, take and subscribe, before some person lawfully entitled to
administer oaths, the oath of office prescribed in Article VI, § 7 of the State
Constitution. The oath of office shall then be kept on file at the Town Hall.
   (D)   If any member of the Town Board shall move his or her residence from
the town, the office shall at once be declared vacant and shall be filled by a
method as decided by the Town Board.
   (E)   Resignation of any member of the Town Board shall be in writing, and
the resignation shall lie on the table until the next regular meeting unless
accepted by the unanimous consent of the Board at the meeting it is submitted.
   (F)   The members of the Town Board are entitled to reimbursement for actual
expenses incurred in the course of performing their official duties at rates
consistent with the State of North Carolina Travel Reimbursement Rates and not
in excess of those allowed to town officers and employees or to a fixed
allowance, the amount of which shall be established by the Town Board, for
travel and other personal expenses of office.
(1981 Code Revision) (Am. Ord. passed 2024)
§ 30.02 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Generally. All meetings shall be called and conducted according to
state law.
   (B)   Regular meetings. The regular meeting of the Town Board shall be held
on the second Tuesday of each month, at 7:00 p.m., at the Town Hall unless
otherwise designated by the Board.
   (C)   Special meetings. Special meetings of the Town Board may be held, upon
the call of the Mayor or upon the request of any two members of the Board of
Commissioners. Notice of the time and purpose of the special meeting shall be
given to the Town Board at the time of calling.
   (D)   Emergency meetings. Emergency meetings of the Town Board may be called
by the Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem or any two members of the Town Board by signing a
written notice stating the time and place of the meeting and the subjects to be
considered. Emergency meetings may be called only because of generally
unexpected circumstances that require immediate consideration by the Town
Board. Only business connected with the emergency may be considered at an
emergency meeting.
   (E)   Recess. A regular or special meeting of the Town Board and any
recessed meeting thereof may continue or recess to a time prior to the next
regular meeting date as may be fixed by the Town Board.
   (F)   Open to the public. Except as provided in the Open Meeting Law of the
state being G.S. Ch. 143, Article 33, all meetings of the Town Board shall be
open to the public.
   (G)   Cancellation. The Chairperson of any board or committee, except the
Town Board, may cancel any meeting if it is apparent prior to the meeting that
there is no business to come before the meeting.
(1981 Code, Ch. A, Art. I, § 2)
§ 30.03 QUORUM.
   (A)   A majority of the members of the Town Board shall constitute a quorum
and no official business of the town shall be transacted by the Board unless a
quorum is present. A member may be considered present via speaker phone
conference call or video conference call, when they have been provided with all
necessary documents which are to be discussed prior to the meeting and are
included in deliberations during the course of the meeting.
   (B)   If a quorum of the Town Board is not present, the Mayor or Mayor Pro
Tem may send for the absentees, and if a quorum fails to attend, the meeting
shall stand adjourned.
(1981 Code, Ch. A, Art. I, § 3)
§ 30.04 MINUTES.
   It shall be the duty of the Town Manager or Clerk to be present at all
meetings of the Town Board and to keep a record of all the proceedings of the
Board. These records shall be maintained in a secured location within the
office. At the end of the fiscal year, copies will be sent to the State
Department of Cultural Resources, Office of Archives and History for permanent
recording.
(1981 Code, Ch. A, Art. I, § 4)
§ 30.05 PRESIDING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Board and in his or her
absence the Mayor Pro Tem shall preside.
   (B)   The presiding official shall cause the Town Clerk to note and record
in the official minutes those present and absent.
   (C)   The presiding official shall preserve order and decorum and shall
decide all questions of order, subject to the right of appeal by any member of
the full Town Board.
   (D)   In the event both the Mayor and the Mayor Pro Tem are absent from a
meeting, the Board may elect from its members a temporary Chairperson to
preside in their absence.
(1981 Code Revision)
§ 30.06 COMMITTEES.
   The Town Board may create those committees of the Board and/or town citizens
for special purposes as it deems appropriate.
(1981 Code, Ch. A, Art. I, § 6)
CHAPTER 31: ORDINANCES
Section
   
31.01   Effective date
   
31.02   Ordinances confined to one subject
   
31.03   Official copy
§ 31.01 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   All ordinances shall be effective after the ratification thereof except
ordinances specifying some other effective date or ordinances required by state
law to be effective only after having met specific date requirements.
(1981 Code, Ch. A, Art. II, § 1)
§ 31.02 ORDINANCES CONFINED TO ONE SUBJECT.
   All ordinances shall be confined to one subject except appropriation
ordinances which shall be confined to the subject of appropriations only.
(1981 Code, Ch. A, Art. II, § 2)
§ 31.03 OFFICIAL COPY.
   A true copy of an ordinance which has been duly enacted by the Town Board,
signed by the Mayor and attested to by the Town Manager or Clerk, shall be
known as an official copy of any ordinance for the town. All ordinances or a
true copy thereof shall be inserted in this code in the proper chapter. The
Town Manager or Clerk shall file a certified true copy of any charter
amendments adopted with the Secretary of State and the legislative library.
(1981 Code, Ch. A, Art. II, § 3)
CHAPTER 32: OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
   
32.01   Office of Mayor
   
32.02   Selection and duties of Mayor Pro Tem
   
32.03   Office of Town Manager
   
32.04   Office of Town Clerk
   
32.05   Town Attorney
   
32.06   Other officers and employees
   
32.07   Employees’ bonds
§ 32.01 OFFICE OF MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall be the chief executive of the town and shall perform the
following duties:
   (A)   Preside over all meetings of the Town Board;
   (B)   Cause all ordinances of the town to be enforced;
   (C)   Keep himself or herself informed as to the town’s business;
   (D)   Vote to break ties on Town Board;
   (E)   Sign all contracts, ordinances, resolutions, franchises and all other
documents as authorized by the Town Board;
   (F)   Make recommendations to the Town Board concerning the affairs of the
town as he or she deems necessary;
   (G)   Represent the town at ceremonies and other official occasions; and
   (H)   Perform other duties as authorized by the General Statutes, the Town
Charter and this code.
(1981 Code, Ch. A, Art. III, § 1)
§ 32.02 SELECTION AND DUTIES OF MAYOR PRO TEM.
   (A)   At the first meeting after their election, the Commissioners shall
select one of their number to act as Mayor Pro Tem. A Board member serving as
Mayor Pro Tem shall be entitled to vote on all matters and shall be considered
a Board member for all purposes, including the determination of whether a
quorum is present.
   (B)   The Mayor Pro Tem shall have no fixed term of office. During the
absence of the Mayor, the Town Board may confer upon the Mayor Pro Tem any of
the powers and duties of the Mayor. If the Mayor should become physically or
mentally incapable of performing the duties of the office, the Board may by
unanimous vote declare that he or she is incapacitated and confer any of his or
her powers and duties on the Mayor Pro Tem. Upon the Mayor’s declaration that
the Mayor is no longer incapacitated, and with the concurrence of a majority of
the Town Board, the Mayor shall resume the exercise of the Mayor’s powers and
duties.
(1981 Code Revision)
§ 32.03 OFFICE OF TOWN MANAGER.
   The Town Manager shall perform the following duties:
   (A)   Accept full responsibility as executive officer;
   (B)   Advise the Town Board professionally in all matters and recommend
policy;
   (C)   Act as an agent of the town to implement and execute all Board policy
when adopted;
   (D)   Keep the Town Board fully and accurately informed about town matters;
   (E)   Attempt to accurately interpret the needs of the town;
   (F)   Be alert to advancements and improvements that may benefit the town;
   (G)   Participate in town activities;
   (H)   Use great care in selecting employees for the town;
   (I)   Develop and administer the annual budget and financial reports to
include dispersing funds, performing budget analysis, developing and presenting
budgetary status reports and ensuring the satisfying of all legal requirements;
   (J)   Consult with the Town Board, legal staff and state/local officials as
required;
   (K)   Disburse funds for the various purposes of the town when an
appropriation for that purpose has been made in the annual budget, the
disbursement is authorized by the Board of Commissioners and/or is in
compliance with the financial management policy as adopted by the Board of
Commissioners;
   (L)   Transcribe and keep a record of all ordinances which are enacted upon
by the Town Board;
   (M)   Attend all meetings, record all proceedings and ensure maintenance of
official public records and that they comply with state requirements;
   (N)   Review town administrative practices and implement necessary
modifications;
   (O)   Attend various out of town meetings and schools as directed by the
Town Board to keep abreast of the developments in local government
administration;
   (P)   Be able to operate an automobile or other transportation vehicle,
computer, two-way radio, copier and other office equipment as required; and
   (Q)   Perform other duties as may be requested by the Town Board.
(1981 Code, Ch. A, Art. III, § 2) (Am. Ord. passed 2024)
§ 32.04 OFFICE OF TOWN CLERK.
   The Town Clerk shall perform the following duties:
   (A)   Give notice of meetings of the Town Board;
   (B)   Keep a journal/minutes of the Town Board meeting;
   (C)   Act as custodian of all town records;
   (D)   The Town Clerk shall attend all meetings of the Board of
Commissioners;
   (E)   In the absence of the Town Manager, shall be responsible for duties as
outlined under the Town Manager position; and
   (F)   Perform other duties as may be requested by the Town Board.
(1981 Code, Ch. A, Art. III, § 3)
§ 32.05 TOWN ATTORNEY.
   The Town Board shall appoint a Town Attorney to serve at its pleasure and
shall prescribe his or her duties and his or her rate of compensation.
(1981 Code Revision)
§ 32.06 OTHER OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Other officers that are deemed necessary shall be appointed by the Town
Board at any meeting. All officers and employees shall serve at the pleasure of
the Board and receive compensation as from time to time may be prescribed by
the Board.
(1981 Code, Ch. A, Art. III, § 4)
§ 32.07 EMPLOYEES’ BONDS.
   Officers and employees required by the Town Board shall, before entering
upon their duties, post bond in amounts specified by the Town Board. All bond
premiums shall be paid from town funds. When two positions are combined, only
one bond shall be required.
(1981 Code, Ch. A, Art. III, § 5)
CHAPTER 33: FINANCES AND PURCHASING
Section
   
33.01   Lines of authority and responsibility
   
33.02   Criteria for initiating transactions
   
33.03   Investment management
   
33.04   Inventory management
   
33.05   Cash management
   
33.06   Cash disbursements; non-payroll
   
33.07   Cash disbursements; payroll
§ 33.01 LINES OF AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Mayor.
      (1)   Review accounts;
      (2)   Sign checks; and
      (3)   Sign official documents as required by law or the Town Board.
   (B)   Mayor Pro Tem. In absence of Mayor, assume responsibilities assigned
to Mayor.
   (C)   Finance Commissioner.
      (1)   Review financial records monthly: income and expenditures;
      (2)   Establish budget for presentation to town and Town Board; and
      (3)   Maintain oversight of budget: revenues and expenditures.
   (D)   Town Manager.
      (1)   Maintain checking, savings and money market accounts;
      (2)   Review monthly financial reports;
      (3)   Write and sign checks for payments of all accounts owed by the
town;
      (4)   Assist with creating town budget;
      (5)   Maintain overview of budget: revenues and expenditures;
      (6)   Oversee daily expenditures and revenues;
      (7)   Reconcile accounts;
      (8)   Handle payment of all accounts pertaining to day to day operations
of the town and those extraneous bills and expenses that have been authorized
for payment by the Town Board; and
      (9)   Handle payments and reimbursement of expenses for items under a
preset amount established by the Town Board for items incurred for town
operations with oversight by the Mayor.
   (E)   Town Clerk.
      (1)   Reconcile bank statements;
      (2)   Enter information regarding revenues and expenditures into computer
data base; and
      (3)   In absence of Town Manager, write checks for payments to accounts
owed by the town.
(1981 Code Revision) (Am. Ord. passed 2024)
§ 33.02 CRITERIA FOR INITIATING TRANSACTIONS.
   Purchases that exceed preset amounts will be presented on a purchase order
(P.O.) with attached information reflecting available resources, justification
for purchase and use of a specific distributor. P.O.s are signed by the Town
Manager and presented to the Town Board for approval. The Town Manager will be
responsible for completion of purchase, payment and retention of records.
(1981 Code Revision)
§ 33.03 INVESTMENT MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   The Finance Commissioner is responsible for overseeing the investment
of town funds.
   (B)   The Town Manager is responsible for bringing availability of funds for
investing to the attention of the Finance Commissioner and Mayor. Investments
are to be made under the name “Town of Minnesott Beach.”
(1981 Code Revision)
§ 33.04 INVENTORY MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   The Town Manager/Town Clerk shall maintain a current inventory of all
property.
   (B)   This inventory listing is to be reconciled yearly.
   (C)   Items disposed of will be duly noted with date, method of disposal and
person authorizing disposal.
(1981 Code Revision)
§ 33.05 CASH MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   The Finance Commissioner is responsible for the oversight of revenue
and expenditures in accordance with the approved budget.
   (B)   The Town Manager is responsible for:
      (1)   The review of bank statements for any discrepancies or
irregularities and bringing these to the attention of the Mayor and Finance
Commissioner;
      (2)   Maintaining oversight of revenue and expenditures in accordance
with the approved budget and ensuring necessary funds are available for daily
town operations; and
      (3)   Maintenance of Petty Cash Fund.
   (C)   The Town Clerk is responsible for:
      (1)   Data input regarding revenues and expenses; and
      (2)   Reconciling bank statements upon receipt and bringing any
discrepancies to the attention of the Town Manager.
(1981 Code Revision)
§ 33.06 CASH DISBURSEMENTS; NON-PAYROLL.
   (A)   Pre-numbered checks shall be used for all disbursements.
   (B)   All checks will require two signatures as denoted by the Town Board.
   (C)   The Town Manager shall be responsible for payment of all expenditures
as specified in the annual budget and/or approved by the Town Board.
   (D)   The Town Manager is authorized to approve purchases of items valued at
under a preset amount established by the Town Board for operations of Town
Hall.
   (E)   Purchase of a single item exceeding that preset amount established by
the Town Board will require approval of the Town Board.
(1981 Code Revision)
§ 33.07 CASH DISBURSEMENTS; PAYROLL.
   (A)   Payroll records shall be maintained reflecting hours worked, hourly
wage rate, deductions for Social Security, state and federal taxes and
Medicare, gross and net pay.
   (B)   Time sheets will reflect all of the above information as well as date
paid and check number.
   (C)   Checks require two signatures as denoted by the Town Board.
(1981 Code Revision)
CHAPTER 34: POLICE
Section
   
34.01   Law enforcement provided by Sheriff’s Department
§ 34.01 LAW ENFORCEMENT PROVIDED BY SHERIFF’S DEPARTMENT.
   Until a time that the town establishes a Police Department, law enforcement
services will be provided by the Sheriff of the county and his or her staff or
state/federal law enforcement offices as appropriate.
(1981 Code Revision)
CHAPTER 35: FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION
Section
Fire Department
   
35.01   Arapahoe Fire Service District
   
35.02   General authority
Fire Hazards
   
35.15   Burning trash within town limits prohibited
   
35.16   Fires prohibited during burn bans
   
35.17   Lots kept free from fire hazard
   
35.18   Permitted fires
   
35.19   Permit required for bonfire
   
35.20   Encumbrances before or on fire exit
   
35.21   Passageways in places of public assemblage to be kept open; exit doors
not to be fastened
FIRE DEPARTMENT
§ 35.01 ARAPAHOE FIRE SERVICE DISTRICT.
   Per resolution dated March 14, 2006, the town is included in the Arapahoe
Fire Service District.
(1981 Code Revision)
§ 35.02 GENERAL AUTHORITY.
   In the event of a fire, citizens are required to follow the policies and
procedures of the Arapahoe Volunteer Fire Department as directed by the officer
in command of the Fire Department.
(1981 Code Revision)
FIRE HAZARDS
§ 35.15 BURNING TRASH WITHIN TOWN LIMITS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall burn or cause to be burned any trash, garbage, refuse,
waste, construction material or litter outside any house, on or in any street,
sidewalk, alley, lot or yard within the limits of the town.
(1981 Code, Ch. C, Art. II, § 1) (Am. Ord. passed 2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 35.16 FIRES PROHIBITED DURING BURN BANS.
   No person shall kindle or maintain any fire or shall knowingly furnish the
material for any fire, or authorize any fire to be kindled or maintained on or
in any street or public ground or upon any private lot within the limits of the
town when a burn ban is in effect as established by the State Division of
Forest Resources.
(1981 Code Revision) (Am. Ord. passed 2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 35.17 LOTS KEPT FREE FROM FIRE HAZARD.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to permit rubbish, refuse or articles of
combustible or inflammable nature to accumulate or remain on any lot or
premises.
(1981 Code, Ch. C, Art. II, § 5) (Am. Ord. passed 2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 35.18 PERMITTED FIRES.
   (A)   Fires to burn leaves and vegetation on one’s lot are permitted with
the exception of when a burning ban is in effect by the State Division of
Forest Resources. All persons, firms or corporations who shall burn any brush
and grass, whereby any property may be endangered, or destroyed, shall keep and
maintain a careful and competent watchman in charge while burning. Fire
escaping while burning shall be prima facie evidence of neglect of these
provisions.
   (B)   Burning of trees, shrubs, and/or vegetation resulting from the
clearing of a 1/3 acre or more requires permission from the State Division of
Forest Resources.
(1981 Code Revision) (Am. Ord. passed 2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 35.19 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR BONFIRE.
   No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire, or shall knowingly furnish
the material for any fire, or authorize any fire to be kindled or maintained on
or in any street, avenue, road or lane or public ground or upon any private lot
within the limits of the town unless written permission to do so shall have
first been secured from the Town Manager/Clerk.
(1981 Code, Ch. C, Art. II, § 2) (Am. Ord. passed 2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 35.20 ENCUMBRANCES BEFORE OR ON FIRE EXIT.
   No person shall at any time, place any encumbrances of any kind whatsoever
before or upon any fire escape, balcony or ladder intended as a means of escape
from fire. It shall be the duty of every member of the Police and Fire
Department who shall discover any fire escape encumbered in any manner to
forthwith report the same to the Town Manager who shall immediately notify the
owner or owners, their agent or agents, tenant or tenants, to remove the
encumbrance and the encumbrance shall thereupon be immediately removed.
(1981 Code, Ch. C, Art. II, § 3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 35.21 PASSAGEWAYS IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLAGE TO BE KEPT OPEN; EXIT DOORS
NOT TO BE FASTENED.
   All doors, aisles and passageways within and leading into or out of
theaters, churches and all other places of public assemblage, shall during the
entire time which any show, performance, service, exhibition, lecture, concert,
ball or other assemblage may be held therein be kept adequately lighted and
free from easels, signs, chairs, benches and any other article or articles that
may obstruct or delay the exit of the audience, congregation or assemblage.
Doors of the building while occupied shall not be fastened so that they cannot
easily be opened by anyone from within. No person shall sit or stand in, nor
shall the owner or operator of those places allow any person to remain in any
place of public assemblage in any aisle under any circumstances, in any exit or
passage required for the safe exit of the assemblage. Clear passage from all
exits and on outside sidewalks of all theaters and other places or public
assemblage shall be maintained at all times. No aisle, passageway or stairway
in any store shall be obstructed with tables, show cases or other obstructions
during the hours the store is open to the public.
(1981 Code, Ch. C, Art. II, § 4) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 36: CIVIL EMERGENCY
Section
   
36.01   Proclamation
   
36.02   Restrictions authorized
   
36.03   Other laws apply
§ 36.01 PROCLAMATION.
   (A)   The Mayor by proclamation may impose the prohibitions and restrictions
specified in §
36.02. The Mayor may impose as many of those specified prohibitions and
restrictions as the Mayor finds are necessary because of an emergency, to
maintain an acceptable level of public order and services and to protect lives,
safety and property. The Mayor shall recite the findings in the proclamation.
   (B)   The proclamation shall be in writing. The Mayor shall provide the
proclamation to persons charged with enforcement of the proclamation. The Mayor
shall retain a text of the proclamation and furnish upon request certified
copies of it for use as evidence.
§ 36.02 RESTRICTIONS AUTHORIZED.
   The proclamation authorized by §
36.01 may include prohibitions and restrictions:
   (A)   Of movements of people in public places;
   (B)   Of the operation of offices, business establishments and other places
to or from which people may travel or at which they may congregate;
   (C)   Upon the possession, transportation, sale, purchase and consumption of
alcoholic beverages;
   (D)   Upon the possession, transportation, sale, purchase, storage and use
of dangerous weapons and substances and gasoline; and
   (E)   Upon other activities or conditions the control of which may be
reasonably necessary to maintain order and protect lives or property during the
state of emergency.
(G.S. § 166A-19.31(b))
§ 36.03 OTHER LAWS APPLY.
   This chapter is intended to supplement and confirm the powers conferred by
G.S. § 160D-103, and all other general and local laws authorizing
municipalities to enact ordinances for the protection of the public health and
safety in times of riot or other grave civil disturbance or emergency.
(G.S. § 160D-107) (Ord. passed - -2021)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   [Reserved]
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
72.   TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
      
73.   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
      
74.   OPERATION OF VEHICLES
      
75.   MOTORCYCLES AND BICYCLES
      
76.   ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED VEHICLES AND WATERCRAFT
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
70.01   Definition of words and phrases
Miscellaneous Regulations
   
70.15   Entering, jumping on or riding vehicles without permission
   
70.16   Persons riding must stay inside
   
70.17   Not more than three persons permitted in front seat
   
70.18   Noise limitations
 
   
70.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 70.01 DEFINITION OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   For the purpose of this title, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire and Police Departments
and ambulances designated or authorized by the Chief of Police. Vehicles of
Volunteer Fire Department personnel responding to a fire or other community
emergency.
   BLOCK. A portion of any street located between two adjacent intersections.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory zoned as business.
   CROSSWALK. Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian
crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
   INTERSECTION. The areas embraced within the prolongation of the lateral curb
lines or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of two or more highways which
join one another at an angle whether or not one such highway crosses the other.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled.
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARD. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall
mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use in the
town.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings and devices,
not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of the
governing body or officials having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulation,
warning or guiding traffic.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
   PARK. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person on foot.
   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, co-partnership, association or
corporation.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the state police, County Sheriff’s office
or municipal police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic or to make arrests for violations.
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every road or driveway not open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
   PUBLIC CONVEYANCE. Any vehicle, other than a taxicab or railroad train, for
transporting for fare.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT. The territory zoned as residential.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
   ROADWAY. The portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for
vehicular travel.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a SAFETY ZONE.
   SIDEWALK. The portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   STANDING. Any stopping of a vehicle, whether occupied or not.
   STOP or STOPPING. When required, means complete cessation of movement. When
prohibited, means any stopping of a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police
officer or traffic-control sign or signal.
   STREET or HIGHWAY. The entire width between property lines of every way or
place of whatever nature when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public, as a matter of right, for purpose of vehicular traffic.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, vehicles, ridden animals and other conveyances either
singly or together while using any street for purposes of travel.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices moved by human power or
used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, provided that for the purpose
of this title, a bicycle or a ridden animal shall be deemed a VEHICLE.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. I, § 1)
MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
§ 70.15 ENTERING, JUMPING ON OR RIDING VEHICLES WITHOUT PERMISSION.
   No person shall enter, jump on or ride any automobile or other vehicle
without the consent of the owner or driver.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. VI, § 1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.16 PERSONS RIDING MUST STAY INSIDE.
   No person when riding shall allow any part of his or her body to protrude
beyond the limits of the vehicle in which he or she is riding, except to give
signals as are by law required and no person shall hang onto any vehicle
whatsoever, except for commercial applications, i.e., trash pick-up, recycling.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. VI, § 2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.17 NOT MORE THAN THREE PERSONS PERMITTED IN FRONT SEAT.
   It shall be unlawful for the driver or the person in charge of any motor
vehicle to permit more than three persons (including driver) to ride in the
front seat or driver’s seat of a motor vehicle. Dogs or animals must be
restrained from contact with the driver when the vehicle is in motion.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. VI, § 3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.18 NOISE LIMITATIONS.
   Operations of any engine or vehicle without an adequate muffler will not be
permitted within the corporate limits. Pipes identified as “cutouts,” “gutted,”
“resonant” or “straight” are among types classified as inadequate.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. VI, § 4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   If any person shall violate any provisions regulating the operation or
parking of vehicles, he or she shall be responsible for an infraction and shall
be required to pay a penalty of not more than $50.
CHAPTER 71: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
   
71.01   Required obedience to traffic ordinance
   
71.02   Obedience to police
   
71.03   Public employees to obey traffic regulations
   
71.04   Exemptions to authorized emergency vehicles
   
71.05   Persons propelling push carts, riding bicycles or animals
   
71.06   Authority of police in special cases
§ 71.01 REQUIRED OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC ORDINANCE.
   It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden, or fail to
perform any act required, in this chapter.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. II, § 1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.02 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE.
   No person shall willfully fail, or refuse, to comply with any lawful order,
or direction by a police officer.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. II, § 2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.03 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned
by or used in the service of the United States government, this state, county
or town and it shall be unlawful for any driver to violate any of the
provisions of this title, except as otherwise permitted in this title or by
state statute.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. II, § 4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.04 EXEMPTIONS TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking
and standing of vehicles shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles, as
defined in §
70.01, except as follows.
      (2)   A driver when operating a vehicle in any emergency, except when
otherwise directed by a police officer, may:
         (a)   Park or stand, notwithstanding the provisions of this title;
         (b)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
         (c)   Exceed the speed limit so long as he or she does not endanger
life or property; and/or
         (d)   Disregard regulations governing direction of movement, or
turning, in specified directions so long as he or she does not endanger life or
property.
   (B)   The foregoing exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any
vehicle from the consequences of his or her reckless disregard for the safety
of others.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. II, § 5)
§ 71.05 PERSONS PROPELLING PUSH CARTS, RIDING BICYCLES OR ANIMALS.
   Every person propelling any push cart, riding a bicycle or animal, upon the
roadway and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to
the provision of this title applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except
those provisions of this title which, by their nature, can have no application.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. II, § 6) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.06 AUTHORITY OF POLICE IN SPECIAL CASES.
   In the event of a fire or other emergency, or when necessary to expedite
traffic or safeguard pedestrians, police officers may direct traffic as
conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this title.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. II, § 3)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Section
   
72.01   Obedience to official traffic-control devices
   
72.02   Obedience to no-turn signs and turning markers
   
72.03   Obedience to no parking zone and safety zone markers
§ 72.01 OBEDIENCE TO OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the directions of any official
traffic-control device applicable thereto and placed in accordance with the
traffic ordinances of this town, unless otherwise directed by a police officer,
subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle
in §
71.04 of this title.
   (B)   No provisions of this title for which signs are required, shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the alleged
violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to an ordinarily observant person. Whenever a particular section does not state
that signs are required, the section shall be effective without signs being
placed to give notice thereof.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. III, § 1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.02 OBEDIENCE TO NO-TURN SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.
   Whenever authorized signs are placed, directed or installed indicating that
no right, left or U turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
directions of any sign, and when authorized markers, buttons or other
indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles traversing or turning, no driver shall disobey the
directions of the indications.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. III, § 2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 72.03 OBEDIENCE TO NO PARKING ZONE AND SAFETY ZONE MARKERS.
   Whenever authorized signs or markings are placed, erected or installed
indicating no parking zones or safety zones, no driver of a vehicle shall
disobey the regulations in connection therewith.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. III, § 3) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 73: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
   
73.01   Vehicles stopping in streets; exceptions
   
73.02   Vehicles not to obstruct passing of other vehicles
   
73.03   Parking prohibited at all times in designated areas
   
73.04   Parking parallel to curb unless otherwise directed by this chapter or
by parking lines
   
73.05   Vehicles backed up to curb
   
73.06   Parking within lines where provided
   
73.07   Unlawful parking
   
73.08   Truck, truck trailer, semi-truck parking
   
73.09   Junked equipment
§ 73.01 VEHICLES STOPPING IN STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   No vehicle shall stop in any street except for the purpose of parking as
prescribed in this title, unless the stop is made necessary by the approach of
fire apparatus, police vehicles, emergency vehicles or a funeral or other
procession which is given the right-of-way, by the stopping of a public
conveyance, by the giving of traffic signals, by the passing of some other
vehicle or pedestrians or by some emergency; and in any case covered by these
exceptions, the vehicles shall stop so as not to obstruct any footway,
pedestrian aisle, safety zone, crossing or street intersection if it can be
avoided.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. IV, § 1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.02 VEHICLES NOT TO OBSTRUCT PASSING OF OTHER VEHICLES.
   No vehicle shall so stand on any street as to interrupt or interfere with
the passage of public conveyances or other vehicles.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. IV, § 2) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.03 PARKING PROHIBITED AT ALL TIMES IN DESIGNATED AREAS.
   When signs are placed, erected or installed giving notice thereof, or
curbing has been painted yellow or red in lieu of those signs, no person shall
park a vehicle at any time.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. IV, § 3) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.04 PARKING PARALLEL TO CURB UNLESS OTHERWISE DIRECTED BY THIS CHAPTER OR
BY PARKING LINES.
   Where not otherwise indicated by this chapter, and where the street is not
marked to show how vehicles shall park, all vehicles shall park parallel to the
curb and not more than 12 inches therefrom.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. IV, § 4) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.05 VEHICLES BACKED UP TO CURB.
   In no case shall a vehicle remain backed up to curb except when actually
loading or unloading.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. IV, § 5) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.06 PARKING WITHIN LINES WHERE PROVIDED.
   On any street which is marked off with lines indicating the parking spaces
for cars, the same shall be parked between the lines.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. IV, § 6) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.07 UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, upon any street for principal
purposes of:
   (A)   Displaying it for sale or purpose of advertising;
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. IV, § 8)
   (B)   Greasing or repairing the vehicle, except repairing necessitated by an
emergency;
   (C)   Storage thereof by garages, dealers or other persons when storage is
not incident to the bona fide use and operation of the automobile or other
vehicles; and
   (D)   Storage of any detached trailer or van when the towing unit has been
disconnected or for the purpose of transferring merchandise or freight from one
vehicle to another.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. IV, § 7) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.08 TRUCK, TRUCK TRAILER, SEMI-TRUCK PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for truck/truck trailer/semi-truck units to be parked
or remain standing on public streets or right-of-way thereof within the
municipal limits of the town.
(1981 Code Revision) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.09 JUNKED EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to store abandoned or junked
equipment on street rights-of-way or on private property when the equipment is
visible either from a street or from a neighbor’s property.
   (B)   In case of automobiles, they will be considered abandoned and junked
if they do not bear a current valid state license tag and have been unmoved for
14 days. This shall also apply to any other equipment requiring a state license
tag.
   (C)   Special written permission may be granted by the Town Manager for
circumstances such as antique vehicles being restored or boats under
construction on an individual basis.
   (D)   When a resident is ordered to remove an offending piece of equipment,
the action must be taken within 72 hours. Failure to comply will result in the
offending equipment being towed away at the owner’s expense. A storage fee will
be charged the owner until the equipment is properly disposed.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. IV, § 9) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 74: OPERATION OF VEHICLES
Section
   
74.01   Clinging to moving vehicles
   
74.02   Speed limit
   
74.03   Driving over a fire hose
§ 74.01 CLINGING TO MOVING VEHICLES.
   Any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates
or any toy vehicle shall not attach the same or himself or herself to any
public conveyance or moving vehicle upon any roadway.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. V, § 8) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.02 SPEED LIMIT.
   (A)   A vehicle may be operated on any street of the town at a rate of speed
not exceeding the posted miles per hour for that street, provided that at no
time shall the speed be greater than is reasonable and prudent under the
conditions then existing.
   (B)   The speed limit on all town streets shall be 35 mph unless otherwise
posted.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. V, § 12) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.03 DRIVING OVER A FIRE HOSE.
   No vehicle shall be driven over any hose of the Fire Department when laid
down on any street or driveway to be used at any fire, without the consent of
the Fire Department official in command.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. V, § 14) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 75: MOTORCYCLES AND BICYCLES
Section
   
75.01   Riding on motorcycle handlebars and the like
   
75.02   Parking bicycles
§ 75.01 RIDING ON MOTORCYCLE HANDLEBARS AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   The operator of a motorcycle when upon a street, shall not carry any
person upon the handlebars, frame or tank of the operator’s vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall so ride upon any vehicle listed in division (A) above.
(1981 Code, Ch. F, Art. V, § 9) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.02 PARKING BICYCLES.
   Bicycles shall be parked upon a street or roadway against the curb, or upon
the sidewalk in a rack to support the bicycle, or against a building or at the
curb, in a manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
(Am. Ord. passed 2024) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Definition of “bicycle,” see G.S. § 20-171.1
CHAPTER 76: ABANDONED, NUISANCE AND JUNKED VEHICLES AND WATERCRAFT
Section
   
76.01   Definitions
   
76.02   Administration and enforcement
   
76.03   Abandoned vehicles unlawful; removal authorized; abandoned vehicles on
private property
   
76.04   Nuisance vehicles unlawful; removal authorized
   
76.05   Junked motor vehicles unlawful; removal authorized; junked motor
vehicles on private property
   
76.06   Removal of abandoned, junked, or nuisance vehicles; pre-towing
requirements
   
76.07   Exceptions to pre-towing notice requirements
   
76.08   Responsibility for costs of removal
   
76.09   Removal of vehicles; post-towing notice requirements
   
76.10   Right to probable cause hearing before sale or final disposition of
vehicle
   
76.11   Redemption of vehicle during proceedings
   
76.12   Sale and disposition of unclaimed vehicle
   
76.13   Conditions on removal of vehicles from private property
   
76.14   Protection against criminal or civil liability
   
76.15   Exceptions
   
76.16   Unlawful removal of impounded vehicle
 
   
76.99   Penalty
§ 76.01 DEFINITIONS.
   When used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   ABANDONED VEHICLE. Is a vehicle that:
      (1)   Is left upon a public street or highway in violation of a law or
ordinance prohibiting parking;
      (2)   Is left on a public street or highway for longer than seven days or
is determined by law enforcement to be a hazard to the motoring public;
      (3)   Is left on property owned or operated by the town for longer than
24 hours; or
      (4)   Is left on private property without the consent of the owner,
occupant or lessee of such property for longer than two hours.
   AUTHORIZING OFFICIAL(S). The Mayor is designated to authorize the removal of
vehicles under the provisions of this chapter. Such authority may be delegated
by the Mayor to any town official or employee at his/her sole discretion.
   CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  The town employee(s) or agent(s) designated by
the Mayor to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE. A vehicle that does not display a current license
plate and is either:
      (1)   Partially dismantled or wrecked;
      (2)   Cannot be self-propelled or moved in the way it was originally
intended to move; or
      (3)   More than five years old and appears to be worth less than $500.
   MOTOR VEHICLE or VEHICLE. All machines designed or intended to travel over
land or water, including watercraft, by self-propulsion or while attached to
any self-propelled vehicle.
   NUISANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle on public or private property that is determined
and declared by the code enforcement officer to be a health or safety hazard to
neighboring residents or businesses or to the public, including but not limited
to a vehicle found to:
      (1)   Be a point of concentration of gasoline, oil or other flammable or
explosive materials;
      (2)   Have accessible areas of confinement that cannot be opened from the
inside, such as trunks, hoods, etc.;
      (3)   Be in danger of falling or turning over;
      (4)   Be a point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste, or
any other rotten or putrescible matter of any kind;
      (5)   Have exposed sharp parts or edges of metal or glass;
      (6)   A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes, other insects, rats or
other pests;
      (7)   A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over
eight inches in height;
      (8)   A point of collection of pools or ponds of water; or
      (9)   Otherwise pose a health and safety hazard as determined by
authorizing official(s) or any duly designated code enforcement officer based
on the following:
         (a)   Danger posed to licensees, invitees, or trespassers of the
property owner;
         (b)   Danger posed to pedestrians or vehicular traffic;
         (c)   Tendency to cause onlooker distraction of passing motor
vehicles;
         (d)   Environmental concerns; or
         (e)   Concerns regarding disruption of stormwater drainage.
   WATERCRAFT. Any boat, vessel, craft, or other conveyance that is designed to
be used, or is made to use, for the transportation of persons, goods, or a
combination thereof upon or under the water; except that inflatable pool rafts,
un-motorized water skis, and other similar small devices are excluded.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
§ 76.02 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The authorizing official(s) and the code enforcement officer(s) shall
be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter and shall
be responsible for administering the removal and the disposition of vehicles
determined to be abandoned on the streets and highways within the town and on
property owned by the town. The code enforcement officer(s) shall be
responsible for administering the removal and disposition of abandoned, junked,
and nuisance vehicles located on private property.
   (B)   If the appropriate inspecting officer(s) have probable cause to
believe that a violation of this chapter is occurring, they shall have the
right to enter on any premises within the town limits at any reasonable hour
between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. in order to determine if any vehicle is in
violation of this chapter.
   (C)   The town may, on an annual basis and with prior approval of the Town
Commissioners, contract with private tow truck operators to remove, store and
dispose of abandoned vehicles and/or nuisance vehicles in compliance with this
chapter and applicable state laws.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
§ 76.03 ABANDONED VEHICLES UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED; ABANDONED VEHICLES ON
PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a vehicle to cause or allow such vehicle to be an abandoned
vehicle.
   (B)   Upon investigation, the authorizing official(s) or any duly designated
code enforcement officer(s) of the town may determine that a vehicle is an
abandoned vehicle and order the vehicle removed.
   (C)   Notwithstanding prior division (B), if an abandoned vehicle is located
on private property, it shall not be removed from private property without the
written consent of the owner, lessee, or occupant of the premises unless the
code enforcement officer(s), authorizing officials, or the Town Commissioners
declare it to be a health or safety hazard.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.04 NUISANCE VEHICLES UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
possession of a vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle is located to leave or allow the vehicle to
remain on the property after it has been declared a nuisance vehicle.
   (B)   Upon investigation, the authorizing official(s) or any duly designated
code enforcement officer(s) of the town may determine and declare that a
vehicle is a health or safety hazard and a nuisance vehicle, and seek to have
the vehicle removed by order of a court of competent jurisdiction after pre-
towing notice is given pursuant §§
76.06 and
76.07.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.05 JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLE UNLAWFUL; REMOVAL AUTHORIZED; JUNKED MOTOR
VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to have a junked motor vehicle, as defined in
this chapter, on the premises of public or private property or any street or
highway.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for the registered owner or person entitled to
the possession of a junked motor vehicle, or for the owner, lessee or occupant
of the real property upon which a junked motor vehicle is located to leave or
allow the vehicle to remain on the property after the vehicle has been ordered
removed.
   (C)   Upon investigation, the authorizing official(s) or any duly designated
code enforcement officer(s) of the town may determine that a vehicle is a
junked motor vehicle and order the junked motor vehicle removed.
   (D)   If the junked motor vehicle is located on private property, the code
enforcement official may order the removal of a junked motor vehicle as defined
in this chapter after finding in writing that the aesthetic benefits of
removing the vehicle outweigh the burdens imposed on the private property
owner. This finding shall be based on a balancing of the monetary loss of the
apparent owner against the corresponding gain to the public by promoting or
enhancing community, neighborhood or area appearance. The following among other
relevant factors may be considered:
      (1)   Protection of property values;
      (2)   Promotion of tourism and other economic development opportunities;
      (3)   Indirect protection of public health and safety;
      (4)   Preservation of the character and integrity of the community; and
      (5)   Promotion of the comfort, happiness and emotional stability of area
residents.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.06 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, JUNKED, OR NUISANCE VEHICLES; PRE-TOWING
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Except as set forth in §
76.07, an abandoned vehicle, junked motor vehicle, or nuisance vehicle that is
to be removed shall be towed at the direction of the town only after notice to
the registered owner or person entitled to possession of the vehicle. If the
names and mailing addresses of the registered owner or person entitled to the
possession of the vehicle, or the owner, lessee or occupant of the real
property upon which the vehicle is located, can be ascertained in the exercise
of reasonable diligence, notice to remove the vehicle shall be given by
certified mail or by hand delivery by the appropriate authorizing official or
code enforcement official. Such notice shall direct the owner or person
entitled to possession to remove the vehicle within seven days from receipt of
the notice. The person who mails or hand delivers the notice shall retain a
written record to show the names and addresses to which the notice was mailed
or delivered and the date of such mail or delivery.
   (B)   If such names and addresses cannot be ascertained or if notice
attempted in accordance with division (A) above is refused by addressee, notice
shall be given by affixing on the windshield or some other conspicuous place on
the vehicle a notice indicating that the vehicle will be removed by the town no
sooner than seven days after the notice is affixed or mailed, unless the
vehicle is moved by the owner or legal possessor prior to that time. Notice may
be given in such a manner concurrently with notice given in accordance with
division (A) above, even where such notice is properly given and accepted by
the addressee.
   (C)   With respect to abandoned vehicle, junked motor vehicle or nuisance
vehicles for which notice is required to be given, if the registered owner or
person entitled to possession does not remove the vehicle but chooses to appeal
the determination that the vehicle is an abandoned, junked, or nuisance
vehicle, such appeal shall be made in writing and delivered to the Town Clerk
within seven days of the owner's receipt of notice of removal. The appeal shall
be heard by the Mayor, or Mayor Pro Tem in the Mayor's absence, within ten days
of receipt of the appeal. Further proceedings to remove the vehicle shall be
stayed until the appeal is heard and decided. In the event the owner or person
entitled to possession fails to pursue the appeal within the time set forth in
this chapter, the appeal shall be deemed abandoned and the vehicle shall be
ordered removed.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.07 EXCEPTIONS TO PRE-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENT.
   The requirement that notice be given prior to the removal of an abandoned
vehicle, junked motor vehicle, or nuisance vehicle may, as determined by the
authorizing official, be omitted in those circumstances where there is special
need for prompt action to eliminate a traffic obstruction or otherwise maintain
and protect the public safety and welfare. Such findings shall be entered by
the authorizing official in the appropriate daily records. Circumstances
justifying the removal of a vehicle without prior notice include:
   (A)   Abandoned vehicles, junked motor vehicles, or nuisance vehicles left
on the streets or highways. For a vehicle left on the public streets or
highways, a law enforcement officer may determine that immediate removal of
such vehicle is warranted if the vehicle is:
      (1)   Obstructing traffic;
      (2)   Parked in violation of an ordinance prohibiting or restricting
parking;
      (3)   Parked in a no stopping or standing zone;
      (4)   Parked in a loading zone;
      (5)   Parked in a bus zone; or
      (6)   Parked in violation of temporary parking restrictions imposed under
any state or local law.
   (B)   Other abandoned, junked or nuisance vehicles. With respect to an
abandoned vehicle, junked motor vehicle, or nuisance vehicle left on property
other than the streets and highways, such a vehicle may be removed without
giving prior notice only in circumstances where the authorizing official finds
a special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health,
safety and welfare. By way of illustration and not of limitation, such
circumstances include those in which a vehicle is blocking or obstructing
ingress or egress to a businesses or residence, poses a traffic hazard, or is
causing damage to public property or to the private property of another.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
§ 76.08 RESPONSIBILITY FOR COSTS OF REMOVAL.
   Owner responsible for removal costs. If an abandoned vehicle, junked motor
vehicle, or nuisance vehicle is removed by or at the direction of the town, the
vehicle owner shall pay all reasonable costs incidental to the removal and
storage of such vehicle and incidental to locating the owner thereof.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
§ 76.09 REMOVAL OF VEHICLES; POST-TOWING NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any abandoned vehicle, junked motor vehicle, or nuisance vehicle which
has been ordered to be removed may, as directed by the town, be removed to a
storage garage or area by the tow truck operator or towing business contracting
to perform such services for the town. In accordance with divisions (B) and (C)
and G.S. § 20-219.11, whenever such a vehicle is removed, the authorizing
official or code enforcement officer shall notify the last known registered
owner of the vehicle, such notice shall include the following:
      (1)   The description of the removed vehicle;
      (2)   The location where the vehicle is stored;
      (3)   The violation with which the owner is charged, if any;
      (4)   The procedure the owner must follow to redeem the vehicle; and
      (5)   The procedure the owner must follow to request a probable cause
hearing on the removal.
   (B)   If the vehicle has a North Carolina registration plate or
registration, notice shall be given to the owner within 24 hours; if the
vehicle is not registered in this state, notice shall be given to the owner
within 72 hours from the removal of the vehicle. This notice shall, if
feasible, be given by telephone. Whether or not the owner is reached by
telephone, notice shall be mailed to his or her last known address unless the
owner or the owner's agent waives this notice in writing.
   (C)   Whenever an abandoned vehicle, junked motor vehicle, or nuisance
vehicle is removed, and such vehicle has no valid registration or registration
plates, the authorizing official shall make reasonable efforts, including
checking the vehicle identification number, to determine the last known
registered owner of the vehicle and to notify him or her of the information set
forth in divisions (A)(1) through (A)(5) of this section, if such information
can be reasonably ascertained.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
§ 76.10 RIGHT TO PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING BEFORE SALE OR FINAL DISPOSITION OF THE
VEHICLE.
   (A)   After the removal of an abandoned vehicle, junked motor vehicle, or
nuisance vehicle the owner or any person entitled to possession is entitled to
a hearing for the purpose of determining if probable cause existed for removing
the vehicle as provided at G.S. § 20-219.11. A request for hearing must be
filed in writing with the county magistrate designated by the chief district
court judge to receive such hearing requests. The magistrate will set the
hearing within 72 hours of receipt of the request, and the hearing will be
conducted in accordance with the provisions of G.S. § 20-219.11.
   (B)   The only issue at this hearing is whether probable cause existed for
the towing. If the magistrate finds that probable cause did exist, the tower's
lien continues. If the magistrate finds that probable cause did not exist, the
tower's lien is extinguished.
   (C)   Any aggrieved party may appeal the magistrate's decision to district
court.
   (D)   The town shall pay the towing and storage charges if the court's final
decision is that no probable cause existed for the tow.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
§ 76.11 REDEMPTION OF VEHICLE DURING PROCEEDINGS.
   Unless such vehicle is being detained by police as evidence, in accordance
with G.S. § 20-219.12 the vehicle owner may obtain possession of a removed
vehicle by paying the towing fee, including any storage charges, or by posting
a bond for double the amount of such fees and charges to the tow truck operator
or towing business having custody of the removed vehicle.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
§ 76.12 SALE AND DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.
   (A)   Consent of owner. With the consent of the registered owner, the town
or tow truck operator may dispose of any vehicle without holding it for any
prescribed period of time.
   (B)   Sale of vehicle. An abandoned vehicle or junked motor vehicle shall be
held for a period of at least 30 days, during which time the owner may claim it
by exhibiting proof of ownership to the town or towing business having custody
of the vehicle and by paying the costs incidental to its towing and storage.
After being held for 30 days, a vehicle may be sold in accordance with the
provisions of G.S. §§ 44A-4, 44A-5, and 44A-6, provided that, if the town is
responsible for collecting towing or removal fees, no hearing in addition to
the probable cause hearing described in §
76.10 shall be required. If no one purchases the vehicle at the sale, and if
the value of the vehicle is less than the amount of the lien, the town may
destroy the vehicle.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
§ 76.13 CONDITIONS ON REMOVAL OF VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   In no case will a vehicle be removed by the town from private property
without a written request of the owner, occupant or lessee, except in those
cases where a vehicle is an abandoned vehicle, junked motor vehicle, or
nuisance vehicle which has been ordered removed by the Board of Commissioners,
authorizing official(s), code enforcement officer or a court of law. The town
may require any person requesting the removal of an abandoned vehicle, junked
motor vehicle or nuisance vehicle from private property to indemnify the town
against any loss, expense or liability incurred because of its removal, storage
or sale.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.14 PROTECTION AGAINST CRIMINAL OR CIVIL LIABILITY.
   No person shall be held to answer in a civil or criminal action to any owner
or other person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned vehicle,
junked motor vehicle, or nuisance vehicle for disposing of such vehicle as
provided in this chapter.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
§ 76.15 EXCEPTIONS.
   No vehicle shall be considered junked, abandoned, or nuisance:
   (A)   Which is located in a bona fide AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD or JUNKYARD, as
defined in G.S. § 136-143;
   (B)   Which is in an enclosed building;
   (C)   Which is on the premises of a business enterprise being operated in a
lawful place and manner if the vehicle is necessary to the operation of the
enterprise;
   (D)   Which is in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained in a
lawful place and manner by the town; or
   (E)   Which is a junked motor vehicle that is used on a regular basis for
business or personal use.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
§ 76.16 UNLAWFUL REMOVAL OF IMPOUNDED VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove from any
storage facility any vehicle which has been impounded pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter unless and until all towing and impoundment fees
which are due, or bond in lieu of such fees, have been paid. Any person who
violates this section shall be guilty of a Class 3 misdemeanor and subject to a
fine of up to $500 for each violation.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024) Penalty, see §
76.99
§ 76.99 PENALTY.
   In addition to any lien or penalty afforded by law, any act constituting a
violation of the provisions of this code or a failure to comply with any of its
requirements shall subject the offender to a civil penalty of $50, or any
lesser amount if so stated in the citation. If the offender fails to remedy the
violation and pay any civil penalty within ten days after being cited for said
violation (or within the time prescribed by a citation if it provides for a
longer period of time than ten days), the civil penalty may be recovered in a
civil action in the nature of a debt. Each day that any violation continues,
regardless of the date of notice, shall be considered a separate offense for
purposes of the penalties and remedies specified in this section. In such an
event, civil penalties begin to accrue from the date of the first notice of
violation. For continuing violations, the initial citation and requirement that
the civil penalty be paid within the time prescribed therein shall be the only
notice required to be given; and shall be deemed to be an on-going citation and
notice for continuing violations after the date of the citation.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
91.   HEALTH PROTECTION AND DISEASE PREVENTION
      
92.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION
      
93.   NUISANCES
      
94.   ANIMALS
CHAPTER 90: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Damaging Streets and Sidewalks
   
90.01   Permit to dig in streets and town rights-of-way
   
90.02   Sidewalk construction
   
90.03   Street repair
   
90.04   Excavations; leaving unprotected
   
90.05   Streets not to be damaged
   
90.06   House moving
   
90.07   Damage to bridges and culverts
   
90.08   Damage to lights and signs
   
90.09   Damage appeal
Obstructing Streets
   
90.20   Assembly on streets
   
90.21   Display of goods prohibited
   
90.22   Placing objects on streets
Use and Cleanliness
   
90.35   Throwing or burning trash on streets prohibited
   
90.36   Tree trimmings
   
90.37   Littering
   
90.38   Littering from vehicle
   
90.39   Maintenance of public areas
Cross-reference:
   Indecent, offensive or disorderly conduct, see §
130.01
   Streets, see §
151.354
   Streets; other requirements, see §
151.355
   Streets, right-of-way and easements, see §
151.141
   Vagrants, see §
130.02
DAMAGING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 90.01 PERMIT TO DIG IN STREETS AND TOWN RIGHTS-OF-WAY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to dig any hole,
ditch or excavation of any kind whatsoever, on any street in the town without
first securing permission in writing from the Town Manager.
(1981 Code, Ch. D, Art. I, § 1) (Am. Ord. passed 2-11-2020) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.02 SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION.
   No sidewalk of any description shall be built by any individual, firm or
corporation, of any brick, wood or any other material in the town without first
securing permission in writing from the Town Manager.
(1981 Code, Ch. D, Art. I, § 2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.03 STREET REPAIR.
   It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation, who shall open or
dig a ditch, trench or hole in any street, public alley or sidewalk of the town
to put the street, public alley or sidewalk in as good condition in all
respects as it was before, and every person, firm or corporation violating or
failing to observe the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(1981 Code, Ch. D, Art. I, § 3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.04 EXCAVATIONS; LEAVING UNPROTECTED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation making any
excavation for any purpose whatsoever in any street or sidewalk to fail to
securely cover the excavations with plank, place ropes around the same three
feet from the ground and to place sufficient number of red lights around the
excavation before dark and to keep those lights burning all night, every night,
the excavation shall be open.
(1981 Code, Ch. D, Art. I, § 4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.05 STREETS NOT TO BE DAMAGED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drag, run
or cause to be dragged or run any harrow, or other implement, engine, machine
or tool upon any asphalt, or other permanently paved street of the town which
shall be liable, in any way to injure or cut the surface thereof.
   (B)   It shall also be unlawful to injure any dirt street in the same
manner.
   (C)   Contractors shall be held liable for any damage to pavement caused by
construction machinery or heavy trucks.
(1981 Code, Ch. D, Art. I, § 5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.06 HOUSE MOVING.
   No person shall move any house or building upon or across the public streets
or sidewalks without written consent of the Town Manager and a deposit of
sufficient bond to cover damage done to the street, sidewalk or property of any
person.
(1981 Code, Ch. D, Art. I, § 6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.07 DAMAGE TO BRIDGES AND CULVERTS.
   No person shall injure or misplace any part of any bridge, culvert, ditch,
drain or other property belonging to or used by the town or shall place any
obstruction in any culvert, ditch or drain to prevent the free flow of water on
or over the streets of the town.
(1981 Code, Ch. D, Art. I, § 7) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.08 DAMAGE TO LIGHTS AND SIGNS.
   No person shall damage, tamper with, remove, paint upon or deface any sign,
sign post, street light, traffic signal or bulletin board or other municipal
property upon the streets and sidewalks except employees of the town in
performance of their duties.
(1981 Code, Ch. D, Art. I, § 8) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.09 DAMAGE APPEAL.
   (A)   The Town Manager will make the determination if any damage was done
and to require that the damage be repaired to the prior condition, and the Town
Manager will determine when repairs are adequate.
   (B)   Any person being in disagreement with the Town Manager’s decision may
appeal to the Town Board.
OBSTRUCTING STREETS
§ 90.20 ASSEMBLY ON STREETS.
   All persons are forbidden from assembling or collecting and standing so as
to obstruct any street and all persons so collecting and standing shall
disperse and move upon the demand of any police officer.
(1981 Code, Ch. D, Art. II, § 1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.21 DISPLAY OF GOODS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall place for display or sale any goods, wares or merchandise of
any kind upon any of the street or town right-of-way without first obtaining a
permit from the Town Manager.
(1981 Code, Ch. D, Art. II, § 2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.22 PLACING OBJECTS ON STREETS.
   Except for a town sanctioned and announced pick-up, no brick, stone, wood or
other substances obstructing the free passage of persons and vehicles shall be
placed in any of the alleyways, streets or other routes of the town, nor shall
any person place on or in any of the streets, sidewalks or alleyways of the
town any boxes, crates, casks or barrels of any description or any other
obstruction of any kind; provided that any person erecting a building, may with
written permission from the Town Manager place building material for immediate
use on the streets in a way as to not interfere with the usual traffic.
(1981 Code, Ch. D, Art. II, § 3) Penalty, see §
10.99
USE AND CLEANLINESS
§ 90.35 THROWING OR BURNING TRASH ON STREETS PROHIBITED.
   No trash or garbage of any kind shall be thrown or swept upon any sidewalk
or street of the town, nor shall any trash, refuse or rubbish be burned
thereon.
(1981 Code, Ch. D, Art. III, § 1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.36 TREE TRIMMINGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place or allow to be placed any tree
trimmings or shrubbery on any street, unless in preparation for a town
sanctioned and announced pick-up.
(1981 Code, Ch. D, Art. III, § 2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.37 LITTERING.
   Persons guilty of throwing bottles, cans, containers, paper or trash of any
nature or placing or causing to be placed refuse or trash on any public or
private property are subject to arrest and prosecution. When persons in
violation of this section are minors, their parents or guardians will be
required to take immediate action in removing litter or be prosecuted.
(1981 Code, Ch. D, Art. III, § 3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.38 LITTERING FROM VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person while a driver or passenger in a vehicle
to throw or deposit litter on any street or other public place within the town,
or on private property. When a violation occurs, the driver and/or owner of the
vehicle will be held responsible regardless of any other passengers.
(1981 Code, Ch. D, Art. III, § 4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 90.39 MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC AREAS.
   Every owner, lessee, tenant, occupant or other person in charge of any
commercial establishment or premises which maintains any paved or unpaved areas
for use of the public, either for parking or as access areas for the
establishment shall keep and maintain the areas clean and free from trash,
litter, rubbish, and any material liable to be blown, deposited or cast on the
street or other public way.
(1981 Code Revision) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 91: HEALTH PROTECTION AND DISEASE PREVENTION
Section
General Regulations
   
91.01   Unlawful to hinder Health Officer or assistants
   
91.02   Property to be kept clean
   
91.03   Human waste
   
91.04   Stagnant water
   
91.05   Eating establishments
   
91.06   Debris from new construction
   
91.07   Dilapidated buildings and abandoned structures
   
91.08   Smoking in municipal buildings and vehicles
Privies and Septic Tanks
   
91.25   Privies regulated
   
91.26   Septic tanks regulated
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 91.01 UNLAWFUL TO HINDER HEALTH OFFICER OR ASSISTANTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct or delay the County
or State Health Officer or any of his or her assistants in the lawful discharge
of their duties.
(1981 Code, Ch. G, Art. I, § 2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.02 PROPERTY TO BE KEPT CLEAN.
   (A)   Owners or occupants of premises are required to keep the same clean.
Every person owning or occupying any premises and any person owning a vacant
lot or lots, except as defined as HEAVILY WOODED, in the town limits shall keep
the premises free from noxious weeds, trash and odor.
   (B)   Persons violating section to be notified. If any person shall violate
the provisions of division (A) above, it shall be the duty of the Town Manager
or his or her associate to give notice to the owner or person in possession of
the premises that within seven days, or sooner from the date of receipt of the
notice, all weeds, trash and other offensive animal or vegetable matter be
removed from the lot. Should any owner or occupant fail to comply with the
notice, the Town Manager shall proceed to have items removed and the owner or
occupant shall be responsible to the town for the cost thereof.
   (C)   Yards; time for cutting. Every owner or person in possession of a lot
on which a dwelling exists and any person owning a vacant lot or lots, except
as defined as HEAVILY WOODED, within the town limits shall cut within four
inches of the ground, all weeds, grass or other noxious growth, except for
natural growth areas, from the lot at least three times each year. The first
not later than June 1, the second not later than August 1 and the third not
later than October 1 of each year. If weeds or other noxious growth are not cut
in compliance with this subchapter, the Town Manager shall proceed to have the
weeds or other noxious growth cut and the owner or person in possession of the
lot shall be responsible to the town for the cost thereof.
(1981 Code, Ch. G, Art. I, § 4) (Am. Ord. passed 7-11-2017) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.03 HUMAN WASTE.
   No person shall urinate or deposit any human waste of any kind on any
street, lot or premises except in approved sanitary facilities.
(1981 Code, Ch. G, Art. I, § 5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.04 STAGNANT WATER.
   No person or occupant of any property shall allow stagnant water to
accumulate or remain in cellars or anywhere on his or her property.
(1981 Code, Ch. G, Art. I, § 6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.05 EATING ESTABLISHMENTS.
   All persons, firms or corporations selling food of any kind or serving
prepared meals shall comply with all requirements pertaining therein of the
State Board of Health.
(1981 Code, Ch. G, Art. I, § 7)
§ 91.06 DEBRIS FROM NEW CONSTRUCTION.
   All refuse, lumber, and debris, including vegetative debris, resulting from
the repair of any building, erection of or completion of new buildings, or
clearing of any lot, shall be removed by the property owner every 90 days. In
the circumstance where a dumpster is maintained on site during construction, as
a receptacle for all afore described material, it shall be removed by the
property owner within ten days after completion of the aforesaid work.
(1981 Code, Ch. G, Art. I, § 8) (Ord. passed 6-9-2015; Am. Ord. passed 7-10-
2018) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.07 DILAPIDATED BUILDINGS AND ABANDONED STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Legislative findings; standards. 
      (1)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160D-1201, it is hereby found and declared that:
         (a)   The existence and occupation of dwellings that are unfit for
human habitation are inimical to the welfare and dangerous and injurious to the
health and safety of the people of the town. Accordingly, a public necessity
exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings;
         (b)   Abandoned structures that present health or safety hazards as a
result of the attraction of insects or rodents, conditions creating a fire
hazard, dangerous conditions constituting a threat to children, or frequent use
by vagrants as living quarters in the absence of sanitary conditions are also
inimical to the welfare and dangerous and injurious to the health and safety of
the people of the town.
      (2)   Accordingly, the town hereby adopts this Minimum Housing Ordinance
pursuant to G.S. § 160D-1201 in an effort to:
         (a)   Provide for the repair, closing, or demolition of such
structures pursuant to the same provisions and procedures that are prescribed
herein;
         (b)   Provide that a public officer may determine that a dwelling is
unfit for human habitation if the officer finds that the conditions exist in
the dwelling that render it dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or
welfare of the occupants of the dwelling, the occupants of neighboring
dwellings, or other residents of the jurisdiction. Defective conditions may
include the following, without limiting the generality of the foregoing:
defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities;
lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; dilapidation;
disrepair; structural defects; or uncleanliness.
   (B)   Definitions.   
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         OWNER. The holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of
record.
         PARTIES IN INTEREST. All individuals, associations, and corporations
that have interests of record in a dwelling and any that are in possession of a
dwelling.
         PUBLIC AUTHORITY. Any housing authority or any officer that is in
charge of any department or branch of the government of the city, county, or
state relating to health, fire, building regulations, or other activities
concerning dwellings in the local government.
         PUBLIC OFFICER. The county inspectors as authorized by the town and
the Town Manager, as officers authorized by division (C) to exercise the powers
prescribed by the ordinances and by this section.
         UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION. A residential building which contains any
of the following conditions, which conditions the county building inspector or
his or her designee shall have found render such building dangerous or
injurious to the health, safety, or welfare of the occupants of the dwelling,
the occupants of neighboring dwellings, or other residents of the town:
            1.   Interior walls or vertical studs which seriously list, lean or
buckle to such an extent as to render the building unsafe.
            2.   Supporting member or members which show 33% or more damage or
deterioration, or non-supporting, enclosing or outside wall or covering which
shows 50% or more of damage or deterioration.
            3.   Floors or roofs which have improperly distributed loads, which
are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for
the purpose for which they are used.
            4.   Such damage by fire, wind, or other causes as rendering the
building unsafe.
            5.   Dilapidation, decay, unsanitary conditions or disrepair which
is dangerous to the health, safety or general welfare of the occupants, or
other people in the town.
            6.   Inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire, accident or
other calamities.
            7.   Defects significantly increasing hazards of fire, accident or
other calamities.
            8.   Lack of adequate ventilation, light, heating or sanitary
facilities to such an extent as to endanger the health, safety, or general
welfare of the occupants or other residents of the town.
            9.   Lack of proper electrical, heating or plumbing facilities
required by the appropriate North Carolina Building Code which constitute a
health or definite safety hazard.
            10.   Lack of adequate weatherization.
            11.   Lack of an operable smoke detector.
            12.   Any combination of substandard items which in the judgment of
the inspector renders any building dangerous or injurious to the health, safety
or general welfare of the occupants of the dwelling, the occupants of
neighboring dwellings, or other residents of the town.
      (2)   Whenever the words DWELLING, DWELLING UNIT, ROOMING-HOUSE, ROOMING
UNIT, or PREMISES are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though
they were followed by the words "or any part thereof."
   (C)   Enforcement duties of the public officers.
      (1)   Pursuant to interlocal agreement, the Pamlico County Building
Inspections Department has express authority to perform building inspections
within the town limits, and such agreement includes express authorization for
the county inspectors to enforce the town's Minimum Housing Ordinance.
Accordingly, the county's building inspectors along with the Town Manager are
hereby designated as the public officers to enforce the provisions of this
section and to exercise the duties and powers herein prescribed. Once a county
inspector has determined a dwelling and/or its conditions are unfit for human
habitation, that determination will be delivered in writing to the Town Manager
or his or her designee to enforce the remaining procedures under this section.
It shall be the duty of these officers to:
         (a)   Investigate the dwelling conditions and to inspect dwellings and
dwelling units located in the town, in order to determine which dwellings and
dwelling units are unfit for human habitation, and for the purposes of carrying
out the objectives of this section with respect such dwelling and dwelling
units.
         (b)   Take such action, together with other appropriate departments
and agencies, public and private, as may be necessary to effectuate
rehabilitation of housing which is deteriorated.
         (c)   Keep a record of the results of inspections made under this
section and an inventory of those dwellings that do not meet the minimum
standards of fitness prescribed in this chapter.
         (d)   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed in this section.
      (2)   To effectuate these duties, the public officer shall have all
powers enumerated in G.S. Ch. 160D, Art. 12, including but not limited to G.S.
§ 160D-1210.
   (D)   Inspections; duty of owners and occupants. For the purpose of making
inspections, the inspector is hereby authorized to enter, examine and survey at
all reasonable times, all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming units and
premises. The owner or occupant of a dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit,
or the person in charge thereof, shall give the inspector free access to the
dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit, and its premises at all reasonable
times for the purposes of an inspection, examination or survey. Each occupant
of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall give the owner thereof, or his or her
agent or employee, access to any part of such dwelling or dwelling unit, and
its premises, at all reasonable times for the purpose of making such repairs or
alterations as are necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this
section or with any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of this
section.
   (E)   Procedure for enforcement.
      (1)   Preliminary investigation; notice; hearing.
         (a)   Whenever a petition is filed with the public officer or his or
her designee by a public authority or by at least five residents of the town
charging that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, the
public officer shall conduct a preliminary investigation of the dwelling or
dwelling unit to determine whether it is unfit for human habitation as outlined
in division (A) of this section. The public officer may, on his or her own
motion, conduct a preliminary investigation of a dwelling of dwelling unit for
the same.
         (b)   Whenever it appears to the public officer after his or her
preliminary inspection that any dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human
habitation, as outlined in division (A) of this section, the public officer
shall disclose a basis for such charges in writing. Then, the public officer
shall issue a complaint and cause said complaint to be served upon the owner of
such dwelling or dwelling units and any parties in interest in such dwellings
or dwelling units. This complaint shall state the charges in that respect and
shall contain a notice that a hearing will be held before the Town Manager, or
his or her designee, at a place within the town in which the property is
located, fixed not less than ten nor more than 30 days after the serving of the
complaint.
         (c)   The owner and parties in interest shall have the right to file
an answer to the complaint and to appear in person, or otherwise, and give
testimony at the place and time fixed in the complaint. Notice of the hearing
shall also be given to at least one of the persons signing a petition relating
to the dwelling. Any person desiring to do so may attend such hearing and give
evidence relevant to the matter being heard. The rules of evidence prevailing
in courts of law or equity shall not be controlling in hearings before the Town
Manager under this section.
      (2)   Procedure after hearing; orders. After notice and hearing pursuant
to division (E)(1) of this section, the public officer shall state in writing
his or her determination whether such dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for
human habitation and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner one of
the following orders, as appropriate:
         (a)   If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling can be
made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, the order
shall require the owner, within the time specified, to repair, alter, or
improve the dwelling in order to render it fit for human habitation. The order
may require that the property be vacated and closed only if continued occupancy
during the time allowed for repair will present a significant threat of bodily
harm, taking into account the nature of the necessary repairs, alterations, or
improvements; the current state of the property; and any additional risks due
to the presence and capacity of minors under the age of 18 or occupants with
physical or mental disabilities. The order shall state that the failure to make
timely repairs as directed in the order shall make the dwelling subject to the
issuance of an unfit order and ordinance under division (E)(3) of this section.
         (b)   If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the dwelling cannot
be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the value of the dwelling, the
order shall require the owner, within the time specified in the order, to
remove or demolish the dwelling. However, notwithstanding any other provision
of law, if the dwelling is located in a historic district and the Historic
District Commission determines, after an administrative hearing as provided by
ordinance, that the dwelling is of particular significance or value toward
maintaining the character of the district, and the dwelling has not been
condemned as unsafe, the order may require that the dwelling be vacated and
closed consistent with G.S. § 160D-949.
      (3)   Unfit order; failure to comply with order; repair, closing, and
posting.
         (a)   If the owner of any dwelling or dwelling unit shall fail to
comply with an order of the public officer issued pursuant to division (E)(2)
of this section, the public officer shall submit to the Board of Commissioners
an ordinance ordering the public officer to cause the dwelling or dwelling unit
to be vacated and closed, removed or demolished, or to be repaired, altered or
improved, to comply with the minimum standards of fitness established by this
section. The ordinance submitted by the public officer shall order the public
officer to proceed to effectuate the purpose of this section with respect to
the particular property or properties that the public officer shall have found
to be unfit for human habitation and which property or properties shall be
described in the ordinance.
         (b)   The ordinance submitted to the Board of Commissioners by the
public officer shall follow the procedural requirements of G.S. § 160D-601(a).
         (c)   Upon adoption by the Board of Commissioners, that said ordinance
shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds in the county where
the property or properties are located and shall be indexed in the name of the
property owner in the grantor index.
         (d)   After the adoption of the ordinance, the public officer may then
cause the dwelling to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and
closed, as directed in the ordinance. The public officer may then also cause to
be posted on the main entrance of any dwelling so closed a placard with the
following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or
occupation of this building for human habitation is prohibited and unlawful."
Occupation of a building so posted shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor.
      (4)   Abandonment of intent to repair. If the dwelling has been vacated
and closed for a period of one year pursuant to an ordinance adopted pursuant
to division (E)(3) of this section or after a public officer issues an order or
proceedings have commenced under the substandard housing regulations regarding
a dwelling to be repaired or vacated and closed as provided in G.S. § 160D-
1203, then the Board of Commissioners may find that the owner has abandoned the
intent and purpose to repair, alter, or improve the dwelling in order to render
it fit for human habitation and that the continuation of the dwelling in its
vacated and closed status would be inimical to the health, safety, and welfare
of the town in that the dwelling would continue to deteriorate, would create a
fire and safety hazard, would be a threat to children and vagrants, would
attract persons intent on criminal activities, would cause or contribute to
blight and the deterioration of property values in the area, and would render
unavailable property and a dwelling that might otherwise have been made
available to ease the persistent shortage of decent and affordable housing in
this state, then in such circumstances, the town may, after the expiration of
such one-year period, enact an ordinance and serve such ordinance on the owner,
setting forth the following:
         (a)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it
fit for human habitation can be made at a cost not exceeding 50% of the then
current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require that the owner
either repair or demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days.
         (b)   If it is determined that the repair of the dwelling to render it
fit for human habitation cannot be made at a cost not exceeding 50% of the then
current value of the dwelling, the ordinance shall require the owner to
demolish and remove the dwelling within 90 days. An ordinance under this
division shall be recorded in the office of the register of deeds in the county
wherein the property or properties are located and shall be indexed in the name
of the property owner in the grantor index. If the owner fails to comply with
this section, the public officer shall effectuate the purpose of the ordinance
adopted.
      (5)   Additional notices to affordable housing organizations. Whenever a
determination is made pursuant to divisions (E)(3) or (4) of this section that
a dwelling must be vacated and closed, or removed or demolished, under the
provisions of this section, notice of the order shall be given by first- class
mail to any organization involved in providing or restoring dwellings for
affordable housing that has filed a written request for such notices. A minimum
period of 45 days from the mailing of such notice shall be given before removal
or demolition by action of the public officer, to allow the opportunity for any
organization to negotiate with the owner to make repairs, lease, or purchase
the property for the purpose of providing affordable housing. The public
officer, his or her designee, or the Town Clerk shall certify the mailing of
the notices, and the certification shall be conclusive in the absence of fraud.
Only an organization that has filed a written request for such notices may
raise the issue of failure to mail such notices, and the sole remedy shall be
an order requiring the public officer to wait 45 days before causing removal or
demolition.
      (6)   Liens.
         (a)   The amount of the cost of repairs, alterations, or improvements,
or vacating and closing, or removal or demolition by the public officer shall
be a lien against the real property upon which the cost was incurred, which
lien shall be filed, have the same priority, and be collected as the lien for
special assessment provided in G.S. Ch. 160A, Art. 10.
         (b)   If the real property upon which the cost was incurred is located
in an incorporated city, then the amount of the cost is also a lien on any
other real property of the owner located within the city limits or within one
mile thereof except for the owner's primary residence. The additional lien
provided in this division is inferior to all prior liens and shall be collected
as a money judgment.
         (c)   If the dwelling is removed or demolished by the public officer,
the local government shall sell the materials of the dwelling, and any personal
property, fixtures, or appurtenances found in or attached to the dwelling, and
shall credit the proceeds of the sale against the cost of the removal or
demolition, and any balance remaining shall be deposited with the Clerk of
Superior Court of Pamlico County by the public officer, shall be secured in a
manner directed by the court, and shall be disbursed by the court to the
persons found to be entitled thereto by final order or decree of the court.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the
power of the town to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or
abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise.
      (7)   Civil action. If any occupant fails to comply with an order to
vacate a dwelling, the public officer may file a civil action in the name of
the town to remove such occupant. The action to vacate the dwelling shall be in
the nature of summary ejectment and shall be commenced by filing a complaint
naming as defendant any person occupying such dwelling, pursuant to the
provisions of G.S. § 160D-1203(8).
      (8)   Appeal; remedies.
         (a)   An appeal from any decision or order of the public officer is a
quasi- judicial matter and may be taken by any person aggrieved thereby or by
any officer, board or commission or the town to the zoning Board of Adjustment.
Any appeal from the public officer shall be taken within ten days from the
rendering of the decision or service of the order by filing with the Town Clerk
and with the zoning Board of Adjustment a notice of appeal, which shall specify
the grounds upon which the appeal is based. Upon the filing of any notice of
appeal, the Town Manager or his or her designee shall forthwith transmit to the
Board all papers constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from
was made. When an appeal is from a decision of the public officer refusing to
allow the person aggrieved thereby to do any act, his or her decision shall
remain in force until modified or reversed. When any appeal is taken from a
decision of the public officer requiring the person aggrieved to do any act,
the appeal shall have the effect of suspending the requirement until the
hearing by the Board, unless the public officer certifies to the Board, after
the notice of appeal is filed with him or her, that because of the facts stated
in the certificate (a copy of which shall be furnished to the appellant), a
suspension of his or her requirement would cause imminent peril to life or
property. In that case, the requirement shall not be suspended except by a
restraining order, which may be granted for due cause shown upon not less than
one day's written notice to the inspector by the Board, or by a court of record
upon petition made pursuant to division (E)(3)(d) of this section.
         (b)   The Board of Adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing
appeals, shall give due notice to the parties, and shall render its decision
within a reasonable time. Any party may appear in person or by agent or
attorney. The Board of Adjustment may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or
may modify the decision or order appealed from, and may make any decision and
order that in its opinion ought to be made in the matter, and to that end it
shall have all the powers of the public officer, but the concurring vote of
four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse or modify any decision
or order of the public officer. The Board of Adjustment shall have power also
in passing upon appeals, when practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships
would result from carrying out the strict letter of the ordinance, to adapt the
application of the ordinance to the necessities of the case to the end that the
spirit of the ordinance shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured,
and substantial justice done.
         (c)   Every decision of the Board of Adjustment under this section
shall be subject to review by proceedings in the nature of certiorari to the
Superior Court of Pamlico County instituted within 15 days of the decision of
the Board, but not otherwise.
   (F)   Service of complaint and orders. As authorized by G.S. § 160D-1206:
      (1)   Complaints or orders issued by a public officer pursuant to this
section shall be served upon persons either personally or by certified mail.
When service is made by certified mail, a copy of the complaint or order may
also be sent by regular mail. Service shall be deemed sufficient if the
certified mail is unclaimed or refused but the regular mail is not returned by
the post office within ten days after the mailing. If regular mail is used, a
notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the
premises affected.
      (2)   If the identities of any owners or the whereabouts of persons are
unknown and cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of
reasonable diligence, or, if the owners are known but have refused to accept
service by certified mail, and the public officer makes an affidavit to that
effect, then the serving of the complaint or order upon the owners or other
persons may be made by publication in a newspaper having general circulation in
the jurisdiction at least once no later than the time at which personal service
would be required under the provisions of this section. When service is made by
publication, a notice of the pending proceedings shall be posted in a
conspicuous place on the premises thereby affected.
(1981 Code Revision) (Am. Ord. passed 6-10-2025)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.08 SMOKING IN MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS AND VEHICLES.
   (A)   SMOKING means the inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying of a lighted
pipe, cigar, cigarette or other combustible tobacco product, including e-
cigarettes.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any building or
facility owned, leased, operated, occupied, managed or controlled by the town.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any vehicle owned or
leased by the town.
(1981 Code Revision) (Am. Ord. passed 2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
PRIVIES AND SEPTIC TANKS
§ 91.25 PRIVIES REGULATED.
   No privies will be permitted in town limits, except construction sites and
special events.
(1981 Code, Ch. G, Art. III, § 1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 91.26 SEPTIC TANKS REGULATED.
   Septic tanks may be installed where sewer is not reasonably accessible;
provided, the tank is constructed in accordance with the specifications of the
State Board of Health.
(1981 Code, Ch. G, Art. III, § 2)
CHAPTER 92: GARBAGE AND REFUSE COLLECTION
Section
   
92.01   Definition
   
92.02   Garbage required to be promptly removed
   
92.03   Garbage cans
   
92.04   Wet garbage
   
92.05   Deposit of garbage in public places and on private property
   
92.06   Transportation of garbage and slops by private persons
   
92.07   Hours for placing cans
§ 92.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GARBAGE. All refuse, animal, fruit and other vegetable matter, all tin cans,
glassware and crockery in which any matter has been put up or stored and all
rags, waste paper, floor sweepings and other combustible refuse, except
building materials, scraps and tree trimmings.
(1981 Code, Ch. G, Art. II, § 1)
§ 92.02 GARBAGE REQUIRED TO BE PROMPTLY REMOVED.
   No garbage that has become decayed or that shall otherwise be a menace to
health or cleanliness shall be allowed to remain in any dwelling, house,
apartment, trailer, restaurant, lunch stand, fruit stand, store or other
building or on any premises a longer time than shall be reasonably necessary to
remove and deposit the same in a can or cans as hereinafter provided in this
chapter.
(1981 Code, Ch. G, Art. II, § 2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.03 GARBAGE CANS.
   The occupant of every building premises or place, where garbage does or may
exist, shall be provided with a garbage can in which he or she shall deposit
all garbage existing at the place occupied. All cans shall be placed in a place
that can be conveniently reached by the garbage collector. No garbage can shall
be placed, kept or left on any street, alley or public way for any purpose
whatsoever. All garbage cans shall be kept reasonably clean by the use of lye
or other effective cleaner.
(1981 Code, Ch. G, Art. II, § 3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.04 WET GARBAGE.
   All wet garbage shall have the liquid drained off and shall be wrapped in
paper or plastic before it is placed in the garbage can, thus preventing smell
and breeding of flies in summer, and freezing and adhesion to the can in
winter.
(1981 Code, Ch. G, Art. II, § 4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.05 DEPOSIT OF GARBAGE IN PUBLIC PLACES AND ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall throw, place or deposit any garbage in any street, alley,
public place or private property within the town limits, except in garbage cans
or official garbage vehicles.
(1981 Code, Ch. G, Art. II, § 5) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.06 TRANSPORTATION OF GARBAGE AND SLOPS BY PRIVATE PERSONS.
   No person or persons shall collect, handle, haul or transport on any of the
streets, alleys, public ways or places of the town any garbage without first
having procured a permit therein from the Town Manager, except for transporting
personal accumulations to the sanitary land fill.
(1981 Code, Ch. G, Art. II, § 6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.07 HOURS FOR PLACING CANS.
   Garbage cans containing garbage and trash for removal shall be placed on the
premises from which the same are to be removed at or before 7:00 a.m. on the
day scheduled for removal, but not earlier than 24 hours before scheduled
removal. Emptied cans must be returned to a safe place on the same day.
(1981 Code, Ch. G, Art. II, § 7) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 93: NUISANCES
Section
Noise
   
93.01   Prohibitions
   
93.02   Noises expressly prohibited
Bills and Other Advertising
   
93.15   Posting bills; other advertising
Noxious Odors
   
93.30   Prohibition
   
93.31   Other conditions declared a public nuisance
Abatement of Nuisance
   
93.45   Required
   
93.46   Investigation of conditions
   
93.47   Notice to abate nuisance
   
93.48   Hearing
   
93.49   Failure to abate nuisance
   
93.50   Liens for cost to abate nuisance
   
93.51   Procedure is alternative to other authorized procedures
NOISE
§ 93.01 PROHIBITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to create, assist
in creating or permit the continuance of any unreasonably loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noise in the town. Noise of a character, intensity and duration as
to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual is prohibited.
(1981 Code, Ch. H, Art. II, § 1) (Am. Ord. passed 2-13-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.02 NOISES EXPRESSLY PROHIBITED.
   The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and
unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but this enumeration shall not
be deemed to be exclusive:
   (A)   The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a danger signal if
another vehicle is approaching or out of control, or if in motion only as a
danger signal after or as brakes are being applied and deceleration of the
vehicle is intended; the creation by means of any signal device or any
unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of the device for an
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
   (B)   The use of any gong or siren upon any vehicle, other than police, fire
or other emergency vehicle;
   (C)   The use or operation of any piano, manual or automatic, phonograph,
radio, CD, loudspeaker or any other instrument or sound amplifying devices so
loudly as to disturb persons in the vicinity thereof, or in a manner as renders
the same a public nuisance; provided, however, that upon application to the
Town Manager, permits may be granted to responsible organizations to produce
programs in music, speeches or general entertainment;
   (D)   The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long
continued noise shall disturb the comfort and repose of any person in the
vicinity;
   (E)   The use of any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle so modified or
out of repair, so loaded or in a manner as to create loud or unnecessary
grating, grinding, exhaust noise, rattling or other noises;
   (F)   The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine,
stationary internal combustion engine, motor vehicle, except through a muffler
or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises;
   (G)   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air or
gasoline unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and reduced;
   (H)   The shouting and crying of peddlers, barkers, hawkers and vendors
which disturbs the quiet and peace of the neighborhood;
   (I)   The use of any drum, loud speaker or other instrument or device for
the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance,
show, sale or display of merchandise; and
   (J)   The use of any mechanical loud speakers or amplifiers on trucks or
other moving vehicles for advertising purposes or other purpose except where
permission is received from the Town Manager.
(1981 Code, Ch. H, Art. II, § 2) (Am. Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
BILLS AND OTHER ADVERTISING
§ 93.15 POSTING BILLS; OTHER ADVERTISING.
   No person shall stick, paint, brand, stamp, write or put upon any house,
fence, wall, pavement, post or upon any property owned by any person, firm,
corporation or town any printed, written, painted or other advertisement, bill,
notice, sign or poster, without first having obtained the written permission of
the owner of the property and having received permission from the Town Manager.
(1981 Code, Ch. H, Art. II, § 4) (Am. Ord. passed 2-13-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
NOXIOUS ODORS
§ 93.30 PROHIBITION.
   The Town Board finds and declares that the following specific condition is
prejudicial to the general health, safety and welfare of the town and its
citizens, lessens the attractiveness and livability of the town and when
located on any lot or parcel of land within the town limits are a nuisance and
therefore unlawful: any conditions or use of property which results in the
emission of pollutants and particles into the atmosphere or causes noxious
odors and stenches to be emitted into the air.
(Am. Ord. passed 2-13-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.31 OTHER CONDITIONS DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   The existence of any of the following conditions in any building, dwelling
or dwelling unit or on any vacant lot or other parcel of land within the
corporate limits of the town hereby is declared to be dangerous and prejudicial
to the public health or safety and to constitute a public nuisance and is
hereby prohibited.
   (A)   The uncontrolled growth of brush, weeds, grass, or other growth
(unimproved lots defined as HEAVILY WOODED are excepted):
      (1)   To a height of more than 12 inches;
      (2)   So as to cause, threaten or be likely to cause a fire hazard;
      (3)   So as to cause, threaten or be likely to cause bushes and shrubbery
to grow beyond the property line and/or in the public right-of-way towards the
street in a manner that restricts visibility of traffic passing on the street
or impedes the delivery of the U.S. Mail or creates an obstruction to vehicular
traffic on adjacent roadways; or
      (4)   So as to cause, threaten or be likely to cause the inhabitation or
breeding therein or thereon other than in their natural habitat of rats, mice,
snakes, flies, mosquitoes or other pests or vermin of any kind which are or may
be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or safety.
   (B)   Trees uprooted or severely damaged, including trees that are
excessively leaning, or which are detrimental to the public health and safety
and/or to any public or private property.
   (C)   Any accumulation of papers, rags, rubbish, trash, junk, or other
matter causing or threatening or likely to cause the accumulation of stagnant
water, a fire hazard, or the inhabitation or breeding therein or thereon of
rats, mice, snakes, flies, mosquitoes or other pests or vermin of any kind
which are or may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public health or safety.
   (D)   Any accumulation of animal or vegetable matter or waste that is
offensive by virtue of odors or vapors, or by the inhabitation or breeding
therein or thereon of rats, mice, snakes, flies, mosquitoes or other pests or
vermin of any kind which are or may be dangerous or prejudicial to the public
health or safety.
   (E)   The open storage of any ice box, refrigerator, stove, appliances,
glass, building or construction materials, building scraps, or similar items.
   (F)   The open storage of inoperable vehicles and boats or inoperable
personal watercraft or unlicensed trailers, including, but not limited to jet
skis and wave runners, provided that the restoration of antique automobiles as
defined in G.S. § 105-330.9(a) or boats under construction shall not be a
violation of this section so long as the restoration or construction work does
not exceed 12 months.
   (G)   Allowing any condition to remain once an authorized federal, state,
county or town official or employee declares it to be detrimental to the public
health or safety.
   (H)   Storing abandoned, junked, or nuisance equipment or vehicles on street
rights-of-way or on private property when the equipment is visible either from
a street or from a neighbor's property.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE
§ 93.45 REQUIRED.
   The owner, lessee, tenant or occupant of any building or premises, where
there shall be a nuisance or any violation of any ordinance relating to health
and sanitation, shall be jointly and severally liable therefor and each of them
may be required to abate the same or comply with the order of the appropriate
enforcement official within the time specified within the order.
(Ord. passed - -2021; Am. Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
Statutory reference:
   Abatement of public health nuisance, see G.S. § 130A-19
   Abatement of public health nuisance by local health director, see G.S. §
130A-19
   Authority of town to abate, see G.S. § 160D-404(c)
§ 93.46 INVESTIGATION OF CONDITIONS.
   The Mayor or his or her designated representative, upon notice from any
person of the existence of any of the conditions described in this chapter,
shall cause to be made such investigation as may be necessary to determine
whether, in fact, conditions exist as to constitute a nuisance or otherwise
violate the provisions of this chapter. The Mayor or his or her designated
representative may conduct such investigation in consultation with individuals
who have expertise in specific areas addressed in the notice.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
§ 93.47 NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE.
   Upon a determination that the conditions constituting a public nuisance or
other conditions violating the provisions of this chapter exist, the Mayor or
his or her designated representative, shall notify, by certified mail, return
receipt requested, the owner and any other person in possession of the real or
personal property in question of the conditions violating the provisions of
this chapter, and shall order the proper abatement of said violation or public
nuisance within ten business days from the date of the written notice. In the
discretion of the Mayor or his or her designated representative, such notice
may be hand-delivered by law enforcement officials in lieu of mailing the
notice by certified mail, return receipt requested. The person who mails or
hand delivers the notice shall retain a written record to show the names and
addresses to which the notice was mailed or delivered and the date of such mail
or delivery. If either of the two methods of notification specified above is
attempted without success, then notice hereunder shall be given by posting of
the same in a conspicuous place upon the real or personal property in question.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
§ 93.48 HEARING.
   Within seven business days from receipt of the notice provided for in §
93.47, the owner, occupant, or person in possession of the real or personal
property in question may request a hearing before the Mayor or his or her
designated representative, to be conducted at Town Hall, or other place agreed
to by the parties. The Mayor or his or her designated representative shall fix
a time for the hearing, and the initial abatement order shall be temporarily
suspended pending the hearing. At the hearing, the individual affected by the
order shall be given the opportunity to present evidence to refute the findings
which supported the abatement order. Upon completion of the hearing, the Mayor
or his or her designated representative shall consider the evidence before him
or her and shall either revoke the initial order, issue an order which differs
from the initial order, or reinstate the initial order of abatement. An
aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the Mayor or his or her designated
representative to the Board of Commissioners of the town, which appeal shall be
heard at a time and date determined by the Board of Commissioners. The appeal
process before the Board of Commissioners shall be the same as the process
before the Mayor or his or her designated representative. Any appeal from a
decision rendered by the Board of Commissioners shall be as provided by law.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
§ 93.49 FAILURE TO ABATE NUISANCE.
   If any person, having been ordered to abate the public nuisance through
anyone of the above procedures, fails, neglects or refuses to abate or remove
the condition or conditions prohibited by this chapter or otherwise
constituting a nuisance within ten business days from service of the notice,
then the Mayor or his or her designated representative shall have the authority
to seek an order from a court of competent jurisdiction to cause the condition
to be removed or otherwise remedied by having employees of the town or
independent contractors to go upon the premises and remove or otherwise abate
the nuisance or other violation of this chapter under the supervision of an
officer or employee designated by the Mayor or his or her designated
representative.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
§ 93.50 LIENS FOR COST TO ABATE NUISANCE.
   Any costs incurred by the town to abate any nuisance described in this
chapter or any other condition that is dangerous or prejudicial to the public
health or public safety shall be paid by the individual responsible for the
condition. Should the individual responsible for the condition fail to pay all
costs incurred by the town within 30 days after being mailed a statement for
said costs, the town shall have a lien on the land or premises where the
nuisance occurred, which lien shall be collected and have the priority as
provided by law, including, but not limited to G.S. §§ 160A-175 and 160A-193.
(Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
§ 93.51 PROCEDURE IS ALTERNATIVE TO OTHER AUTHORIZED PROCEDURES.
   The procedure set forth hereinabove shall be in addition to any other
remedies that may now or hereafter exist under law for the abatement of public
nuisances, and the provisions shall not prevent the town from proceeding in a
criminal action against any person violating the provisions of this chapter as
provided in §
10.99.
(Am. Ord. passed 2-13-2024)
CHAPTER 94: ANIMALS
Section
   
94.01   Definitions
   
94.02   Bird sanctuary
   
94.03   Dangerous, domestic animals and livestock
   
94.04   Dogs
   
94.05   Hog pens
   
94.06   Fowl
   
94.07   Hunting
   
94.08   Enforcement
 
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER.  Any person designated to enforce this chapter.
   ANIMAL OWNER.  Any person or legal entity that has possessory property or
custodial right in an animal.
   ANIMAL.  Any domesticated animal.
   AT LARGE.  An animal that is off the owner’s real property and not under
control.
   BIRD SANCTUARY.  An area designated for the preservation of birds.
   BITE.  Any puncturing, tearing or scratching of the skin caused by an
animal’s teeth.
   CONTROL.  An animal within the real property limits of its owner or under
the control of its owner.
   DANGEROUS DOG.  A dog who:
      (1)   Without provocation has killed or inflicted severe injury on a
person;
      (2)   Determined by the County Dangerous Dog Committee to be potentially
dangerous because the dog has engaged in one or more of the behaviors listed
under the definition of potentially dangerous dog; or
      (3)   Is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog
fighting, or any dog trained for dog fighting.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL.  Any animal that is owned, kept or controlled by a person.
   HUMANE TREATMENT.  Care of an animal to include, but not limited to adequate
heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome food/water, consistent with the
normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal’s size, species and breed.
   NOISY ANIMAL.  An animal that by frequent or continued noise disturbs the
comfort and repose of any person in the vicinity.
   NUISANCE.  An animal that annoys humans and other animals and interferes
with their rights to enjoyment of life and property. The term NUISANCE
includes, but is not limited to: damages, soils or defecates on property other
than the owner’s, public property, and street right-of-ways; molest or
intimidates pedestrians; chases vehicles or bicycles or fits the definition of
a noisy animal.
   NUMBERS/DENSITIES OF ANIMALS.  No person shall keep more than four animals
outside their residence on lots or premises less than one acre.
   OWNER’S REAL PROPERTY.  Any real property owned or leased by the owner of
the animal, but not including any public right-of-ways or common area of any
multi-family dwellings.
   PENALTY.  Any actions taken in the enforcement of this chapter.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.  A dog that the County Dangerous Dog Committee
has determined to have:
      (1)   Inflicted a bite on a person that resulted in broken bones or
disfiguring lacerations or required cosmetic surgery or hospitalization;
      (2)   Killed or inflicted severe injury upon a domestic animal when not
on the owner’s real property; or
      (3)   Approached a person when not on the owner’s property in a vicious
or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack.
   SERIOUS BODILY INJURY.  An injury characterized by severe bite wounds or
severe ripping and tearing of muscle or tissue that would cause a reasonably
prudent person to seek treatment from a medical professional and would require
hospitalization without regard to whether the person actually sought medical
treatment.
   STRAY ANIMAL.  Any animal that is roaming and not under control and whose
ownership is not readily ascertainable. Absence of a current rabies tag and/or
tag or chip identifying the owner of any animal is evidence of its status as a
stray.
   VACCINATED.  An animal which has been currently and properly injected with a
rabies vaccine, licensed for use in that species.
   VICIOUS ANIMAL.  Any animal declared vicious by the Public Health Director
when the animal has attacked a person causing bodily harm without being teased,
molested, provoked, beaten, tortured or otherwise harmed.
   WILD ANIMAL. All species of animals that naturally exist in an unconfined
state and are not usually domesticated.
(Am. Ord. passed 2024)
§ 94.02 BIRD SANCTUARY.
   The area embraced within the corporate limits of the town and all lands
owned or leased, now or in the future, by the town outside the corporate limits
are hereby designated as a bird sanctuary.
(1981 Code, Ch. H, Art. III, § 1)
§ 94.03 DANGEROUS, DOMESTIC ANIMALS AND LIVESTOCK.
   (A)   Possession or harboring of animals which are dangerous to persons or
property is prohibited.
   (B)   Possession or harboring of domestic animals other than the usual
household pets, such as dogs, cats and birds is prohibited.
   (C)   It is the responsibility of the animal owners to restrict/prohibit
animal noise that annoys, disturbs or frightens their neighbors.
   (D)   Horses are permitted on tracts of land of at least five acres.
   (E)   No other form of livestock is permitted.
   (F)   No commercial enterprise of animals is permitted.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, possessing or harboring an
animal to abandon that animal.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person to molest, torture, deprive of
necessary sustenance, cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, wound, injure,
poison or subject to conditions detrimental to its health or general welfare of
any animal, or to cause or procure such action.
   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any owner or keeper to fail to provide his or
her animal(s) with proper shelter and protection from the weather, sufficient
and wholesome food and water to keep his or her animal(s) in good health and
comfort and the opportunity for daily exercise.
(1981 Code, Ch. H, Art. III, § 2) (Ord. passed 2-9-1999) Penalty, see §
10.99 
§ 94.04 DOGS.
   (A)   Owners of dogs are responsible for the acts of their dogs. The owner
of a dog shall be strictly liable in civil damages for any injuries or property
damage the dog inflicts upon a person, his or her property, or another animal.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any owner to keep any dangerous, potentially
dangerous, or vicious animal within town unless it is confined within a secure
building or enclosure or unless it is securely muzzled and under restraint by a
competent person who, by means of a leash, has the animal firmly under control
at all times.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep a dog that has not
been currently and properly vaccinated with an appropriate rabies vaccine.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any dog, stray or otherwise, to run at large.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or harbor or
maintain within the town, any dog that habitually or repeatedly barks, howls,
or whines in a manner or to such extent that it is a public nuisance or causes
serious annoyance to the neighborhood or to any residence or interferes with
the reasonable use and enjoyment of public streets, sidewalks, and other public
areas.
(1981 Code Revision) (Am. Ord. passed 2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.05 HOG PENS.
   No person shall be permitted to keep or maintain any hogs, hog’s pens or
pigs within the town limits.
(1981 Code, Ch. H. Art. III, § 3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.06 FOWL.
   No person shall keep or maintain fowls.
(1981 Code, Ch. H, Art. III. § 4) (Ord. passed 2-9-1999) Penally, see §
10.99
§ 94.07 HUNTING.
   The release of hunting dogs during game season within the town limits shall
be prohibited. Hunting dog owners or releasers shall be held responsible.
(Ord. passed 9-9-2003; Am. Ord. passed 11-10-2015) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 94.08 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Dangerous, potentially dangerous, and vicious animal violations shall
be reported to the County Animal Control Officer to enforce state laws
regarding dangerous, potentially dangerous and vicious animals.
   (B)   Violation of rabies vaccination requirements shall be reported to the
County Animal Control Officer for enforcement.
   (C)   Dogs, stray animals, or at-large animals running at large shall be
reported to the Town Manager and to the County Animal Control Officer for
enforcement.
   (D)   Nuisance and noisy animals shall be reported on an official complaint
form signed by the complainant and a witness for follow-up and enforcement by a
town official(s).
   (E)   Number/densities of animals violations shall be reported on an
official complaint form signed by the complainant and a witness for follow-up
and enforcement by a town official(s).
   (F)   Hog pens, fowl and hunting violations shall be reported on an official
complaint form signed by the complainant and a witness for follow-up and
enforcement by a town official(s).
(Am. Ord. passed 2024)
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Penalty for dangerous, potentially dangerous, and vicious animals
violations shall be determined by official action(s) of the County Animal
Control Officer.
   (B)   Penalties for rabies vaccination, stray animals and bitches at-large
violations shall be determined by official action(s) of the County Animal
Control Officer.
   (C)   If official complaints for at-large animals, nuisance and noisy
animals, number/densities of animal, hog pens, fowls and hunting violations
appear to exist, the hearing process for abatement nuisances, §
93.46 shall apply. Based upon the hearing, the town may impose upon the
violator a civil penalty of $25 for the first offence. The penalty will double
for each offence, thereafter, by the same animal owner: $25, $50, $100, $200,
etc.
(Am. Ord. passed 11-12-2017; Am. Ord. passed 2024)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT SALESPERSONS
      
111.   RESERVED
      
112.   GARAGE AND YARD SALES
CHAPTER 110: PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT SALESPERSONS
Section
   
110.01   Definitions
   
110.02   Peddlers and itinerant salespersons prohibited
   
110.03   Municipal policy on soliciting
   
110.04   Notice regulating soliciting
   
110.05   Duty of solicitors to ascertain notice
   
110.06   Prohibited solicitation
§ 110.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS.  The business carried on by any person who is an itinerant
merchant, peddler or solicitor as defined in this section.
   GOODS.  Merchandise of any description whatsoever, and includes, but is not
restricted to, wares and foodstuffs.
   ITINERANT MERCHANT.  Any person, whether as owner, agent or consignee, who
engages in a temporary business of selling goods within the municipality and
who, in the furtherance of the business, uses any building, structure, vehicle
or any place within the municipality.
   PEDDLER.  Any person, not an itinerant merchant, who:
      (1)   Travels from place to place by any means carrying goods for sale or
making sales or making deliveries; or
      (2)   Without traveling from place to place, sells or offers goods for
sale from any public place within the municipality.
   SOLICITOR.  Any person who travels by any means from place to place, taking
or attempting to take orders for sale of goods to be delivered in the future or
for services to be performed in the future. A person who is a SOLICITOR is not
a peddler.
§ 110.02 PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT SALESPERSONS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to sell, offer for sale
or solicit orders for goods, wares, merchandise, food, periodicals or services
by going from door-to-door (“peddle” or “solicit”) or to beg or panhandle
within the town unless the peddler or itinerant salesperson has been requested
or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of the private residence and
premises. Nor shall any peddler or itinerant salesperson be permitted to engage
in activities upon any public park, street, highway, alley, sidewalk or other
public way or upon any property owned or leased by the town. This section shall
not apply to solicitation performed by organizations designated as non-profit
by the United States Internal Revenue Service.
(1981 Code Revision) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.03 MUNICIPAL POLICY ON SOLICITING.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the municipality that the
occupants of the residences in the municipality shall make the determination of
whether solicitors shall be, or shall not be, invited to their respective
residences.
§ 110.04 NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING.
   (A)   Notice of the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence,
shall be given on a weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four
inches in size, the letters shall be at least one- third inch in height,
exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence, indicating the
determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words, as follows:
   NO SOLICITORS INVITED, or
   NO SOLICITORS, or
   NO SOLICITING
   (B)   The card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any
solicitor of the determination by the occupant of the residence of the
information contained thereon.
(Ord. passed 8-12-2014; Am. Ord. passed 2024)
§ 110.05 DUTY OF SOLICITORS TO ASCERTAIN NOTICE.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises
in the municipality upon which a residence is located to first examine the
notice provided for in §
110.04 if any is attached, and be governed by the statement contained on the
notice. If the notice states any of the following: “NO SOLICITORS INVITED,” “NO
SOLICITORS,” “NO SOLICITING,” then the solicitor, whether registered or not,
shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises.
   (B)   Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether
invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when
requested to do so by the occupant.
(Am. Ord. passed 2024) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.06 PROHIBITED SOLICITATION.
   It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of the residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in soliciting in defiance of the notice exhibited
at the residence in accordance with the provisions of §
110.04 above.
Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 111: RESERVED
CHAPTER 112: GARAGE AND YARD SALES
Section
   
112.01   Garage and yard sales
§ 112.01 GARAGE AND YARD SALES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      YARD SALE. A sale of personal property which has been owned or used
previously by an individual residing on the premises where the sale is
conducted. The term GARAGE SALE is included within the definition of YARD SALE.
The incidental sale of one or two items of personal property is not a YARD
SALE.
   (B)   The conduct of general retail sales or commercial activities in
residential districts are prohibited except as otherwise expressly authorized
by this code.
   (C)   Yard sales are permitted only insofar as they are conducted consistent
with the limitations set out in this section.
   (D)   Not more than four yard sales per year may be conducted at any
location. No single sale shall be conducted longer than two consecutive days.
Yard sales shall be conducted during daylight hours only.
   (E)   Personal property offered for sale at a yard sale may be displayed on
a driveway, in a garage, in a front yard or in a rear yard. Yard sales shall
not be conducted in any public right-of-way.
   (F)   Signs used to advertise yard sales shall be displayed only on the
premises on which the sale is conducted, except that two off-site directional
signs are permitted. Signs advertising yard sales shall be removed within 24
hours and the site of the sale shall be cleared within 24 hours.
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
      
131.   FIREARMS
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
   
130.01   Indecent, offensive or disorderly conduct
   
130.02   Vagrants
   
130.03   Houses of ill fame
   
130.04   Profanity and boisterous conduct
   
130.05   Drinking in public
   
130.06   Narcotics
§ 130.01 INDECENT, OFFENSIVE OR DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   No occupant of any house, whether residence or business, shall permit the
same to be kept in an indecent or offensive or disorderly manner or permit
loafers or idle persons to congregate therein or in front of same to the
annoyance of persons passing or living in the vicinity.
(1981 Code, Ch. H, Art. I, § 1) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.02 VAGRANTS.
   (A)   A person commits a violation if he or she loiters or prowls in a
place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under
circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the
vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining
whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon
appearance of a police officer, refuses to identify himself or herself, or
manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or herself or any object. Unless flight
by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a police officer
shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person
an opportunity to dispel any alarm which would otherwise be warranted, by
requesting the person to identify himself or herself and to explain his or her
presence or conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this
section if the police officer did not comply with the preceding sentence, or if
it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and, if
it had been believed by the police officer at the time, would have dispelled
the alarm. Any police officer may arrest any person suspected of being a
loiterer or prowler without a warrant if it reasonably appears that the delay
in arresting the suspect caused by obtaining a warrant would result in the
suspect’s escape.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, after first being warned by a
police officer, or where a “no loitering” sign or signs have been posted, to
loiter, stand, sit, or lie in or upon any public or quasi-public sidewalk,
street, curb, cross-walk, walkway area, mall or that portion of private
property utilized for
public use, so as to hinder or obstruct unreasonably the free passage of
pedestrians or vehicles thereon. It shall be unlawful for any person to block,
obstruct, or prevent free access to the entrance to any building open to the
public.
   (C)   For the purpose of this section, PUBLIC PLACE has the following
definition unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning: an area generally visible to public view, including streets,
sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, automobiles
(whether moving or not), and buildings open to the general public, including
those which serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and
entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
(1981 Code, Ch. H, Art. I, § 2) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.03 HOUSES OF ILL FAME.
   No person shall keep a house or other place of ill fame in the town and no
person shall knowingly rent any house to be used as a house of ill fame. All
adult persons living in that house shall be considered as keepers thereof and
be subject to the penalties of this code.
(1981 Code, Ch. H, Art. I, § 3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.04 PROFANITY AND BOISTEROUS CONDUCT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to use loud and boisterous language so
as to become a nuisance or use any form of profanity or indecent language on
the street or in a gathering or audience or assembly, or in any public place
whatsoever, or to indecently expose themselves within the town limits.
(1981 Code, Ch. H, Art. I, § 4) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.05 DRINKING IN PUBLIC.
   No person shall consume, serve or drink wine, beer, whiskey or alcoholic
beverages of any kind on the public streets, public property, alleys or in
public buildings.
(1981 Code, Ch. H, Art. I, § 6) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 130.06 NARCOTICS.
   All state, county and federal laws apply to the use of narcotics and drugs
in the town.
(1981 Code, Ch. H, Art. I, § 7)
CHAPTER 131: FIREARMS
Section
   
131.01   Firearms regulated
   
131.02   Firearms exemptions
§ 131.01 FIREARMS REGULATED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to use, hunt with or discharge within the town
limits any shotgun, rifle, pistol or other firearm except for the purpose and
in the manner set forth herein.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      FIREARM. Shall not include a pellet gun, air rifle, BB gun or similar gun
having or using a mechanism or device to project a missile by compressed air or
mechanical action.
   (C)   The use or discharge of a shotgun, rifle, pistol or other firearm
shall not be unlawful when used in the defense of person or property or when
used or discharged pursuant to lawful directions of law enforcement officers,
or when possessed, used or discharged by law enforcement officers, or when
possessed, used or discharged by law enforcement officers pursuant to their
lawful duties.
   (D)   Firearms concealed or not concealed are not permitted on town
property.
(1981 Code, Ch. H, Art. II, § 3) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 131.02 FIREARMS EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Firearms are permitted within designated areas of Y.M.C.A. Camp Sea
Gull for education and training by camp personnel in accordance with their
programs.
   (B)   Within the regulations of the State Wildlife Commission, the Town
Board may give written, restrictive and limited permission for the control of
damaging wild animals.
(1981 Code Revision)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
      
152.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
   
150.01   Building Code adopted
   
150.02   Building Inspector; powers and duties
§ 150.01 BUILDING CODE ADOPTED.
   The most current edition of the State Building Code is hereby adopted as the
official building code of the town.
§ 150.02 BUILDING INSPECTOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The officer or employee as the municipality may appoint, or may otherwise
designate or agree to pursuant to G.S. §§ 160D-402(b), 160D-404(c) and 160D-
1102, shall be the Building Inspector of the town, and he or she shall possess
all the powers conferred and perform all the duties prescribed by G.S. §§ 160D-
402(b), 160D-404(c), 160D-1102 and 160D-1104 and other applicable statutes. The
Building Inspector shall possess further power and perform further duties as
may be prescribed by this chapter and shall receive the fees allowed by
statute.
(Ord. passed - -2021)
CHAPTER 151: UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
151.001   Short title
   
151.002   Authority
   
151.003   Jurisdiction
   
151.004   Continuity
   
151.005   Effective date
   
151.006   Relationship to land use plan
   
151.007   Zoning effects on land and buildings
   
151.008   Fees
   
151.009   Severability
   
151.010   Interpretation and application
   
151.011   Conflict with other ordinances
   
151.012   Purpose
   
151.013   Only one principal use or structure upon any lot; exceptions
   
151.014   Reduction or change in lot size
   
151.015   Maintenance of open spaces
   
151.016   Location of accessory buildings/structures
   
151.017   Street access
   
151.018   Lots with multiple frontages
   
151.019   Uses prohibited
   
151.020   Conservation land classification
   
151.021   Bond requirement for modular homes
   
151.022   Tiling; changes in right-of-way ditches; storm water drainage
   
151.023   Conflicts of interest
   
151.024   Who may apply; approvals run with land; vested rights; revocation
   
151.025   Permit choice
Interpretation and Definition
   
151.035   Interpretation
   
151.036   Tense and number
   
151.037   Term definition
Administrative Structure
Part I: Planning Board
   
151.050   Establishment
   
151.051   Purpose
   
151.052   Powers and duties of Planning Board
   
151.053   Appointment and terms of Planning Board members
   
151.054   Planning Board officers
   
151.055   Meetings of the Planning Board
   
151.056   Quorum and voting
Part II: Board of Adjustment
   
151.070   Creation; composition
   
151.071   Meetings; officers
   
151.072   Powers and duties
   
151.073   Notice of hearing, transmission of administrative materials
   
151.074   Voting
   
151.075   Quasi-judicial procedure and decisions; judicial review
   
151.076   Appeals
   
151.077   Additional remedies
Part III: Zoning Administration
   
151.090   Intent
   
151.091   Zoning Administrator
   
151.092   Enforcement powers of the Zoning Administrator
   
151.093   Zoning permit required
   
151.094   Application for zoning permit
   
151.095   Remedies
   
151.096   Complaints regarding violations
   
151.097   Cancellation of permits
Nonconforming Lots, Structures and Uses
   
151.110   Intent
   
151.111   Repairs and maintenance
   
151.112   Nonconforming structures due to physical restrictions
   
151.113   Nonconforming uses of land and/or buildings
Official Zoning Map
   
151.125   Zoning maps are a part of this chapter
   
151.126   Zoning map changes
   
151.127   Maintenance of the official zoning map
Interpretation of Zoning District Boundaries
   
151.140   Location of district boundaries
Zoning Districts
   
151.160   General requirements
   
151.161   Submission of plans
   
151.162   R-20 Residential
   
151.163   R-15 Single-Family Dwelling Districts
   
151.164   R-M Multi-Family Dwelling District
   
151.165   C Commercial
   
151.166   C-M Commercial Marina
   
151.167   IP Institutional and Public
   
151.168   R-MU Residential Mixed Use District
Provisions for Certain Uses Permitted as a Right
   
151.180   Home occupations
   
151.181   Accessory buildings/structures or uses
Standards for Specific Uses
   
151.185   Sale of mind-altering substances
Provisions for Special Uses and Certain Permitted Uses
   
151.195   General restrictions
   
151.196   Additional restrictions and revocation of permits
   
151.197   Uses which may be permitted
Exceptions and Modifications
   
151.210   Walls and fences
   
151.211   Reduction of front yard setback requirements
   
151.212   Substandard lots of record
   
151.213   Fallout shelters
   
151.214   Required buffer strips in all C Districts
   
151.215   Visibility at intersections
   
151.216   Planned unit development
   
151.217   Conservation land classification
Off-Street Parking and Service Requirements
   
151.230   General provisions
   
151.231   Plan and design standards
   
151.232   Minimum number of off-street parking spaces required
   
151.233   Off-street loading and unloading space
   
151.234   Camp exemption
Signs
   
151.245   Purpose
   
151.246   General provisions
   
151.247   Sign administration, filing procedure and permits
   
151.248   Signs which do not require a permit
   
151.249   Signs which require a permit
   
151.250   Sign setback requirements
   
151.251   Non-conforming signs
Amendments
   
151.265   Who may petition
   
151.266   Fee
   
151.267   Application procedure
   
151.268   Amendment submission
   
151.269   Required public hearing
   
151.270   Town Commissioners action on amendments
   
151.271   Protest to zoning district changes
Subdivision Regulations
Part I: Introductory Provisions
   
151.285   Title
   
151.286   Purpose
   
151.287   Authority
   
151.288   Jurisdiction
   
151.289   Prerequisite to plat recordation
   
151.290   Acceptance of streets
   
151.291   Zoning and other plans
Part II: Legal Provisions
   
151.305   General procedure for plat approval
   
151.306   Statement by owner
   
151.307   Effect of plat approval on dedications
   
151.308   Separability
   
151.309   Variances
   
151.310   Amendments
   
151.311   Abrogation
   
151.312   Repeal of conflicting ordinances
Part III: Review and Approval of Subdivision Plats
   
151.325   Plat shall be required on any subdivision of land
   
151.326   Approval prerequisite to plat recordation
   
151.327   Procedures for review of major and minor subdivisions
   
151.328   Procedure for review of minor subdivisions
   
151.329   Sketch plan for major subdivisions
   
151.330   Review by other agencies
   
151.331   Preliminary plat for major subdivisions
   
151.332   Final plat for major subdivisions
   
151.333   Improvements guarantees
   
151.334   Submission procedure
   
151.335   Information requirements for preliminary and final plats
   
151.336   Recombination of land
   
151.337   Resubdivision procedures
Part IV: Minimum Standards of Design
   
151.350   General
   
151.351   Suitability of land
   
151.352   Name duplication
   
151.353   Subdivision design
   
151.354   Streets
   
151.355   Streets; other requirements
   
151.356   Utilities
   
151.357   Other requirements
   
151.358   Buffering, recreation and open space requirements
Part V: Residential Mixed Use Development
   
151.370   Applicability
   
151.371   Purpose
   
151.372   Plat submission
   
151.373   Change in plans
   
151.374   Plat approval
   
151.375   Waiver of general subdivision requirements
   
151.376   Permits
   
151.377   Parking
 
   
151.999   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Conflict of interest, see G.S. § 160D-109
   Term definitions, see G.S. § 160D-102
   Zoning map, see G.S. § 160D-105
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.001 SHORT TITLE.
   These regulations shall be known as the Town of Minnesott Beach “Unified
Development Ordinance” or by the initials “UDO.”
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.1)
§ 151.002 AUTHORITY.
   (A)    Zoning. Zoning provisions enacted herein are under the authority of
G.S. § 160D-102, which extends to cities the authority to enact regulations
promoting the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community.
These provisions are further authorized to regulate and restrict the erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of buildings,
structures or land.
   (B)   Subdivision. Subdivision provisions enacted herein are under the
authority of G.S. § 160D-102, which provides for the coordination of streets
and public facilities, the dedication or reservation of recreation areas or for
the provision of funds to be used to acquire recreation areas and for the
distribution of population and traffic in a manner that will avoid congestion
and overcrowding.
   (C)   Automatic amendment. Whenever any provision of this ordinance refers
to or cites a section of the General Statutes or a state or federal department
rule or regulation and that section is later amended or superseded, the
ordinance shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or the
section that most nearly corresponds to the superseded section.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.2; Ord. passed - -2021)
§ 151.003 JURISDICTION.
   The provisions of this ordinance shall apply within the corporate limits of
the town and within the territory beyond the corporate limits as now or
hereafter fixed on the “Official Zoning Map of Minnesott Beach, North Carolina”
and in accordance with G.S. § 160D-108(b).
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.3; Ord. passed - -2021)
§ 151.004 CONTINUITY.
   (A)   This Unified Development Ordinance replaces and supersedes both the
Town Zoning Ordinance dated July 20, 1982 and the Town Beach Subdivision
Ordinance dated October 15, 1996 and all amendments made to these two
documents.
   (B)   Any nonconforming use, structure or other requirement of the previous
zoning documents shall be considered to be out of compliance with the Unified
Development Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.4)
§ 151.005 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   These regulations shall become effective on February 10, 2009 and on that
date, these regulations shall supersede, repeal and replace the Town Zoning
Ordinance and the Town Subdivision Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.5)
§ 151.006 RELATIONSHIP TO LAND USE PLAN.
   It is the intention of the Town Commissioners, hereafter referred to as the
“Town Commissioners,” that this ordinance implements the planning policies
adopted for the town, as reflected in the land use plan and other planning
documents. While the Town Commissioners reaffirm their commitment that this
ordinance and any amendment to it conform to the adopted planning policies, the
Town Commissioners hereby express their intent that neither this ordinance nor
any amendment to it may be challenged based on any alleged nonconformity with
any planning document.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.6)
§ 151.007 ZONING EFFECTS ON LAND AND BUILDINGS.
   No land or structure shall be used, no structure shall be erected, and no
existing structure shall be moved, added to, enlarged or altered except in
conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in
which it is located.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.7) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.008 FEES.
   Reasonable fees sufficient to cover the costs of administration, inspection,
publication of notice and similar matters may be charged to the applicants
seeking any land use permits, special use permits, unified development
ordinance amendments, variances, appeals, other administrative relief and site
plan review over which this ordinance has authority. The amount of the fees
charged shall be set forth in the town’s budget or as established by resolution
of the Town Commissioners filed in the office of Town Hall. The fees
established in this section shall be paid upon submission of a signed
application or notice of appeal.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.8)
§ 151.009 SEVERABILITY.
   It is hereby declared the intention of the Town Commissioners that the
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Unified
Development Ordinance are severable. If any section, paragraph, sentence,
clause or phrase is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court
of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, the
unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remaining
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases of this ordinance, since
the same would have been enacted without the incorporation into this ordinance
of the unconstitutional or invalid section, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.9)
§ 151.010 INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION.
   In interpreting and applying these regulations, the requirements contained
herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the
purpose of these regulations. Except as hereinafter provided, these regulations
shall not be deemed to interfere with any easements, covenants, deed
restrictions or other agreements between parties. Whenever the provisions of
these regulations impose greater restrictions upon the use of land or buildings
or require a larger percentage of lot to be left unoccupied, then the
provisions of these regulations shall govern.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.10)
§ 151.011 CONFLICT WITH OTHER ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.11)
§ 151.012 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Unified Development Ordinance shall be to promote the
health, safety and the general welfare by regulating the height, number of
stories, size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of lot that may
be occupied, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, the density of
population, the location and use of buildings, structures and land for trades,
industry, residence or other purposes, to create districts and establish
boundaries for those purposes; to define certain terms used in the ordinance;
and to provide penalties for violation of this ordinance.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.12)
§ 151.013 ONLY ONE PRINCIPAL USE OR STRUCTURE UPON ANY LOT; EXCEPTIONS.
   There shall be no more than one principal use and/or structure upon any lot.
However, on lots in zoning districts zoned C Commercial, there shall be no more
than two uses in one structure or one use in each of two structures as long as
all uses and/or structures are otherwise permitted and meet the standards of
this Unified Development Ordinance.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.13) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.014 REDUCTION OR CHANGE IN LOT SIZE.
   No lot shall be reduced or changed in size so that the total area; minimum
frontage; front, side or rear setbacks, lot area per dwelling unit; or other
dimensions, areas or open spaces required by these regulations are not
maintained. No lot shall be reduced in size so as to produce an additional lot,
which is not in conformity with these regulations, unless the lot is combined
with other land to produce a conforming lot or unless the lot is needed and
accepted for public use.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.14) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.015 MAINTENANCE OF OPEN SPACES.
   No yard shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in
conformity with these regulations. No yard for one principal building shall be
considered as a yard for any other principal building. Shrubbery, driveways,
retaining walls, fences, curbs, ornamental objects and planted buffer strips
shall not be construed to be encroachments on yards.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.15) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.016 LOCATION OF ACCESSORY BUILDINGS/STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Accessory buildings/structures shall not be erected in the areas
between a public or a paved private street right-of-way and the nearest side of
the principal building as built, the required side yard setback for the zoning
district, within five feet of the rear property line, or within ten feet of the
principal building.
   (B)   On lots of five acres or more on which the owner maintains horses, the
shed, stable or barn must be located a minimum of 100 feet from the front, side
and rear property line. A minimum of two acres per animal is required.
   (C)   An accessory building/structure shall be built and located in a way to
preserve the character and integrity of the neighborhood.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.16; Ord. passed 1-19-2021; Ord. passed - -2021;
Ord. passed 5-10-2022) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.017 STREET ACCESS.
   No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut an open street
which is either a public street; a publicly maintained street; a public alley;
or a publicly maintained alley or private street.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.17) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.018 LOTS WITH MULTIPLE FRONTAGES.
   In the case of a corner lot having frontage on two or more streets, all
buildings shall be set back from each street a distance equal to the minimum
front yard requirement for the district. If a building is constructed on a lot
having frontage on two streets but not at an intersection, a setback from each
street shall be provided equal to the front yard requirement for the district
in which the lot is located. Where a minimum frontage is specified in these
regulations, it shall be measured at the front yard setback line.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.18) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.019 USES PROHIBITED.
   If either a use or class of use is not specifically indicated as being
permitted in a district, either as a matter of right or as a special use, then
that use or class of use shall be prohibited in those districts.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.19) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.020 CONSERVATION LAND CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   The State Coastal Resources Commission has defined three areas of
environmental concern (AEC) within the corporate limits:
      (1)   Coastal wetlands;
      (2)   Public trust areas; and
      (3)   Estuarine shorelines.
   (B)   Construction or modification of existing uses in these AECs will
follow guidelines set forth in §
151.217 of this ordinance.
   (C)   Estuarine waters of the Neuse River abut the corporate limits of the
town.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.20) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.021 BOND REQUIREMENT FOR MODULAR HOMES.
   (A)   No zoning permit shall be issued or may any off-frame or on-frame
modular home be brought within the municipal limits of the town without the
owner thereof providing sufficient security to protect the town and public
property from damage caused by the transportation and/or installation of an
off-frame or on-frame modular home.
   (B)   The security shall be in accordance with the approved town fee
schedule and must be in the form of a bond, irrevocable letter of credit, cash
or other instrument readily converted to cash at face value, to be approved by
the town’s Zoning Administrator and deposited with the Town Clerk.
   (C)   The provisions of this section may only be waived by vote of the Town
Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.21) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.022 TILING; CHANGES IN RIGHT-OF-WAY DITCHES; STORM WATER DRAINAGE.
   (A)   The tiling or other alteration of right-of-way drainage ditches shall
be permitted only with the express approval of the Town Zoning Administrator,
and only after adequate verification that the tiling or other alteration will
not impede or accelerate unreasonably the flow of storm water runoff to
adjoining property.
   (B)   If approval for tiling is granted, the person requesting the approval
shall install in conjunction with the tiling catch basins as may be required by
the Town Zoning Administrator after taking into consideration the length of the
right-of-way drainage ditch to be tiled.
   (C)   For those drainage ditches and drainage tile installed in the town’s
right-of-way by the property owner, either current or prior, it is the then
current property owner’s responsibility to maintain those drainage ditches and
tiles.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 1.22) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.023 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
   (A)   Governing board. A governing board member shall not vote on any
legislative decision regarding a development regulation adopted pursuant to
this chapter where the outcome of the matter being considered is reasonably
likely to have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact
on the member. A governing board member shall not vote on any zoning amendment
if the landowner of the property subject to a rezoning petition or the
applicant for a text amendment is a person with whom the member has a close
familial, business, or other associational relationship.
   (B)   Appointed Boards. Members of appointed Boards shall not vote on any
advisory or legislative decision regarding a development regulation adopted
pursuant to this chapter where the outcome of the matter being considered is
reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial, and readily identifiable
financial impact on the member. An appointed Board member shall not vote on any
zoning amendment if the landowner of the property subject to a rezoning
petition or the applicant for a text amendment is a person with whom the member
has a close familial, business, or other associational relationship.
   (C)   Administrative staff.
      (1)   No staff member shall make a final decision on an administrative
decision required by this chapter if the outcome of that decision would have a
direct, substantial, and readily identifiable financial impact on the staff
member or if the applicant or other person subject to that decision is a person
with whom the staff member has a close familial, business, or other
associational relationship. If a staff member has a conflict of interest under
this section, the decision shall be assigned to the supervisor of the staff
person or such other staff person as may be designated by the development
regulation or other ordinance.
      (2)   No staff member shall be financially interested or employed by a
business that is financially interested in a development subject to regulation
under this chapter unless the staff member is the owner of the land or building
involved. No staff member or other individual or an employee of a company
contracting with a local government to provide staff support shall engage in
any work that is inconsistent with his or her duties or with the interest of
the local government, as determined by the local government.
   (D)   Quasi-judicial decisions. A member of any Board exercising quasi-
judicial functions pursuant to this chapter shall not participate in or vote on
any quasi-judicial matter in a manner that would violate affected persons'
constitutional rights to an impartial decision maker. Impermissible violations
of due process include, but are not limited to, a member having a fixed opinion
prior to hearing the matter that is not susceptible to change, undisclosed ex
parte communications, a close familial, business, or other associational
relationship with an affected person, or a financial interest in the outcome of
the matter.
   (E)   Resolution of objection. If an objection is raised to a Board member's
participation at or prior to the hearing or vote on a particular matter and
that member does not recuse himself or herself, the remaining members of the
Board shall by majority vote rule on the objection.
   (F)   Familial relationship. For purposes of this section, a "close familial
relationship" means a spouse, parent, child, brother, sister, grandparent, or
grandchild. The term includes the step, half, and in-law relationships.
(Ord. passed - -2021)
§ 151.024 WHO MAY APPLY; APPROVALS RUN WITH LAND; VESTED RIGHTS; REVOCATION.
   (A)   Applications for development approvals may be made by the landowner, a
lessee or person holding an option or contract to purchase or lease land, or an
authorized agent of the landowner. An easement holder may also apply for
development approval for such development as is authorized by the easement.
   (B)   Unless provided otherwise by law, all rights, privileges, benefits,
burdens, and obligations created by development approvals made pursuant to the
Code of Minnesott Beach pursuant to G.S. Chapter 160D attach to and run with
the land.
   (C)   Upon issuance of a development permit, the statutory vesting granted
by G.S. § 160D-108(c) for a development project is effective upon filing of the
application in accordance with G.S. § 143-755, for so long as the permit
remains valid pursuant to law. Unless otherwise specified by G.S. § 160D-108 or
other statute, local development permits expire one year after issuance unless
work authorized by the permit has substantially commenced.
   (D)   A vested right is established with respect to any property upon the
valid approval, or conditional approval, of a site-specific vesting plan as
provided in G.S. § 160D-108.1. Such a vested right confers upon the landowner
the right to undertake and complete the development and use of the property
under the terms and conditions of the site-specific vesting plan, including any
amendments thereto.
   (E)   Except where a longer vesting period is provided by statute or the
Code of Minnesott Beach, the statutory vesting granted by G.S. § 160D-108, once
established, expires for an uncompleted development project if development work
is intentionally and voluntarily discontinued for a period of not less than 24
consecutive months.
   (F)   Notwithstanding division (C) of this section, a building permit issued
pursuant to G.S. Chapter 160D, Article 11 expires by limitation six months
after the date of issuance if the work authorized by the permit has not been
commenced. If, after commencement, the work is discontinued for a period of 12
months, the permit shall immediately expire. No work authorized by any building
permit that has expired shall be performed until a new permit has been secured.
   (G)   Notwithstanding division (C) of this section, a vested right for a
site-specific vesting plan remains vested for a period of two years. This
vesting shall not be extended by any amendments or modifications to a site-
specific vesting plan unless expressly provided by the town.
   (H)   In addition to initiation of enforcement actions under G.S. § 160D-
404, development approvals may be revoked by the town issuing the development
approval by notifying the holder in writing stating the reason for the
revocation. The town shall follow the same development review and approval
process required for issuance of the development approval, including any
required notice or hearing, in the review and approval of any revocation of
that approval. Development approvals shall be revoked for any substantial
departure from the approved application, plans, or specifications; for refusal
or failure to comply with the requirements of any applicable town regulation or
any state law delegated to the town for enforcement purposes in lieu of the
state; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing the
approval. Any development approval mistakenly issued in violation of an
applicable state or local law may also be revoked. The revocation of a
development approval by a staff member may be appealed pursuant to G.S. § 160D-
405. If an appeal is filed regarding a development regulation adopted by the
town pursuant to this chapter, the provisions of G.S. § 160D-405(f) regarding
stays apply.
(Ord. passed 7-6-2022, § 2.3)
§ 151.025 PERMIT CHOICE.
   If a land development regulation is amended between the time a development
permit application was submitted and a development permit decision is made or
if a land development regulation is amended after a development permit decision
has been challenged and found to be wrongfully denied or illegal, the
provisions of G.S. § 143-755 apply.
(Ord. passed 7-6-2022, § 2.4)
INTERPRETATION AND DEFINITION
§ 151.035 INTERPRETATION.
   For the purpose of this ordinance, all other words used in this ordinance
shall have their customary dictionary definitions. Except as defined herein,
certain words shall be interpreted as follows.
   (A)   The word PERSON includes a firm, association, organization,
partnership, trust, company or corporation, as well as an individual.
   (B)   The word MAY is permissive.
   (C)   The word SHALL is always mandatory.
   (D)   The words USED or OCCUPIED includes the words INTENDED, DESIGNED AND
ARRANGED TO BE USED OR OCCUPIED.
   (E)   The word LOT includes the words PLOT, PARCEL, SITE and PREMISES.
   (F)   The word BUILDING includes the word STRUCTURE.
   (G)   The words MAP, ZONING MAP and MINNESOTT BEACH ZONING MAP shall mean
the official zoning map for Minnesott Beach, North Carolina.
   (H)   The words TOWN or CITY shall mean the Town of Minnesott Beach, North
Carolina.
   (I)   The words ORDINANCE and REGULATIONS shall mean the Unified Development
Ordinance for the Town of Minnesott Beach, North Carolina.
   (J)   The words PLANNING BOARD shall mean the Town of Minnesott Beach
Planning Board.
   (K)   The words BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS or TOWN COMMISSIONERS shall mean the
Board of Commissioners of Minnesott Beach, North Carolina.
   (L)   The words BOARD OF APPEALS shall mean the Town of Minnesott Beach
Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, §
2.1; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, § 2.28)
§ 151.036 TENSE AND NUMBER.
   (A)   The present tense includes the future tense and the future tense
includes the present tense.
   (B)   The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural number
includes the singular number.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 2.2)
§ 151.037 TERM DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING AND USE. A subordinate building or use, the use of which
is incidental to that of the principal building or use on the same lot with a
foundation.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. As it pertains to §
151.016, a structure without a foundation which may be moved.
   ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION. Decisions made in the implementation,
administration, or enforcement of development regulations that involve the
determination of facts and the application of objective standards set forth in
this chapter or local government development regulations. These are sometimes
referred to as ministerial decisions or administrative determinations.
   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING. A proceeding to gather facts needed to make an
administrative decision.
   ADMINISTRATOR, ZONING. The person or his or her authorized representative,
whom the Town Commissioners have designated as its agent for the administration
and enforcement of these regulations.
   ALLEY. A strip of land, owned publicly or privately, set aside primarily for
vehicular service access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting
on a street.
   ATTACHED STRUCTURES. Structures having a common wall and a continuous roof
similar in architectural and aesthetic construction. The roofs need not be on
the same plane and the buildings will have open space on two or more sides of
each unit.
   BANNER. A sign made of wind and weather resistant cloth or other lightweight
material, intended to hang either with or without frames or in some manner as
not to be wind activated, and possessing characters, letters, illustrations, or
ornamentations applied to paper, plastic, or fabric of any kind. Flags shall
not be considered banners.
   BEACON. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or
directed at one or more points not on the same site as the light source; also,
any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
   BEDROOM. A habitable room designated as sleeping or bedroom on the plans and
permit application.
   BILLBOARD. A sign structure and/or sign utilized to display a commercial
message or provide commercial advertising for an establishment, an activity, a
product, service, or entertainment, which is sold, produced, manufactured,
available or furnished at a place other than on the property on which said sign
and/or sign structure is located.
   BLISTER UNIT. A storage unit attached to the outside of a principal
building. This unit forms a part of the principal building when measuring for
any required separations or setbacks.
   BLOCK. A piece of land bounded on one or more sides by streets or roads.
   BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS or TOWN BOARD or TOWN COMMISSIONERS. The Board of
Commissioners of the Town of Minnesott Beach, North Carolina.
   BOARDING HOUSE. A building dedicated to the lodging or feeding or both of
non-transient persons for compensation.
   BUFFER STRIP. A planted strip of land which shall be a minimum of 16 feet in
width and shall be composed of evergreen bushes, trees and/or shrubs so that at
least two rows are provided from the ground to a height of six feet within six
years and foliage overlaps within six years.
   BUILDING. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any
use or occupancy.
   BUILDING LINE. The line beyond which a structure does not extend. Eaves are
excluded from this definition.
   BUILDING SETBACK LINE. A line parallel to the front property line in front
of which no structure shall be erected. Setbacks shall be figured from the
right-of-way line.
   CAMPS. A parcel or parcels of land with permanent buildings, tents or other
structures together with appurtenances thereon, owned and operated by a non-
profit or governmental entity as a recreational, learning and/or religious
center, where available activities may include, but are not limited to, riding,
swimming, tennis, hiking, boating, crafts and the like. CAMPS may provide
sleeping and eating quarters or may be intended for day use only. The term CAMP
shall not include facilities for manufactured homes or recreational vehicles.
   CHURCH, CLUB or PRIVATE LODGE. An incorporated or unincorporated association
for civic, social, cultural, religious, fraternal, literary, political,
recreational or like activities, operated on a non-profit basis for the benefit
of its members.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. A comprehensive plan that has been officially adopted by
the governing board pursuant to G.S. § 160D-501.
   CONDITIONAL ZONING. A legislative zoning map amendment with site-specific
conditions incorporated into the zoning map amendment.
   CORNER LOT. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets. A lot
abutting on a curved street or streets shall be considered a CORNER LOT if
straight lines drawn from the foremost points of the side lot lines to the
foremost point of the lot meet at an interior angle of less than 135 degrees.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A short street having but one end open to traffic and the other
end being permanently terminated and a vehicular turnaround provided.
   CUTOUTS. Part of an outdoor advertising sign which extends beyond the edge
or border of the sign; sometimes called a TOP-OUT or EXTENSION.
   DECISION MAKING BOARD. A governing board, Planning Board, Board of
Adjustment, Historic District Board, or other Board assigned to make quasi-
judicial decisions under this chapter.
   DEDICATION. A gift, by the owner, or a right to use of land for a specified
purpose or purposes. Because a transfer of property rights is entailed,
DEDICATION must be made by written instrument, and is completed with an
acceptance.
   DELTA PRODUCTS. All products containing chemically modified or synthetically
derived tetrahydrocannabinol (“THC”) or THC isomers, including, but not limited
to, Delta-8 THC, Delta-9 THC, and Delta-10 THC, originating from hemp or
products derived from hemp, such as cannabidiol (“CBD”). The term DELTA
PRODUCTS shall not include products containing Delta-9 THC concentrations
exceeding three-tenths of one percent (0.3%) on a dry weight basis.
   DETENTION. Surface collection, storage and distribution of storm water
runoff for the purpose of compensating for increased runoff volume and
decreased travel time associated with an increase in impervious surfaces, and
to allow for the setting-out of pollutants borne by the runoff.
   DETERMINATION. A written, final, and binding order, requirement, or
determination regarding an administrative decision.
   DEVELOPER. A person, including a governmental agency or redevelopment
authority, who undertakes any development and who is the landowner of the
property to be developed or who has been authorized by the landowner to
undertake development on that property.
   DEVELOPMENT.
      (1)   Any of the following:
         (a)   The construction, erection, alteration, enlargement, renovation,
substantial repair, movement to another site, or demolition of any structure;
         (b)   The excavation, grading, filling, clearing, or alteration of
land;
         (c)   The subdivision of land as defined in G.S. § 160D-802; or
         (d)   The initiation or substantial change in the use of land or the
intensity of use of land.
      (2)   This definition does not alter the scope of regulatory authority
granted by this chapter.
   DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL. An administrative or quasi-judicial approval made
pursuant to this chapter that is written and that is required prior to
commencing development or undertaking a specific activity, project, or
development proposal. Development approvals include, but are not limited to,
zoning permits, site plan approvals, special use permits, variances, and
certificates of appropriateness. The term also includes all other regulatory
approvals required by regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, including
plat approvals, permits issued, development agreements entered into, and
building permits issued.
   DEVELOPMENT REGULATION. A unified development ordinance, zoning regulation,
subdivision regulation, erosion and sedimentation control regulation,
floodplain or flood damage prevention regulation, mountain ridge protection
regulation, stormwater control regulation, wireless telecommunication facility
regulation, historic preservation or landmark regulation, housing code, State
Building Code enforcement, or any other regulation adopted pursuant to this
chapter, or a local act or charter that regulates land use or development.
   DISTRICT, ZONING. A section of the town within which the zoning regulations
are uniform.
   DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT. A continuous (through) lot which is accessible from
both streets upon which it fronts, also referred to as THROUGH LOTS.
   DWELLING. A building that contains a dwelling unit used, intended or
designed to be used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied for living
purposes.
   DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY. A building that contains three to four dwelling
units used, intended or designed to be used, rented, leased, let or hired out
to be occupied for living purposes by three or more families.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A building that contains one dwelling unit used,
intended or designed to be used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be
occupied for living purposes by one family only.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A building that contains two dwelling units used,
intended or designed to be used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be
occupied for living purposes by two families only.
   DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   EASEMENT. A grant by the property owner of a strip of land for a specified
purpose and use by the public, a corporation or persons.
   EVIDENTIARY HEARING. A hearing to gather competent, material, and
substantial evidence in order to make findings for a quasi-judicial decision
required by a development regulation adopted under this chapter.
   FAMILY. One or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single
housekeeping unit; but further provided that domestic servants employed on the
premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a FAMILY or
FAMILIES.
   FAMILY CARE HOME. A home with support and supervisory personnel that
provides room and board, personal care and rehabilitation services, in a family
environment for not more than six resident disabled persons.
   FLAG. Any fabric or bunting containing distinct colors, patterns, or
symbols, used as an ornamental flag or as a symbol, or for decorative purposes,
that does not contain a commercial message, and that is displayed on a
flagpole.
   FLAGPOLE. A pole on which to raise or display a flag.
   FRONTAGE. The distance between the two side lot lines as measured along the
right-of-way line of an adjoining street.
   FRONTAGE ROAD. A local street or road that is parallel to a full or partial
access control facility and functions to provide access to adjacent land.
   GOVERNING BOARD. The City Council or Board of County Commissioners. The term
is interchangeable with the terms "Board of Aldermen" and "Boards of
Commissioners" and means any governing board without regard to the terminology
employed in charters, local acts, other portions of the General Statutes, or
local customary usage.
   G.S. § 47-30. The current version of G.S. § 47-30 titled Plats and
Subdivisions; Mapping Requirements.
   HALF-STREET. A street whose centerline coincides with a subdivision plat
boundary, with one-half the street right-of-way width being contained within
the subdivision plat.
   HANDICAPPED PERSON. A person with a temporary or permanent physical,
emotional or mental disability including, but not limited to, mental
retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, hearing and sight impairments,
emotional disturbances and orthopedic impairments but not including mentally
ill persons who are dangerous to others as defined in G.S. § 122C-3(11).
   HEATED LIVING AREA. Areas normally occupied as living quarters and having
headroom of at least six feet.
   HEMP. The plant Cannabis sativa (L.) and any part of that plant, including
the seeds thereof and all derivatives, extracts, cannabinoids, isomers, acids,
salts, and salts of isomers, whether growing or not, with a Delta-9 THC
concentration of not more than three-tenths of one percent (0.3%) on a dry
weight basis.
   HOME OCCUPATION. An occupation for gain or support customarily conducted on
the premises by a person or family residing thereon.
   HOTEL. A commercial structure in which sleeping accommodations are provided
and offered to transient visitors for compensation.
   INTERIOR LOT. A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage on a
street.
   JUNK YARD. Use of property for indoor/outdoor storage, abandonment or sale
of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used
lumber, salvaged house wrecking and structural steel, materials and equipment
or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles and boats or
other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof.
   KENNELS. An establishment for the breeding or boarding of dogs.
   KRATOM. Any substance containing mitragynine and/or 7-hydroxymitragynine.
   LANDOWNER OR OWNER. The holder of the title in fee simple. Absent evidence
to the contrary, a local government may rely on the county tax records to
determine who is a landowner. The landowner may authorize a person holding a
valid option, lease, or contract to purchase to act as his or her agent or
representative for the purpose of making applications for development
approvals.
   LOCAL RESIDENTIAL STREET. Cul-de-sacs, loop streets less than 2,500 feet in
length, or streets less than one mile in length that do not connect
thoroughfares, or serve major traffic generators, and do not collect traffic
from more than 100 dwelling units.
   LOT. A parcel of land which fronts on and has ingress and egress by means of
a public right-of-way and which is occupied or intended to be occupied by a
building or groups of buildings as provided herein with the customary
accessories and open spaces. Also, a portion of a subdivision, or any other
parcel of land, intended as a unit of transfer of ownership or for development,
or both.
   LOT DEPTH. The mean horizontal distance between front and rear lot lines.
   LOT OF RECORD. A lot, which is part of a subdivision, a plat of which has
been recorded in the office of the Register of Deeds of the county, or a lot
described by metes and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.
   LOT WIDTH. The distance between side lot lines measured at the building
line.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. (As defined in G.S. § 143-145(7)) is a structure,
transportable in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode is eight
body feet or more in width, or 40 body feet or more in length, or, when erected
on site, is 320 or more square feet; and which is built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without permanent foundation
when connected to the required utilities, including the plumbing, heating, air
conditioning and electrical systems contained therein. MANUFACTURED HOME
includes any structure that meets all of the requirements of this definition
except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer
voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of HUD and complies
with the standards established under the Act. For manufactured homes built
before June 15, 1976, MANUFACTURED HOME also means a portable manufactured
housing unit designed for transportation on its own chassis and placement on a
temporary or semipermanent foundation having a measurement of over 32 feet in
length and over eight feet in width. MANUFACTURED HOME also means a double-wide
manufactured home, which is two or more portable manufactured housing units
designed for transportation on their own chassis that connect on site for
placement on a temporary or semipermanent foundation having a measurement of
over 32 feet in length and over eight feet in width. MANUFACTURED HOME shall
not include a modular home as defined herein/but shall include an on-frame
manufactured home as defined herein. See §
151.197(E).
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. Any tract of land maintained, offered or used for
the parking of two or more manufactured homes and the intent is for living or
sleeping purposes.
   MODULAR HOME. A dwelling unit, constructed in accordance with the standard
set forth in the State Building Code, composed of components assembled in a
manufacturing plant and meeting the following additional standards:
      (1)   Assembled on a permanent foundation consisting of continuous
perimeter weight-bearing foundation with storm ties embedded;
      (2)   Permanent underpinning of solid masonry;
      (3)   Permanent interior foundation support of solid masonry or its
equivalent;
      (4)   Permanent under house vents and egress access;
      (5)   Permanent steps and/or stoops to all exterior entries;
      (6)   Roofing surface of materials other than sheet goods; and
      (7)   An exterior siding of wood, masonry, vinyl or other non-metal
construction.
   MOTEL. A commercial structure with at least one off-street parking space
provided for every unit, in which sleeping accommodations are provided or
offered to transient visitors for compensation.
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A building or structure that is designed to house
several different families in separate housing units. The most common type of
multifamily housing is an apartment building. Duplexes, quadraplexes,
condominiums, and town homes also qualify as multifamily housing. The entire
building or structure may be owned by an individual, an entity, or, as is the
case with condominiums and townhomes, by individuals who have purchased units.
   NONCONFORMING USES. A structure or land lawfully occupied by an existing use
which does not conform with the permitted uses for the zoning district in which
it is situated, either at the effective date of this ordinance, or as a result
of subsequent amendments to this ordinance.
   NURSING HOME. A health facility where persons are housed and furnished with
meals and continuing nursing care for compensation.
   OFFICIAL MAP OR PLANS. Any maps or plans officially adopted by the Town
Commissioners.
   ON-FRAME MANUFACTURED HOME.
      (1)   A dwelling unit, constructed in accordance with the standard set
forth in the State Building Code, composed of components assembled in a
manufacturing plant, transported to its site on a permanent chassis and meets
the following additional standards:
         (a)   Assembled on a permanent foundation consisting of a continuous
perimeter weight bearing foundation with storm ties embedded;
         (b)   Permanent underpinning of solid masonry;
         (c)   Permanent interior foundation support of solid masonry or its
equivalent;
         (d)   Permanent under house vents and egress access;
         (e)   Permanent steps and/or stoops to all exterior entries;
         (f)   Roofing surface of materials other than sheet goods; and
         (g)   An exterior siding of wood, masonry, vinyl or other non-metal
construction.
      (2)   See definitions of manufactured home.
   OPEN SPACE. An area (land and/or water) generally lacking in human-made
structures and reserved for enjoyment in its unaltered state.
   OUTDOOR ADVERTISING SIGN. Any sign, either freestanding or attached to a
structure, which directs attention to a business, commodity, service,
entertainment or other activity, conducted, sold or offered elsewhere than on
the premises on which the sign is displayed.
   PENNANT. Any series of small flag-like or streamer-like pieces of cloth,
plastic, paper, or similar material attached in a row to any staff, cord,
building, or at only one or two edges, the remainder hanging loosely.
   PERMANENT SIGN. Any sign which, when installed, is intended for permanent
use. Any sign with an intended use in excess of 12 months from date of
installation shall be deemed a permanent sign.
   PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATION JURISDICTION. The geographic area
defined in Part 2 of Chapter 160D within which a city or county may undertake
planning and apply the development regulations authorized by this chapter.
   PLANNING BOARD. Any Board or Commission established pursuant to G.S. § 160D-
301.
   PLAT. A map or plan of a parcel of land which is to be, or has been
subdivided.
   PRINCIPAL USE. The principal purpose for which a lot or the main structure
thereon is designed, or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied
or maintained.
   PRINCIPAL USE SIGN. A sign which directs attention to a business commodity,
service, entertainment or other activity, conducted, sold or offered on the
premises upon which the sign is located.
   PROPERTY. All real property subject to land-use regulation by a local
government. The term includes any improvements or structures customarily
regarded as a part of real property.
   PUBLIC OR COMMUNITY SEWAGE SYSTEM. A single system of sewage collection,
treatment and disposal owned and operated by a sanitary district, a
metropolitan sewage district, a water and sewer authority, a county or
municipality or a public utility.
   QUASI-JUDICIAL DECISION. A decision involving the finding of facts regarding
a specific application of a development regulation and that requires the
exercise of discretion when applying the standards of the regulation. The term
includes, but is not limited to, decisions involving variances, special use
permits, certificates of appropriateness, and appeals of administrative
determinations. Decisions on the approval of subdivision plats and site plans
are quasi-judicial in nature if the regulation authorizes a decision-making
board to approve or deny the application based not only upon whether the
application complies with the specific requirements set forth in the
regulation, but also on whether the application complies with one or more
generally stated standards requiring a discretionary decision on the findings
to be made by the decision-making board.
   RECREATION AREA OR PARK. An area of land or combination of land and water
resources that is developed for active and/or passive recreation pursuits with
various human-made features that accommodate the activities.
   RESIDENTIAL COLLECTOR STREET. A local access street, which serves as a
connector street between local residential streets and the thoroughfare system.
RESIDENTIAL COLLECTOR STREETS typically collect traffic from 100 to 400
dwelling units.
   RETENTION. Surface collection, storage and reduction of storm water runoff
for the purpose of providing infiltration of runoff into the soil.
   REVERSED FRONTAGE LOT. A lot on which the frontage is at right angles or
approximately right angles (interior angles less than 135 degrees) to the
general pattern in the area. A REVERSED FRONTAGE LOT may also be a corner lot,
an interior lot or a through lot.
   SERVICE STATION. A building or lot dedicated to the rendering of services
such as the sale of gasoline, oil, grease and accessories and the minor repairs
of automobiles such as tune-ups, brake adjustments and tire changes excluding
body working, overhauling and painting.
   SETBACK LINE. The line on the front, rear or sides of a lot, set according
to the zoning district regulations, which delineates the area upon which a
structure may be built and maintained.
   SIGN. Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form,
graphic, illumination, symbol, or writing to advertise, attract attention,
announce the purpose of, or identify the purpose of a person or entity, or to
communicate information of any kind to the public. The following shall not be
considered signs subject to the regulations of this subchapter: artwork,
cemetery markets, machinery or equipment signs, lighting used to accommodate
architectural or landscaping features, and holiday and seasonal decorations.
   SIGN, A-FRAME. A portable sign using an upright, rigid supporting frame in
the form of a triangle or an inverted “V” style of framing to support the sign.
   SIGN, ANIMATED. A sign that includes action, motion, or color changes, or
the optical illusion of action, motion, or color changes, including signs set
in motion by movement of the atmosphere, or made up of a series of sections
that turn.
   SIGN AREA. The area of signs composed in whole or in part of freestanding
letters, devices or sculptured matter not mounted on a measurable surface shall
be construed to be the area of the least square, rectangle or circle that will
enclose the letters, devices and/or sculptured matter. The area of a double-
faced sign shall be the area of one face of the sign, provided that two faces
are of the same size and are parallel to one another.
   SIGN, CANOPY.  A sign that is a part of or attached to a structural
protective cover over a door, entrance, window or outdoor service area. A
marquee is not a canopy sign.
   SIGN, CHANGEABLE COPY. A sign designed so that letters, numbers, symbols and
other similar characters attached to the sign can be changed manually in the
field to indicate a different message.
   SIGN, DIGITAL. A sign capable of displaying words, symbols, or images that
can be electronically or mechanically changed by remote, automatic, or
electrical means.
   SIGN, DISCONTINUED.  A sign or sign structure whose owner has failed to
operate and maintain said sign or sign structure for a period of 90 days or
longer. The following conditions shall be considered the failure to operate or
maintain a sign or sign structure:
      (1)   A sign displaying advertising for a product or service which is no
longer available or displaying advertising for a business which is no longer
operating;
      (2)   A sign which is blank; or
      (3)   A sign or sign structure which has fallen into disrepair so that
the sign or sign structure is illegible or unstable.
   SIGN, ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE MESSAGE. An electronically-activated sign or any
portion thereof whose message content of display, either whole or in part, may
be changed by means of electrical, electronic or computerized programming; an
ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN includes a sign or any portion thereof that
displays electronic, non-pictorial, text information in which each alphanumeric
character, graphic, or symbol is defined by a small number of matrix elements
using different combinations of light-emitting diodes (LEDs), fiber optics,
light bulbs, or other illumination devices within the display area. An
ELECTRONIC CHANGEABLE MESSAGE SIGN includes a digital sign. Drive-through lane
signs shall not be considered electronic changeable message signs.
   SIGN, FEATHER. A sign extending in a sleeve-like fashion down a telescoping
or fixed pole that is mounted in the ground or on a building or stand. A
feather sign is usually shaped like a sail or feather, and attached to the pole
support on one vertical side.
   SIGN, FLASHING. A sign which permits light to be turned on or off
intermittently more frequently than once per minute, or any illuminated sign on
which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and
color at all times when such sign is in use, including an LED (light emitting
diode) or digital sign.
   SIGN, HOLOGRAPHIC DISPLAY. A sign or advertising display that creates a
three-dimensional image through projection, OLED (organic light emitting
diode), or any similar technology.
   SIGN, INTERMITTENT. A sign which permits light to be turned on or off
intermittently more frequently that once every 12 hours or which is operated in
a way whereby light is turned off or on intermittently or which varies in
intensity or color more frequently than once every 12 hours, including any
illuminated sign on which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant
in intensity or color at all times when the sign is in use, including but not
limited to an LED (light emitting diode) or digital sign.
   SIGN, MACHINERY or EQUIPMENT.  A sign incorporated into machinery or
equipment by a manufacturer or distributor, that functions only to identify or
advertise the product or service dispensed by the machine or equipment, such as
signs customarily affixed to vending machines, newspaper racks, telephone
booths, and gasoline pumps.
   SIGN, MOVING.  Any sign in which the sign itself or any portion of it
physically moves or revolves.
   SIGN, NEON.  Any electric discharge tubing manufactured into shapes that
form letters, parts of letters, skeleton tubing, outline lighting, or other
decorative elements, and filled with various inert gases.
   SIGN, OFF-SITE. Any sign that is used to attract attention to an object,
person, product, institution organization, business, service, event, or
location that is not located on the premises upon which the sign is located.
This shall not include traffic, directional, or regulatory signs or notices by
a federal, state, county, or municipal government agency.
   SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING. See BILLBOARD.
   SIGN, POLE. Any sign which is mounted on a free-standing pole or poles, or
other support structure such that the bottom edge of the sign face is 42 inches
or more above the adjacent grade or roadway crown height.
   SIGN, PORTABLE.  Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other
permanent structure or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not
limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs made as
A-frames or T-frames; balloons used as signs; umbrellas used for commercial
messages; and signs attached to or painted on vehicles or trailers parked and
visible from the public right-of-way.
   SIGN, SCROLLING. A sign that, by mechanical or electronic means, displays a
message that moves up or down, or across a display screen or surface.
   SIGN, SNIPE. A sign made of any material when such sign is tacked, nailed,
posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to or placed on public property
such as, but not limited to, a public utility pole, a public street sign, a
public utility box, a public fire hydrant, a public right-of-way, public street
furniture, or other public property; except for A-frame signs that are
temporarily placed on public property under such limitation and constraints as
may be set forth in this chapter.
   SIGN, SUSPENDED. A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal
plane surface and supported by such surface.
   SIGN, TEMPORARY. A sign intended for use not permanent in nature. For the
purposes of this chapter, a sign intended for use of one year or less, unless
otherwise allowed in the sub chapter for signs, shall be deemed a temporary
sign.
   SIGN, WALL. Any sign painted on or attached to and extending not more than
six inches from an exterior wall in a parallel manner.
   SIGN, WINDBLOWN.  A sign which uses objects or materials fastened in such a
manner as to move upon being subjected to pressure by wind, and shall include
pennants, ribbons, spinners, streamers, or captive balloons; however, the term
windblown shall not include flags.
   SIGN, WINDOW. Any sign painted on, attached to, or displayed in a window so
as to direct attention of persons outside the building to a product or activity
on the premises.
   SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING. Housing units that share one or more common
walls with dwelling(s) on one or more sides. Synonymous with "Townhouse" or
"Row House." SINGLE- FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING is a subset of TWO-FAMILY
DWELLING or MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING.
   SINGLE-TIER LOT. A lot, which backs upon a limited access highway, a
railroad, a physical barrier or another type of land use and to which access
from the rear is usually prohibited.
   SITE PLAN. A scaled drawing and supporting text showing the relationship
between lot lines and the existing or proposed uses, buildings, or structures
on the lot. The site plan may include site-specific details such as building
areas, building height and floor area, setbacks from lot lines and street
rights-of-way, intensities, densities, utility lines and locations, parking,
access points, roads, and stormwater control facilities that are depicted to
show compliance with all legally required development regulations that are
applicable to the project and the site plan review. A site plan approval based
solely upon application of objective standards is an administrative decision
and a site plan approval based in whole or in part upon the application of
standards involving judgment and discretion is a quasi-judicial decision. A
site plan may also be approved as part of a conditional zoning decision.
   SLEEPING UNIT. A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include
permanent provisions for living, eating, and either sanitation or kitchen
facilities but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a dwelling
unit are not sleeping units.
   SPECIAL USE. A use that would not be appropriate generally or without
restriction throughout the zoning district but which, if controlled as to
number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood, would promote the
public health, safety, welfare, morals, order, comfort, convenience,
appearance, prosperity or general welfare. These uses may be permitted in the
zoning districts as a SPECIAL USE, if specific provision for SPECIAL USES is
made in this UDO and only after the Board of Adjustment has granted approval.
   SPECIAL USE PERMIT. A permit issued to authorize development or land uses in
a particular zoning district upon presentation of competent, material, and
substantial evidence establishing compliance with one or more general standards
requiring that judgment and discretion be exercised as well as compliance with
specific standards. The term includes permits previously referred to as
conditional use permits or special exceptions.
   STABLE. A building in which domestic animals are sheltered and fed.
   STREET. A thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to
abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, land, boulevard,
highway, road and any other thoroughfare except an alley.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, placed or erected, the use of which
requires location on the land or attachment to something having a permanent
location on the land. The term STRUCTURE includes buildings, manufactured
homes, walls, signs, swimming pools, fallout shelters, and fencing.
   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS. Any change, except for repair or replacement, in the
supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or
girders.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm or corporation who subdivides or develops any
land deemed to be a subdivision as herein defined.
   SUBDIVISION.  
      (1)   The division of land for the purpose of sale or development as
specified in G.S. § 160D-802.
      (2)   For the purposes of this Unified Development Ordinance, SUBDIVISION
means all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots,
building sites or other divisions for the purpose of sale or building
development (whether immediate or future) and shall include all divisions of
land involving the dedication of a new street or a change in existing streets;
but the following shall not be included within this definition nor be subject
to any regulations enacted pursuant to this ordinance:
         (a)   The combination or recombination of portions of previously
subdivided and recorded lots where the total number of lots is not increased
and the resultant lots are equal to or exceed the standards of the municipality
as shown in this ordinance;
         (b)   The division of land into parcels greater than ten acres where
no street right-of-way dedication is involved;
         (c)   The public acquisition by purchase of strips of land for the
widening or opening of streets; and
         (d)   The division of a tract in single ownership whose entire area is
no greater than two acres into not more than three lots, where no street right-
of-way dedication is involved and where the resultant lots are equal to or
exceed the standards of the municipality as shown in this ordinance.
         (e)   The division of a tract into parcels in accordance with the
terms of a probated will or in accordance with intestate succession under G.S.
Chapter 29.
   SUBDIVISION REGULATION. A subdivision regulation authorized by Article 8 of
G.S. Ch. 160D.
   TEMPORARY SIGNS. A sign permitted for a period not exceeding 12 months
including “for sale,” “for rent,” real estate agent’s name, construction
company’s name, subcontractor’s name and architect’s and planner’s name.
   VARIANCE. A relaxation of the terms of the this ordinance, where the
variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where owing to
conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the
applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary
and
undue hardship. As used in this ordinance, a VARIANCE is authorized only for
height, area and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces.
Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed
by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of
nonconformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district.
   YARD. A required open space unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or
portion of a structure from ground upward, except as provided herein.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard extending across the front of a lot measured from side
lot line to side lot line and lying between the abutting street right-of-way
and the front building setback line.
   YARD, REAR. A yard extending across the rear of the lot from side setback
line to side setback line and lying between the rear property line and the rear
building setback line.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard extending along either side of a lot from front setback
line to rear property line and lying between the side property line and the
side setback line.
   ZONING MAP AMENDMENT OR REZONING. An amendment to a zoning regulation for
the purpose of changing the zoning district that is applied to a specified
property or properties. The term also includes: (i) the initial application of
zoning when land is added to the territorial jurisdiction of a local government
that has previously adopted zoning regulations; and (ii) the application of an
overlay zoning district or a conditional zoning district. The term does not
include: (i) the initial adoption of a zoning map by a local government; (ii)
the repeal of a zoning map and readoption of a new zoning map for the entire
planning and development regulation jurisdiction; or (iii) updating the zoning
map to incorporate amendments to the names of zoning districts made by zoning
text amendments where there are no changes in the boundaries of the zoning
district or land uses permitted in the district.
   ZONING REGULATION. A zoning regulation authorized by Article 7 of G.S. Ch.
160D.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 2.3; Ord. passed 8-12-2014; Ord. passed 7-11-2017;
Ord. passed - -2021; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, §§ 2.5, 2.6, 2.28; Ord. passed 2-14-
2023, § 2; Ord. passed 5-30-2023, § 9; Ord. passed 2023, § 4 ;  Ord. passed
2024; Ord. passed 10-8-2024, § 2)
ADMINISTRATIVE STRUCTURE
Part I: Planning Board
§ 151.050 ESTABLISHMENT.
   In accordance with G.S. § 160D-301, a Planning Board is hereby established.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 3.1; Ord. passed - -2021)
§ 151.051 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Board is to advise the Town Commissioners and Mayor on
planning and zoning issues to include, but not limited to, establishment or
revision of districts; and regulation and restriction of erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair or use of buildings,
structures or land in accordance with G.S. §§ 160D-502, 160D-605(b), 160D-703
and 160D-909.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 3.2; Ord. passed - -2021)
§ 151.052 POWERS AND DUTIES OF PLANNING BOARD.
   Pursuant to G.S. § 160D-301, the Planning Board shall report to the Town
Commissioners and shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Make studies of the area within its jurisdiction and surrounding
areas;
   (B)   Acquire and maintain in current form basic information and material as
are necessary to an understanding of past trends, present conditions and forces
at work to cause change in these conditions;
   (C)   Determine objectives to be sought in development of the area;
   (D)   Prepare plans for achieving these objectives and recommend amendment
and revision of a comprehensive and coordinated plan for the physical
development of the town’s zoning jurisdiction;
   (E)   Develop and recommend to the Town Commissioners policies, ordinances,
administrative procedures and other means for promoting orderly development
along lines indicated in the comprehensive plan and for carrying out plans in a
coordinated and efficient manner;
   (F)   Advise the Town Commissioners concerning the use and amendment of
means for carrying out the plans;
   (G)   Exercise any functions in the administration and enforcement of
various means for carrying out plans that the Town Commissioners may direct;
   (H)   Keep the Town Commissioners informed and advised as to these matters;
   (I)   Perform any other duties which may lawfully be assigned to it by the
Town Commissioners; and
   (J)   The Planning Board may adopt rules and regulations governing its
procedures and operations consistent with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 3.3; Ord. passed - -2021)
§ 151.053 APPOINTMENT AND TERMS OF PLANNING BOARD MEMBERS.
   (A)   There shall be a Planning Board consisting of seven members appointed
by the Town Commissioners.
   (B)   Planning Board members shall serve without pay and at the pleasure of
the Town Commissioners for two-year staggered terms. The Town Commissioners
shall annually and alternately appoint four and three members to the Board. The
provisions of this division are subject to any rights to appointment by the
County Board of Commissioners pursuant to G.S. §§ 160D-200, 160D-202 and 160D-
903, but only to the extent that the town exercises exterritorial jurisdiction.
   (C)   The term of office shall commence on July 1 and end on June 30, unless
appointed to fill a vacancy to complete that respective term of office. If no
replacement, the person remains in office until his or her successor is
appointed.
   (D)   The Town Commissioners may remove Planning Board members only by
taking a public vote. A Board member, who misses three consecutive meetings
without being excused by the Board, shall be considered to have resigned
membership in the Board. A Planning Board member may willingly resign at any
time. The vacancy shall be filled by the Town Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 3.4; Ord. passed - -2021)
§ 151.054 PLANNING BOARD OFFICERS.
   (A)   Town Commissioners shall appoint the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson
and other offices as it may determine.
   (B)   The term of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson shall be one year,
with eligibility for additional appointments.
   (C)   The Vice-Chairperson shall serve as acting Chairperson in the absence
of the Chairperson, and at those times, shall have the same duties and powers
as the Chairperson.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 3.5)
§ 151.055 MEETINGS OF THE PLANNING BOARD.
   (A)   The Planning Board may hold at least one meeting monthly. Special
meetings may be called by the Chairperson or at least two members of the Board.
   (B)   A notice shall be posted no less than 48 hours prior to a meeting.
   (C)   Minutes shall be kept of all Board proceedings and shall be made
available to the public (except for closed session minutes held pursuant to
G.S. § 143-318.11 may be withheld from public inspection as long as public
inspection would frustrate the purpose of a closed session). Recorded
information shall also include information of attendance, findings,
recommendations and actions taken by the Board.
   (D)   All meetings of the Planning Board shall be open to the public.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 3.6)
§ 151.056 QUORUM AND VOTING.
   (A)   A quorum for the Planning Board shall consist of a majority of the
Board membership (excluding vacant seats). A quorum is necessary for the Board
to take official action required or authorized by this ordinance.
   (B)   All actions of the Planning Board shall be taken by majority vote, a
quorum being present.
   (C)   The Board may adopt bylaws, rules and other procedures not
inconsistent with the town’s ordinances and laws of the state.
   (D)   Members of the Planning Board shall not vote on recommendations
regarding any zoning map or text amendment where the outcome of the matter
under consideration is reasonably likely to have a direct, substantial and
readily identifiable financial impact on the member.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 3.7)
Part II: Board of Adjustment
§ 151.070 CREATION; COMPOSITION.
   A Board of Adjustment ("Board") is hereby established pursuant to G.S. §§
160D-1-9(d), 160D-302, 160D-403(b), 160D-405, 160D-406, 160D-702, 160D-705 and
160D-1405, consisting of the Mayor and Town Commissioners, ex officio.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2015; Ord. passed - -2021)
§ 151.071 MEETINGS; OFFICERS.
   The Mayor shall serve as the Chair of the Board, the Mayor Pro Tem shall
serve as the Vice-Chair, and the Town Clerk shall serve as the Secretary to the
Board. The Board shall follow its normal rules of procedure, except where
different procedures are specifically required by state law or this chapter
151. Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of the Chair, or in his
absence the Vice-Chair, or at least two members of the Board. All meetings of
the Board shall be open to the public. The Board shall keep full and accurate
minutes of its proceedings.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2015)
§ 151.072 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals from and review any
order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative
official charged with enforcement of this chapter.
   (B)   Interpretation. To interpret the terms of this chapter and zoning maps
and to pass upon disputed questions of lot lines or district boundary lines and
similar questions as they arise in the administration of this chapter.
   (C)   Conditional use and special use permits. To hear and decide special
use permits in accordance with standards and procedures specified in this
chapter. Reasonable and appropriate conditions may be imposed upon these
permits. Conditions may not be imposed on special use permits that the town
does not otherwise have statutory authority to impose.
   (D)   Subpoena. The Chair, or in the Chair's absence anyone acting as the
Chair, may subpoena witnesses and compel the production of evidence. To request
issuance of a subpoena, persons with standing under G.S. § 160D-1402(c) may
make a written request to the Chair explaining why it is necessary for certain
witnesses or evidence to be compelled. The Chair shall issue requested
subpoenas he or she determines to be relevant, reasonable in nature and scope,
and not oppressive. The Chair shall rule on any motion to quash or modify a
subpoena. Decisions regarding subpoenas made by the Chair may be appealed to
the full Board. If a person fails or refuses to obey a subpoena issued pursuant
to this section, the Board or the party seeking the subpoena may apply to the
General Court of Justice for an order requiring that its subpoena be obeyed,
and issue these orders after notice to all proper parties the court shall have
jurisdiction to issue these orders after notice to all proper parties.
   (E)   Oath. The Chair of the Board, or any member acting as chair, and the
Clerk to the Board are authorized to administer oaths to witnesses in any
matter coming before the Board. Any person willfully swears falsely is guilty
of who, while under oath during a proceeding before the Board, willfully swears
falsely is guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
   (F)   Variance; in general. When unnecessary hardships would result from
carrying out the strict letter of the UDO, the Board may vary any of the
provisions of the UDO upon a showing of all of the following:
      (1)   Unnecessary hardship would result from the strict application of
the UDO. It shall not be necessary to demonstrate that, in the absence of the
variance, no reasonable use can be made of the property.
      (2)   The hardship results from conditions that are peculiar to the
property, such as location, size, or topography. Hardships resulting from
personal circumstances, as well as hardships resulting from conditions that are
common to the neighborhood or the general public, may not be the basis for
granting a variance.
      (3)   The hardship did not result from actions taken by the applicant or
the property owner. The act of purchasing property with knowledge that
circumstances exist that may justify the granting of a variance shall not be
regarded as a self-created hardship.
      (4)   The requested variance is consistent with the spirit, purpose, and
intent of the UDO, such that public safety is secured, and substantial justice
is achieved. Provided, however, no change in permitted uses may be authorized
by variance. Appropriate conditions may be imposed on any variance, provided
that the conditions are reasonably related to the variance.
   (G)   Variance; Federal Fair Housing Act. Notwithstanding the provisions of
division (F) above, the Board may provide for a variance under the Federal Fair
Housing Act upon the following:
      (1)   Application requirements; determination of completeness.
         (a)   Persons authorized to file applications. An application for a
reasonable accommodation may be filed only by the owner of the land affected by
the reasonable accommodation; an agent, lessee, or contract purchaser
specifically authorized by the owner to file such application; or any unit of
government that is not the owner of the lot but proposes to acquire the lot by
purchase, gift, or condemnation.
         (b)   Pre-application conference. Before filing an application for a
reasonable accommodation, the applicant may request a pre-application
conference with the Zoning Administrator.
         (c)   Application filing. An application for a reasonable
accommodation shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. No filing fee is
required for such application. Once the application is complete, the Zoning
Administrator shall schedule the application for consideration at a hearing
before the Board, and shall transmit to the Board all applications and other
records pertaining to such reasonable accommodation prior to the hearing on the
application.
      (2)   Approval criteria. The Board shall grant a reasonable accommodation
to any provision of the UDO if it finds by a greater weight of the evidence
that the proposed reasonable accommodation is determined to be both reasonable
and necessary, in accordance with the following:
         (a)   Reasonable. An accommodation will be determined to be reasonable
if it would not undermine the legitimate purposes and effects of existing
planning regulations, and if it will not impose significant financial and
administrative burdens upon the town and/or constitute a substantial or
fundamental alteration of the UDO's provisions; and
         (b)   Necessary. An accommodation will be determined to be necessary
if it would provide direct or meaningful therapeutic amelioration of the
effects of the particular disability or handicap, and would afford an equal
opportunity to enjoy and use housing in residential areas in the town.
      (3)   Effect of approval or denial.
         (a)   After the Board approves a reasonable accommodation, the
applicant shall follow the normal procedures set forth in the UDO, and any
other applicable ordinance, for approval of any permits, certificates, and
other approvals required in order to proceed with development or use of the
property. All orders, decisions, determinations, and interpretations made by
administrative officers under those procedures shall be consistent with the
reasonable accommodation granted by the Board.
         (b)   The Board shall refuse to hear a reasonable accommodation
request that has been previously denied, unless it finds that there have been
substantial changes in the conditions or circumstances relating to the matter.
      (4)   Lapse. Failure of an applicant to apply for a building permit or
any other required development permit, and commence uninterrupted construction
or action with regard to a variance granted hereunder within one year of
receiving approval of the reasonable accommodation shall automatically render
the variance null and void.
   (H)   Decision. As used in this chapter, the term "decision" includes any
final and binding order, requirement, or determination for special use permits.
The Board shall follow quasi-judicial procedures when deciding appeals and
requests for variances and special use permits. The Board shall hear and decide
all matters upon which it is required to pass under any statute or this
subchapter.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2015; Ord. passed - -2021; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, §§ 2.7, 2.8;
Ord. passed 2024)
§ 151.073 NOTICE OF HEARING, TRANSMISSION OF ADMINISTRATIVE MATERIALS.
   (A)   Notice of hearings conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be mailed,
return receipt requested, to the person or entity whose appeal, application, or
request is the subject of the hearing; to the owner of the property that is the
subject of the hearing if the owner did not initiate the hearing; to the owners
of all parcels of land abutting the parcel of land that is the subject of the
hearing; to property owners whose property may be substantially impacted by the
requested use or variance, and to any other persons entitled to receive notice
as provided by the zoning or unified development ordinance. For this section,
properties are "abutting" even if separated by a street, railroad, or other
transportation corridor. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the town
may rely on the county tax listing to determine owners of property entitled to
mailed notice. The notice must be deposited in the mail at least ten days, but
not more than 25 days, prior to the date of the hearing. Within that same time
period, the town shall also prominently post a notice of the hearing on the
site that is the subject of the hearing or on an adjacent street or highway
right-of-way. The Board may continue an evidentiary hearing that has been
convened without further advertisement. If an evidentiary hearing is set for a
given date and a quorum of the Board is not then present, the hearing shall be
continued until the next regular Board meeting without further advertisement.
   (B)   The administrator or staff to the Board shall transmit to the Board
all applications, reports, and written materials relevant to the matter being
considered. The administrative materials may be distributed to the members of
the Board prior to the hearing if at the same time they are distributed to the
Board a copy is also provided to the appellant or applicant and to the
landowner if that person is not the appellant or applicant. The administrative
materials shall become a part of the hearing record. The administrative
materials may be provided in written or electronic form. Objections to
inclusion or exclusion of administrative materials may be made before or during
the hearing. Rulings on unresolved objections shall be made by the Board at the
hearing.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2015; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, § 2.9; Ord. passed 2024)
§ 151.074 VOTING.
   (A)   The concurring vote of four-fifths of the Board shall be necessary to
grant a variance. A majority of the members shall be required to decide any
other quasi-judicial matter or to determine an appeal made in the nature of
certiorari. For all other matters, a majority of the members shall be required.
For the purposes of this section, vacant positions on the Board and members who
are disqualified from voting on a quasi-judicial matter shall not be considered
members of the Board for calculation of the requisite majority if there are no
qualified alternates available to take the place of such members. Abstentions
by a member not otherwise excused from voting shall be counted as a vote in
favor of any motion or action, except for votes taken under G.S. § 160D-601.
   (B)   A member of the Board shall not participate in or vote on any quasi-
judicial matter in a manner that would violate affected persons' constitutional
rights to an impartial decision maker. Impermissible violations of due process
include, but are not limited to, a member having a fixed opinion prior to
hearing the matter that is not susceptible to change, undisclosed ex parte
communications, a close familial, business, or other associational relationship
with an affected person, or a financial interest in the outcome of the matter.
If an objection is raised to a member's participation and that member does not
recuse himself or herself, the remaining members shall by majority vote rule on
the objection.
   (C)   The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the
order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and shall make
any order, requirement, decision, or determination that in its opinion ought to
be made.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2015; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, 2.10)
§ 151.075 QUASI-JUDICIAL PROCEDURE AND DECISIONS; JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   (A)   The applicant, the town, and any person who would have standing to
appeal the Board's decision under G.S. § 160D-1402(c) shall have the right to
participate as a party at the evidentiary hearing. Other witnesses may present
competent, material and substantial evidence that is not repetitive as allowed
by the Board. Objections regarding jurisdictional and evidentiary issues,
including, but not limited to, the timeliness of an appeal or the standing of a
party, may be made to the Board. The Board Chair shall rule on any objections,
and the Chair's rulings may be appealed to the full Board. These rulings are
also subject to judicial review pursuant to G.S. § 160D-1402. Objections based
on jurisdictional issues may be raised for the first time on judicial review.
   (B)   The Board shall determine contested facts and make its decision within
a reasonable time. When hearing an appeal, the Board may reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or may modify the decision appealed from and shall make any
order, requirement, decision, or determination that ought to be made. The Board
shall have all the powers of the official who made the decision. Every quasi-
judicial decision shall be based upon competent, material, and substantial
evidence in the record. Each quasi-judicial decision shall be reduced to
writing, reflect the Board's determination of contested facts and their
application to the applicable standards, and be approved by the Board and
signed by the Chair or other duly authorized member of the Board. A quasi-
judicial decision is effective upon filing the written decision with the Clerk
to the Board or such other office or official as this chapter specifies. The
decision of the Board shall be delivered within a reasonable time by personal
delivery, electronic mail, or first-class mail to the applicant, landowner, and
any person who has submitted a written request for a copy prior to the date the
decision becomes effective. The person required to provide notice shall certify
to the town that proper notice has been made, and the certificate shall be
deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud.
   (C)   Every quasi-judicial decision shall be subject to review by the
Pamlico County Superior Court by proceedings in the nature of certiorari
pursuant to G.S. § 160D-1402. A petition for review shall be filed with the
Clerk of Pamlico County Superior Court by the later of 30 days after the
decision is effective or after delivery of the written decision of the Board
pursuant to §
151.075(B). When first-class mail is used to deliver notice, three days shall
be added to the time to file the petition.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2015; Ord. passed - -2021; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, 2.11)
§ 151.076 APPEALS.
   The Board shall hear and decide appeals from decisions of administrative
officials charged with enforcement of this subchapter, pursuant to all of the
following:
   (A)   Any person who has standing under G.S. §§ 160D-1-02 and 160D-1402 or
the town may appeal a decision to the Board. An appeal is taken by filing a
notice of appeal with the Town Clerk and payment of any applicable fees adopted
by the Town. The notice of appeal shall state the grounds for the appeal.
   (B)   The official who made the decision shall give written notice to the
owner of the property that is the subject of the decision and to the party who
sought the decision, if different from the owner. The written notice shall be
delivered by personal delivery, electronic mail, or by first-class mail.
   (C)   The owner or other party shall have 30 days from receipt of the
written notice within which to file an appeal. Any other person with standing
to appeal shall have 30 days from receipt from any source of actual or
constructive notice of the decision within which to file an appeal.
   (D)   It shall be conclusively presumed that all persons with standing to
appeal have constructive notice of the decision from the date a sign containing
the words "Zoning Decision" in letters at least six inches high and identifying
the means to contact an official for information about the decision is
prominently posted on the property that is the subject of the decision,
provided the sign remains on the property for at least ten days. Posting of
signs is not the only form of constructive notice. Any such posting shall be
the responsibility of the landowner or applicant. Verification of the posting
shall be provided to the official who made the decision. Absent an ordinance
provision to the contrary, posting of signs shall not be required.
   (E)   The official who made the decision shall transmit to the Board all
documents and exhibits constituting the record upon which the action appealed
from is taken. The official shall also provide a copy of the record to the
appellant and to the owner of the property that is the subject of the appeal if
the appellant is not the owner.
   (F)   An appeal of a notice of violation or other enforcement order stays
enforcement of the action appealed from and accrual of any fines assessed
during the pendency of the appeal to the Board and any subsequent appeal in
accordance with G.S. § 160D-1402 or during the pendency of any civil proceeding
authorized by law or appeals therefrom, unless the official who made the
decision certifies to the Board after notice of appeal has been filed that
because of the facts stated in an affidavit, a stay would cause imminent peril
to life or property or because the violation is transitory in nature, a stay
would seriously interfere with enforcement of this subchapter. In that case,
enforcement proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order,
which may be granted by a court. If enforcement proceedings are not stayed, the
appellant may file with the official a request for an expedited hearing of the
appeal, and the Board of Adjustment shall meet to hear the appeal within 15
days after such a request is filed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, appeals of
decisions granting a permit or otherwise affirming that a proposed use of
property is consistent with this subchapter shall not stay the further review
of an application for permits or permissions to use such property; in these
situations the appellant may request and the Board may grant a stay of a final
decision of permit applications or building permits affected by the issue being
appealed.
   (G)   Subject to the provisions of division (F) of this section, the Board
shall hear and decide the appeal within a reasonable time.
   (H)   The official who made the decision, or his or her successor if the
official is no longer employed by the town, shall be present at the hearing as
a witness. The appellant shall not be limited at the hearing to matters stated
in the notice of appeal. If any party or the town would be unduly prejudiced by
the presentation of matters not presented in the notice of appeal, the Board
shall continue the hearing. The Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly,
or may modify the decision appealed from and shall make any order, requirement,
decision, or determination that ought to be made. The Board shall have all the
powers of the official who made the decision.
   (I)   When hearing an appeal in the nature of certiorari, the hearing shall
be based on the record as defined by G.S. § 160D-1402(h) and the scope of
review shall be as provided in G.S. § 160D-1402(j).
   (J)   The parties to an appeal that has been made under this chapter may
agree to mediation or other forms of alternative dispute resolution.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2015; Ord. passed - -2021; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, § 2.12; Ord.
passed 2024)
§ 151.077 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   In addition to any other penalties and remedies allowed under the town's
code of ordinances, if a building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building,
structure or land is used in violation of this subchapter, the town, in
addition to other remedies, may institute any appropriate action or proceedings
to prevent the unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration,
repair, conversion, maintenance or use, to restrain, correct or abate the
violation, to prevent occupancy of the building, structure or land, or to
prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about the premises.
(Ord. passed 4-14-2015)
Part III: Zoning Administration
§ 151.090 INTENT.
   (A)   It is the intent of this ordinance that all questions of
interpretation and enforcement shall be first presented to the Zoning
Administrator. If his or her decisions are questioned, the aggrieved party may
appeal to the Board of Adjustment and that recourse from the decisions of the
Board of Adjustment shall be to the courts as provided by law.
   (B)   It is further the intent of this ordinance that the duties of the Town
Commissioners in connection with this ordinance shall be to:
      (1)   Consider and adopt or reject proposed amendments or the repeal of
this ordinance; and
      (2)   Establish a schedule of fees and charges as stated in this
ordinance.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 3.14)
§ 151.091 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Zoning Administrator is appointed by the Town Commissioners and is
hereby authorized, and it shall be his or her duty, to enforce and administer
the provisions of this ordinance.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 3.15; Ord. passed 2024)
§ 151.092 ENFORCEMENT POWERS OF THE ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Zoning Administrator may provide for the enforcement of this ordinance
by means of withholding zoning permits, by instituting injunction, mandamus or
other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, moving, maintenance or
use; to correct or abate a violation; or to prevent the occupancy of the
building, structure or land.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 3.16)
§ 151.093 ZONING PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Neither building, sign, nor other structure shall be erected, moved,
extended or enlarged, or structurally altered, nor shall any excavation or
filling of any lot for the construction of any building be commenced until the
Zoning Administrator approves a permit in accordance with the requirements of
this ordinance.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 3.17)
§ 151.094 APPLICATION FOR ZONING PERMIT.
   (A)   Each application to the Zoning Administrator for a permit shall be
accompanied by plot plans in duplicate showing:
      (1)   The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon;
      (2)   The size of the building to be erected;
      (3)   The location of the building on the lot with required setbacks
indicated;
      (4)   The location of existing structures on the lot, if any;
      (5)   The number of dwelling, commercial or industrial units the building
is designed to accommodate;
      (6)   The setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots;
      (7)   The location of any required parking areas;
      (8)   Other information as may be essential for determining whether the
provisions of this ordinance are being observed; and
      (9)   Any changes to the submitted building plans affecting items in this
ordinance shall be resubmitted to the Zoning Administrator for approval.
   (B)   Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work
authorized by it shall have been commenced within six months of its date of
issuance or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period
of one year. No work authorized by any building permit that has expired shall
be performed until a new permit has been secured.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, §
3.18; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, § 2.13; Ord. passed 2024)
§ 151.095 REMEDIES.
   In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,
repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation
of this ordinance, the Zoning Administrator, or any other appropriate town
authority, or any person who would be damaged by the violation, in addition to
other remedies may institute an action for injunction, or mandamus or other
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the violation.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 3.20)
§ 151.096 COMPLAINTS REGARDING VIOLATIONS.
   When a violation of this ordinance occurs, or is alleged to have occurred,
any person may file a written complaint. The complaint shall state fully the
cause and basis thereof and shall be filed with the Zoning Administrator. He or
she shall record properly the complaint, investigate within ten days and take
action thereon as provided in these regulations.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 3.21)
§ 151.097 CANCELLATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall cancel a zoning permit when the method
of moving, construction or use violates any provisions contained in these
regulations or any state or local ordinance or resolution. Upon the
cancellation, any further work upon the moving, construction, alteration or
repair of the building or structure, or further use of the building, structure
or land shall be deemed a violation.
   (B)   Each and every day the unlawful moving, construction, alteration or
repair of the building or structure, or further use of the building, structure
or land continues shall be deemed a separate offense. The Zoning Administrator
shall advise the violator of the cancellation of a zoning permit in writing.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 3.22)
NONCONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES AND USES
§ 151.110 INTENT.
   Within the districts established by this ordinance, there may exist
structures and uses of land and structures, which were lawful before the
original town zoning ordinance of July 20, 1982 was passed but which were
prohibited under that ordinance and its amendment and would be prohibited under
the terms of this ordinance. It is the intent of this Unified Development
Ordinance to permit these nonconformities to continue but they shall in no case
be expanded except as provided for in §
151.112(A).
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 4.1)
§ 151.111 REPAIRS AND MAINTENANCE.
   Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent maintenance,
strengthening or restoring to safe conditions any building or part thereof.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 4.2)
§ 151.112 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES DUE TO PHYSICAL RESTRICTIONS.
   Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 151 of the Unified Development
Ordinance, where a lawful structure exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this ordinance that could not be built under the terms of this
ordinance by reason of restrictions on area, lot coverage, height, yards, its
location on the lot or other requirements concerning the structure, the
structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to
the following provisions.
   (A)   Nonconforming structures (except accessory buildings/structures) may
be enlarged only if the enlarged part of the structure meets the setback and
height requirements for the zone in which it is located.
   (B)   Nothing in this ordinance shall be taken to prevent the restoration of
a building damaged to the extent of not more than 75% of its assessed tax
value, by fire, explosion or other cause, act of God or the public enemy, nor
the continued occupancy or use of the building or part thereof which is
existing at the time of the partial destruction. Nonconforming buildings
damaged to an extent greater than 75% of the assessed tax value, or buildings
voluntarily razed, may be restored or replaced only by meeting the requirements
specified for substandard lots of record in §
151.212.
   (C)   Should the structure be moved for any reason for any distance
whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in
which it is located after it is moved.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, §
4.3; Ord. passed 5-10-2022; Ord. passed 2023, § 2)
§ 151.113 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND AND/OR BUILDINGS.
   Except as otherwise provided in Chapter 151 of the Unified Development
Ordinance, where at the time of passage of this ordinance lawful use of land
and/or buildings exists, which would not be permitted by the regulations
imposed by this ordinance, the use may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful provided:
   (A)   No nonconforming use shall be enlarged or increased nor extended to
occupy a greater area than was occupied at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this ordinance;
   (B)   If a nonconforming use ceases for any reason for a period of more than
90 days, any subsequent use shall conform to the uses specified by this
ordinance for the district involved. Only the Board of Adjustment or the courts
can grant extension of this period; and
   (C)   No additional structures that do not conform to requirements of this
ordinance shall be erected in connection with nonconforming uses.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, §
4.4; Ord. passed 2023, § 3)
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
§ 151.125 ZONING MAPS ARE A PART OF THIS CHAPTER.
   (A)   The town is hereby divided into districts whose locations and
boundaries are shown on the official zoning map, which are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance and are herewith attached
and recorded in the minutes of the Town Commissioners.
   (B)   The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the
Mayor and Town Clerk and bearing the seal of the town under the following
words:
“This is to certify that this map is the official zoning map referred to in §
151.125 of the Town of Minnesott Beach, North Carolina Unified Development
Ordinance” together with the date of the adoption of this ordinance.
   (C)   The official zoning map shall remain on display in the Town Hall and
be kept up to date by the Zoning Administrator.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 5.1)
§ 151.126 ZONING MAP CHANGES.
   (A)   No changes shall be made except in conformity with the procedure set
forth for amendment of this ordinance. These changes shall be entered on the
official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the Town
Commissioners, with an entry on the official zoning map as follows:
“On                                , by official action of the Town Board of
Commissioners, the following changes were made in the Official Zoning Map:
                                                                       .”
   (B)   The entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the Town Clerk.
   (C)   No amendment to the official zoning map shall become effective until
the change has been officially mapped and recorded.
   (D)   If a zoning map amendment is adopted and the action was deemed
inconsistent with the adopted plan, the zoning amendment shall have the effect
of also amending any future land-use map in the approved plan, and no
additional request or application for a plan amendment shall be required. A
plan amendment and a zoning amendment may be considered concurrently. The plan
consistency statement is not subject to judicial review. For a future land use
map that is deemed amended, if it is a CAMA plan, then such amendment is not
effective until it goes through the CAMA plan-amendment process.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, §
5.2; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, § 2.14)
§ 151.127 MAINTENANCE OF THE OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
   The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for the maintenance and
revision of the official zoning map. Upon notification by the Town
Commissioners that a zoning change has been made, the Zoning Administrator
shall make the necessary changes on the official zoning maps within three
calendar days of notification.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 5.3)
INTERPRETATION OF ZONING DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
§ 151.140 LOCATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   Where boundaries prove to be uncertain as to their location on the official
zoning map, the following rules shall apply.
   (A)   Streets, rights-of-way and easements. Boundaries indicated as
approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways or alleys shall be
construed to follow the centerlines.
   (B)   Lot lines. Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot
lines shall be construed as following the lot line.
   (C)   Corporate limits. Boundaries indicated as approximately following town
limits shall be construed as following the town limits.
   (D)   Property division. If a district boundary divides a lot, the
requirements for the district in which the greater portion of the lot lies
shall be extended to the balance of the lot, provided that the extension shall
not include any part of lot which lies more than 50 feet beyond the district
boundary, and further provided that the remaining parcel shall not be less than
the minimum required for the district in which it is located.
   (E)   Vacation and abandonment. Where any public street, alley or road is
hereafter officially vacated or abandoned, the regulations applicable to
parcels of abutting property shall apply to that portion of the street, alley
or road added thereto by virtue of the vacation or abandonment.
   (F)   Shorelines. Boundaries indicated as following shorelines shall be
construed to follow those shorelines, and in the event of change in the
shoreline shall be construed as moving with the actual shoreline.
   (G)   Further interpretation. In instances where uncertainty exists, the
Board of Adjustment shall interpret the intent of the map as to location of the
boundaries.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, §§ 6.1, 6.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.5, 6.6, 6.7; Ord. passed 2024)
ZONING DISTRICTS
§ 151.160 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Single-family, two-family and multi-family dwellings in Zoning Districts R-
20 Residential, R-15 Single-Family Dwelling District, R-M Multi-Family Dwelling
District, C Commercial, C-M Commercial Marina and IP Institutional and Public
that allow single-family, two-family and multi-family dwellings shall comply
with the following requirements.
   (A)   The pitch of the roof must have a minimum vertical rise of five feet
for every 12 feet of horizontal run (5:12) and the roof finished with a type of
roofing material that is commonly used in standard residential construction.
   (B)   All roof structures shall provide an eave projection of no less than
ten inches, which may not include gutter, unless the roof pitch is eight to 12
(8:12) or greater.
   (C)   The exterior walls must be at least eight feet in height measured from
the floor to the top plate.
   (D)   A minimum front stoop of three feet by five feet, excluding the steps,
is required.
   (E)   New construction of single-family dwellings shall contain a minimum of
two bedrooms as defined in §
151.037.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, §
7.1; Ord. passed 2-14-2023, § 2) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.161 SUBMISSION OF PLANS.
   Prior to issuance of a permit, the owner or his or her representative must
provide the Zoning Administrator with one original set of “as-built” plans for
all dwellings built on-site or off-site as well as requirements specified in §
151.094.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 7.2)
§ 151.162 R-20 RESIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district shall be to maintain a minimum
lot size of 20,000 square feet and to allow for other uses permitted as special
uses permitted which would not interfere or be detrimental to the quiet
residential nature of the areas included within the district.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings;
      (2)   Public utility uses;
      (3)   Accessory building/structure or use;
      (4)   Forestry;
      (5)   Public or private parks or community centers; and
      (6)   Family care homes.
   (C)   Special uses.
      (1)   Church, private club or lodge;
      (2)   Golf course;
      (3)   Kindergarten or nursery;
      (4)   Hospital;
      (5)   Public or private elementary and secondary schools, colleges and
universities;
      (6)   Principal use sign; and
      (7)   Home occupations.
   (D)   Dimensional requirements. Principal buildings and uses, unless
otherwise specified in this ordinance, shall comply with the following
dimensional requirements:
      (1)   A minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet per dwelling unit;
      (2)   A minimum lot width of 100 feet at the required front building
setback line;
      (3)   The minimum front yard setback shall be 35 feet;
      (4)   The minimum side yard setback shall be 15 feet;
      (5)   The minimum rear yard setback shall be 25 feet; and
      (6)   No principal building shall be constructed unless it meets the
following dimensional requirements:
         (a)   The maximum height above grade shall be 32 feet to the peak
(excluding chimney).
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, §
7.3; Ord. passed 8-12-2014; Ord. passed - -2021; Ord. passed 5-10-2022; Ord.
passed 7-6-2022, § 2.15)
§ 151.163 R-15 SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district shall be to maintain a minimum
lot size of 15,000 square feet, and to allow for other uses permitted as
special uses permitted which would not interfere with single-family residences
in the district and which would not be detrimental to the quiet residential
nature of the areas included within the district.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Single-family dwelling;
      (2)   Accessory building/structure and use;
      (3)   Public utility uses;
      (4)   Churches; and
      (5)   Family care home.
   (C)   Special uses.
      (1)   Hospital;
      (2)   Kindergarten or nursery;
      (3)   Schools;
      (4)   Neighborhood playground and parks;
      (5)   Golf course;
      (6)   Home occupation; and
      (7)   Principal use sign.
   (D)   Dimensional requirements. Principal buildings and uses in this zoning
district shall comply with the dimensional requirements of this district:
      (1)   A minimum lot size of 15,000 square feet per dwelling unit;
      (2)   A minimum lot width of 80 feet at the required front building
setback line;
      (3)   The minimum front yard setback shall be 30 feet;
      (4)   The minimum side yard setback shall be ten feet;
      (5)   The minimum rear yard setback shall be ten feet; and
      (6)   No principal building shall be constructed unless it meets the
following dimensional requirements:
         (a)   The maximum height above grade shall be 32 feet to the peak
(excluding chimney).
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, §
7.4; Ord. passed 8-12-2014; Ord. passed - -2021; Ord. passed 5-10-2022; Ord.
passed 7-6-2022, § 2.16)
§ 151.164 R-M MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. This district is established for moderate density single-
family and low density multi- family development of varying types and designs.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Dwellings, attached (including townhouses).
      (2)   Dwellings, duplex, triplex and quadraplex.
      (3)   Dwellings, multi-family.
      (4)   Dwellings, single-family, detached.
      (5)   Quad-unit apartments.
      (6)   Nursery or kindergarten.
      (7)   School.
      (8)   Hospital.
      (9)   Family Care home.
   (C)   Special uses.
      (1)   Private club or lodge;
      (2)   Manufactured home park;
      (3)   Golf Course;
      (4)   Swimming Pool;
      (5)   Utilities;
      (6)   Principal use sign; and
      (7)   Home occupation.
   (D)   Development standards. All uses and structures permitted in the R-
M District shall meet the applicable development standards established in this
section and all other applicable requirements of these regulations.
      (1)   Dimensional requirements.
         (a)   Minimum lot size - 15,000 square feet.
         (b)   Minimum lot width - 80 feet at the building setback line.
         (c)   Maximum lot size and width - subject to approval of the plot
plan.
      (2)   Maximum density.
         (a)   Multi-family, duplexes, quadraplexes, townhomes and
condominiums: ten units per acre.
         (b)   Single-family detached: six units per acre.
      (3)   Setback requirements.
         (a)   Front yard setback - 30 feet.
         (b)   Side yard setback - 15 feet.
         (c)   Rear yard setback - 15 feet.
         (d)   Minimum distance between two separate principal buildings - 30
feet.
         (e)   Minimum distance between any point of any principal building and
accessory building/structure - ten feet.
      (4)   Other requirements:
         (a)   No more than five dwelling units in any one structure.
         (b)   Maximum height above mean surrounding ground level - 35 feet to
the eaves.
         (c)   A minimum of two off-street parking places allocated to each
family unit in the complex.
         (d)   All requirements for on-frame manufactured homes and
manufactured homes are specified in §
151.197.
   (E)   Dimensional requirements; multiple buildings. When there are two or
more principal buildings on a common lot, which has single or multiple
ownership, they shall comply with the following requirements:
      (1)   The minimum distance between the closest points of any two
principal buildings shall be 30 feet;
      (2)   The minimum distance between any point of a principal building and
the nearest property line shall be 15 feet;
      (3)   The minimum distance between any point of any building and any road
right-of-way line shall be 30 feet;
      (4)   Accessory buildings/structures shall be located as follows:
         (a)   More than ten feet from any point of any principal building; and
         (b)   More than 75 feet in front of any principal building as
determined by the projection of the sidelines of the principal building.
      (5)   A building shall contain a maximum of five dwellings; and
      (6)   Building height shall not exceed 35 feet to the eaves.
   (F)   Dimensional requirements; manufactured homes. All requirements for
manufactured homes are specified in §
151.197(E).
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, §
7.5; Ord. passed 8-12-2014; Ord. passed 7-11-2017; Ord. passed 3-10-2020; Ord.
passed 5-10-2022; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, §§ 2.17, 2.28; Ord. passed 2024)
§ 151.165 C COMMERCIAL.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to provide for encouragement,
and protect the orderly development and growth of activities that are normally
associated with small town shopping and service facilities and to the motoring
public and highway department.
   (B)   Permitted uses - retail establishments.
      (1)   Antique store;
      (2)   Apparel store;
      (3)   Appliance store;
      (4)   Auto and truck sales and service;
      (5)   Auto parts sales (retail);
      (6)   Bait and tackle store;
      (7)   Bakery goods sales store;
      (8)   Book store;
      (9)   Convenience store;
      (10)   Delicatessen;
      (11)   Drug store;
      (12)   Dry goods store;
      (13)   Farm and garden supplies;
      (14)   Farm implement sales and service;
      (15)   Farmers’ market;
      (16)   Florist;
      (17)   Gift shop;
      (18)   Greenhouse or plant nursery;
      (19)   Hardware store;
      (20)   Hearing aid sales and service;
      (21)   Hobby shop;
      (22)   Home furnishings store - retail;
      (23)   Jewelry store;
      (24)   Music store;
      (25)   Newsstand;
      (26)   Office equipment sales and service store;
      (27)   Optical goods store;
      (28)   Pet shop;
      (29)   Seed and feed store;
      (30)   Shoe sales and repair store;
      (31)   Specialty goods store;
      (32)   Sporting goods store;
      (33)   Stationery store and printing shop;
      (34)   Swimming pool sales and service;
      (35)   Toy store; and
      (36)   Variety store.
   (C)   Permitted uses - consumer services.
      (1)   Accountant, bookkeeping service;
      (2)   Advertising agency office;
      (3)   Ambulance service;
      (4)   Animal hospital, veterinary clinic or animal boarding place;
      (5)   Appliance repair shop;
      (6)   Art studio;
      (7)   Attorney or legal offices;
      (8)   Audiology services;
      (9)   Auto upholstery shop;
      (10)   Bank savings and loan institution;
      (11)   Barber shop;
      (12)   Beauty shop;
      (13)   Chamber of Commerce;
      (14)   Dance studio;
      (15)   Dry cleaning and laundering pick-up station;
      (16)   Finance and/or investment services office;
      (17)   Fire station;
      (18)   Freezer locker service or ice storage;
      (19)   Funeral home;
      (20)   Loan office;
      (21)   Motel;
      (22)   Newspaper office;
      (23)   Office building and offices as an accessory use;
      (24)   Opthamology and optician services;
      (25)   Photo studio;
      (26)   Physician or dentist office;
      (27)   Post office;
      (28)   Restaurant;
      (29)   Tailor or dressmaker;
      (30)   Taxi stand;
      (31)   Telephone and telegraph office;
      (32)   Theater;
      (33)   Ticket agency;
      (34)   Tire service;
      (35)   Town Hall and administration offices; and
      (36)   Travel bureau.
   (D)   Permitted uses - other uses.
      (1)   Public utility building or use; and
      (2)   Single-family homes.
   (E)   Special uses.
      (1)   Principal use sign;
      (2)   Temporary sign;
      (3)   Outdoor advertising sign; and
      (4)   Service station.
   (F)   Non-permitted uses. Big box or big box-type stores, and drive through
restaurants are not permitted.
   (G)   Commercial building design. Commercial buildings, if made of metal,
must have exterior cladding and design on the front and sides of the building
that are visible from thoroughfares that is consistent with the character of
the town.
   (H)   Dimensional requirements. Principal buildings and uses in this zoning
district shall comply with the dimensional requirements of this district:
      (1)   The minimum lot size is 20,000 square feet;
      (2)   The minimum lot width is 90 feet;
      (3)   The minimum front building setback requirement is 35 feet;
      (4)   The minimum side yard setback is 20 feet;
      (5)   The minimum rear yard setback is 50 feet; and
      (6)   Building height shall not exceed 32 feet above grade to the peak
excluding chimney.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 7.6; Ord. passed 8-12-2014; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, §
2.18; Ord. passed 2024)
§ 151.166 C-M COMMERCIAL MARINA.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is to promote the marina
character of waterfront areas. Only those uses that will support and complement
the marina atmosphere shall be allowed in the district.
   (B)   Acreage limitations. In order to be zoned or rezoned C-M (Commercial
Marina), a tract must contain a minimum of 20 acres above mean high water mark.
The acreage of multiple tracts may be added together to reach the 20-acre
minimum set forth herein so long as said tracts are adjacent to one another and
said tracts are owned by the same individual or entity.
   (C)   Improvements. No approval for construction of any on-site or off-site
improvements in a C-M District shall be granted until a development plan for
the commercial marina development is approved in accordance with the procedures
and requirements of these regulations. Once approved, the provisions of the
development plan will govern all aspects of development of the property.
   (D)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Automobile parking;
      (2)   Bait and tackle shop;
      (3)   Boat dock;
      (4)   Boat service area (marina);
      (5)   Boat storage (excluding stack storage);
      (6)   Boat repair;
      (7)   Boat sales;
      (8)   Fishing pier or dock;
      (9)   Gift shop;
      (10)   Marine club or organization;
      (11)   Restaurant; and
      (12)   Marine service station.
   (E)   Special uses.
      (1)   Motel;
      (2)   Petroleum products;
      (3)   Public use, including public utility distribution lines,
transformer stations, transmission lines and towers, water tanks, but not
service or storage yards;
      (4)   Principal use signs; and
      (5)   Office and professional buildings.
   (F)   Development standards. All uses and structures permitted in the C-
M District shall meet the applicable development standards established in this
section and all other applicable requirements of these regulations.
      (1)   Dimensional requirements. Except as provided otherwise in this
section, the following regulations are applicable in the C-M District:
         (a)   Unless greater setbacks are required by applicable state or
federal regulations, the minimum front, side and rear setbacks for all
structures, parking, and dry storage shall be 25 feet. However, if property
zoned C-M Commercial Marina abuts property zoned either Residential R-20,
Residential R-15, Residential Mixed Use RMU, or Residential Multi-Family RM
(hereinafter collectively referred to as "residential property") and a
residential dwelling for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued is
situated upon the residential property as of the date this ordinance amendment
is adopted, the minimum setback shall be 50 feet with respect to the portion
(front, side, or rear as applicable) of the Commercial Marina C-M property
abutting any residential property.
         (b)   Maximum height limitations:
            1.   Structures shall not exceed 35 feet above mean surrounding
ground level to the eaves, except for structures which enclose boats while
under repair and/or maintenance; and
            2.   Outside dry storage of the cradles and racks, without roof
coverage, shall not exceed ten feet.
         (c)   Parking requirements. A minimum of one off-street parking space
shall be required for every two wet slips in the marina basin. Additional off-
street parking shall be required as set forth in §§
151.230 through
151.233 of these regulations.
      (2)   Buffers. The buffer requirement set forth in §
151.214 of the Code of Minnesott Beach shall apply to property zoned C-
M Commercial Marina.
   (G)   Procedure.
      (1)   Pre-application conference. Before filing an application for a C-
M development plan approval, the applicant shall schedule a pre-application
conference with the Planning Board. The applicant shall provide the Planning
Board the following information at the pre-application conference:
         (a)   Size and location of the parcel proposed for development,
including the footprint of all proposed structures;
         (b)   All proposed permitted and special uses, including location and
acreage for those uses;
         (c)   A schematic description of traffic circulation and roadway
improvements; and
         (d)   Drawings showing compliance with all applicable buffer
requirements.
      (2)   Once an applicant's development plan is approved by the Board of
Commissioners, the property shall be developed consistent with said development
plan. Substantive changes may not be made to the development plan following its
approval until the proposed substantive changes have been submitted to the
Planning Board and approved by the Board of Commissioners. For purposes of this
division, the term "substantive changes" includes, but is not necessarily
limited to, (i) changes impacting the number, location or use of buildings or
structures; (ii) changes impacting the size of buildings or structures if the
change is greater than 10%; (iii) the location of roads or traffic circulation;
and (iv) the subdivision of any property depicted on the development plan.
   (H)   Effect of approval.
      (1)   The approval of a C-M development application and a development
plan shall not become effective until the applicant has submitted to the
Planning Board a copy of the development plan incorporating all changes, if
any, that were required as conditions to the Board of Commissioners approval,
and additional information as may have been required as a condition of the C-
M or development plan approval.
      (2)   Upon receipt of all required submittals, the Mayor shall mark and
sign the development plan as approved by the Board of Commissioners and return
a marked and signed copy of the development plan to the applicant. A copy
marked "ORIGINAL" shall be retained for the records of the town.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, §
7.7; Ord. passed 5-10-2022; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, § 2; Ord. passed 2024)
§ 151.167 IP INSTITUTIONAL AND PUBLIC.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district is intended to accommodate
public and institutional uses, which have a limited land use impact or traffic
generation potential upon surrounding uses. The district is intended to
accommodate smaller, less intensive public and institutional uses which have
concentrated service areas and are located in or near residential areas, or
larger, less intensive recreational or institutional facilities in rural areas.
   (B)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Public utility uses;
      (2)   Accessory building/structure or use;
      (3)   Forestry;
      (4)   Public or private parks or community centers; and
      (5)   Camps.
   (C)   Special uses.
      (1)   Church, private club or lodge;
      (2)   Golf course;
      (3)   Kindergarten or nursery;
      (4)   Hospital;
      (5)   Public or private elementary and secondary schools, colleges and
universities; and
      (6)   Principal use sign.
   (D)   Dimensional requirements. Principal buildings and uses in this zoning
district shall comply with the dimensional requirements of this district:
      (1)   All lots shall have a minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet,
excluding lots used primarily as a camp. All camps shall require a minimum lot
size of five acres, regardless of the number of structures located thereon;
      (2)   The minimum lot width is 100 feet;
      (3)   The minimum front building setback requirement is 35 feet;
      (4)   The minimum side yard setback requirement is 20 feet;
      (5)   The minimum rear yard setback requirement is 50 feet; and
      (6)   Building height (residential or occupied living quarters only)
shall not exceed 32 feet above grade to the peak, excluding chimney.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 7.8; Ord. passed 8-12-2014; Ord. passed 5-10-2022;
Ord. passed 2024)
§ 151.168 R-MU RESIDENTIAL MIXED USE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this district shall be to allow for the
development, on tracts of 20 acres or more, of multi-phased, mixed-use
developments consisting of primarily residential uses, and also including a
variety of commercial, retail and marina options organized around an integrated
usable open space system.
   (B)   Improvements. No approval for construction of any on-site or off-site
improvements in an R-MU development shall be granted until a master plan for
the R-MU development is approved in accordance with the procedures and
requirements of this ordinance. Once approved, the provisions of the master
plan will govern all aspects of development of the property.
   (C)   Permitted residential uses.
      (1)   Single-family dwellings;
      (2)   Two-family dwellings;
      (3)   Multi-family dwellings;
      (4)   Nursery or kindergarten;
      (5)   Public or private elementary and secondary schools;
      (6)   Neighborhood playgrounds or parks;
      (7)   Public or private parks or community centers;
      (8)   Environmental corridors;
      (9)   Bicycle and pedestrian paths;
      (10)   Private clubs or lodges;
      (11)   Churches;
      (12)   Public utility buildings or uses; and
      (13)   Accessory buildings/structures and uses customarily incidental to
any of the permitted uses listed above.
   (D)   Special residential uses.
      (1)   Golf course;
      (2)   Principal use sign;
      (3)   Home occupation; and
      (4)   Family care homes.
   (E)   Permitted commercial uses; marina.
      (1)   Boat docks;
      (2)   Boat service area;
      (3)   Marine service station;
      (4)   Boat repair;
      (5)   Boat sales;
      (6)   Boat storage facility (excluding stack storage);
         (a)   Except that Arlington Place may have dry stack storage as shown
on the 2020 Proposed Master Plan in a building not more than 35 feet high.
      (7)   Fishing pier or dock;
      (8)   Bait and tackle shop;
      (9)   Gift shop;
      (10)   Marine club or organization;
      (11)   Restaurant;
      (12)   Any of the permitted or special uses authorized in the C-
M Commercial Marina District in this ordinance; and
      (13)   Accessory buildings/structures and uses customarily incidental to
any of the permitted uses listed above.
   (F)   Permitted commercial uses; retail establishments.
      (1)   Any of the permitted retail establishment uses authorized in the
Commercial District in this ordinance, except:
         (a) “Big box” or big box type store; and
         (b) Department store.
      (2)   Accessory buildings/structures and uses customarily incidental to
any permitted uses listed above.
   (G)   Permitted commercial uses; consumer services.
      (1)   Any of the permitted consumer service uses authorized in the
Commercial District in this ordinance except:
         (a)   Auto/truck dealership;
         (b)   Commercial parking structures/lots;
         (c)   Drive-in/in-car eating restaurant (drive-up windows are allowed
upon approval of building plans by Town Commissioners);
         (d)   Drive-in theater;
         (e)   Funeral home; and
         (f)   Pawnbroker.
      (2)   Accessory buildings/structures and uses customarily incidental to
any of the permitted uses listed above.
   (H)   Special commercial uses.
      (1)   Principal use sign;
      (2)   Temporary sign; and
      (3)   Outdoor advertising sign.
   (I)   General use and development standards for R-MU developments.
      (1)   Uses allowed. An R-MU development may contain any or all of the
uses specified in the approved R-MU master plan, provided that at least 60% of
the useable property in the development shall be developed for residential uses
and the Town Commissioners may set a higher standard for residential use. A
wide range of uses are possible in an R-MU development, and the specific uses
allowed may be different in each R-MU development. Notwithstanding §
151.019 regarding prohibited uses, all uses that are set out in a master plan
and approved by the Town Commissioners shall be treated as permitted uses
within the R-MU development.
      (2)   Mixed uses encouraged. Mixed use developments are strongly
encouraged in the R-MU zoning district, including the mixing of principal
residential uses with principal nonresidential uses.
Mixed use development may occur by having two or more principal uses located in
the same building (e.g., retail on ground floor, office space above), or by
having two or more principal uses located in different buildings sited on the
same lot or parcel (e.g. freestanding child day care center located on the same
parcel as an office building). Mixed location uses in all cases must be
compatible as determined by the Town Commissioners.
   (J)   Designation procedure.
      (1)   Designation of an R-MU development shall require a rezoning
pursuant to the procedure set forth in §§
151.126 and
151.265 through
151.271.
      (2)   Property may only be zoned R-MU upon request of the owners of the
property.
   (K)   Standards. The following standards apply:
      (1)   Minimum tract size. The minimum tract size for an R-MU development
shall be 20 acres.
There shall be no more than four dwelling units of ownership, on average, for
each acre of the R-MU development property utilized. The term UTILIZED is
defined as the total acreage of the development minus CAMA setbacks from
naturally occurring bodies of water, minus the roads, rights-of-way, utilities
and service buildings, and minus the unbuildable wetland areas and other bodies
of water contained within the plot.
      (2)   Lot size. The average lot size for single-family lots within the R-
MU development with frontage on a naturally occurring body of water shall be
three-fourths of an acre; otherwise, the average size of all single family lots
within R-MU development shall be one-half of an acre. There shall be no minimum
lot size for other structures in the R-MU development provided the proposed lot
sizes are set forth in the master plan and approved by the Town Commissioners.
The minimum lot sizes established hereunder may be waived by the Town
Commissioners, in its sole discretion, upon an affirmative finding that the
public health, safety and welfare will not be negatively impacted by the waiver
and is consistent with the General Statutes and other laws of the state.
      (3)   Wastewater treatment. All wastewater treatment of effluent
generated within the R-MU development must be through a State DENR approved
treatment and disposal system operated by either a unit of government or an
approved licensed public utility with a franchise granted by the State
Utilities Commission. Properly permitted septic systems by either county or
state agencies may be allowed for the treatment of wastewater effluent until it
is feasible to develop public wastewater treatment facilities for the R-MU
development and as required by the homeowner’s association for connection to
the public system. Wastewater treatment plans shall be included as a required
part of the final phase presentation and no approval will be considered until
all necessary permitting is secured and is presented with the plan.
      (4)   Water supply. All water supplied to property within the R-MU
development must be through an approved system operated by either a unit of
government or an approved licensed public utility with a franchise granted by
the State Utilities Commission. The water supply shall not deteriorate
or in any way affect the supply, pressure or quality of the existing public
water system when supplying water to the development.
      (5)   Setback; single family detached. The following minimum setbacks
shall apply for single- family detached dwellings:
 
Minimum front yard setback line 35 feet
Minimum side yard setback line  15 feet
Minimum rear yard setback line  25 feet
 
      (6)   Setback; single-family attached and two-family. The following
minimum setbacks shall apply for single-family attached dwellings and two-
family and multi-family dwellings:
 
Minimum front yard setback line    30 feet
Minimum rear yard setback line     15 feet
Minimum side yard setback line     15 feet
Minimum distance between buildings 15 feet
 
      (7)   Setback; other structures.  Setback; non-residential. There shall
be no minimum setback for non-residential structures in the R-MU development
provided the proposed setbacks are set forth in the approved master plan and
approved by the Town Commissioners.
      (8)   Other minimum specifications for residential buildings:
         (a)   Single family detached: refer to R-20 zoning requirements.
         (b)   Single family attached and multi-family: refer to R-M zoning
requirements.
      (9)   Streets. All streets must meet the requirements imposed by §§
151.354 and
151.355.
         (a)   Streets shall have a minimum rights-of-way and paving widths and
shall be required to meet the provisions of §
151.354.
         (b)   All base, material and paving must meet the then current
secondary road standards of the state.
         (c)   In all cases, there must be a maintenance agreement for all
streets.
         (d)   Further, in the event that any street in an R-MU development
shall not be constructed to minimum standards sufficient to allow its inclusion
in the state highway system for maintenance and is approved in the master plan,
a street disclosure and maintenance agreement to be recorded with the plat or
deeds as provided under §
151.354(G) of this ordinance shall be required.
      (9)   Environmental buffers. Variations from the minimum federal and
state mandated environmental buffers shall not be allowed without requisite
approvals from the appropriate federal and state agency.
      (10)   Common space. Each R-MU development shall provide adequate
private, common open space facilities including both active and passive
recreational uses. The facilities must be specified in the master plan and
approved by the Town Commissioners.
      (11)   Building height. Building height shall not exceed 35 feet above
mean surrounding ground level to the eaves.
   (L)   Coordination with review of subdivision plans. An application for an
R-MU master plan approval and any required application for subdivision approval
should be filed simultaneously. Sections
151.285 through
151.291,
151.305 through
151.312,
151.325 through
151.337,
151.350 through
151.358 and
151.370 through
151.377 govern approval. The review and processing of these applications shall
be coordinated and consolidated as much as possible. The Planning Board and the
Town Commissioners shall render sequential reports, recommendations and
decisions on each application.
   (M)   Procedure.
      (1)   Pre-application conference. Before filling an application for an R-
MU master plan approval, the applicant shall schedule a pre-application
conference with the Planning Board. The applicant shall provide the Planning
Board the following information at the pre-application conference:
         (a)   Size and location of the parcel proposed for development as an
R-MU development;
         (b)   Proposed gross density and/or the amount of nonresidential
square footage for the proposed R-MU development and net density of individual
parcels within the R-MU;
         (c)   A master plan showing the proposed uses for the R-MU development
including location, acreage, parks and net density of individual parcels within
the R-MU development; and
         (d)   A schematic description of utility location, utility services,
traffic circulation and roadway improvements for the planned development.
      (2)   Application filing. An application for an R-MU zoning approval
shall be filed and processed in accordance with the zoning and rezoning
procedures set forth in §§
151.265 through
151.271. In addition, the application shall be accompanied by a master plan and
supporting plans and documents as specified by the Planning Board.
   (N)   Approval criteria. In addition to the general approval criteria for
zoning set forth in §§
151.265 through
151.271, R-MU zoning applications shall be reviewed for compliance with the
following additional criteria:
      (1)   The R-MU designation is necessary to address a unique situation or
represents a substantial benefit to the town compared to what could have been
accomplished through strict application of otherwise applicable zoning district
standards as determined by the Town Commissioners; and
      (2)   The R-MU application complies with the R-MU standards set forth in
this subchapter.
   (O)   Effect of approval.
      (1)   The approval of an R-MU application and a master plan shall not
become effective until the applicant has submitted to the Planning Board a copy
of the master plan incorporating all changes, if any, that were required as
conditions to the Town Commissioners approval, and additional information as
may have been required as a condition of R-MU or master plan approval.
      (2)   Upon receipt of all required submittals, the Mayor shall mark and
sign the master plan as approved and return a marked and signed copy of the
master plan to the applicant. A copy marked “ORIGINAL” shall be retained for
the records of the town.
      (3)   Actual development of the property comprising the approved R-MU
development shall be subject to all applicable state requirements, subdivision
plan approvals and other permits and approvals otherwise required by this
ordinance. The development shall comply with all requirements of this ordinance
unless the approved R-MU documents specifically state otherwise.
      (4)   The approved master plan will remain in effect so long as
development is ongoing and does not cease for a period of more than 12
continuous months.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 7.9; Ord. passed 7-11-2017; Ord. passed 5-10-2022;
Ord. passed 2024)
PROVISIONS FOR CERTAIN USES PERMITTED AS A RIGHT
§ 151.180 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   A home occupation as defined in this ordinance and permitted in an R
District shall be governed by the following requirements.
   (A)   Only one person, other than those residing in the home shall be
engaged in the occupation.
   (B)   The home shall continue to be used principally as a dwelling.
   (C)   The use of the home for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants, and not more than 25% of the heated floor area of the home shall be
used in the conduct of the home occupation.
   (D)   There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building or
premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of the home occupation other
than one sign measuring no more than six inches by 14 inches, non-illuminated
and mounted against the wall of the principal building of the premises.
   (E)   Home occupations shall be permitted only in single-family dwellings.
   (F)   The occupation shall not constitute a nuisance or any undue
disturbance in the neighborhood.
   (G)   The Zoning Administrator shall approve home occupations.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 8.1)
§ 151.181 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS/STRUCTURES OR USES.
   An accessory use or building as defined in this ordinance and permitted in
an R District shall be governed by the following requirements.
   (A)   All accessory uses and buildings shall be required to meet the
appropriate setback requirements established in §§
151.016 and
151.160 through
151.168.
   (B)   Accessory uses and buildings shall consist of the following
structures:
      (1)   Fallout shelter;
      (2)   Garage (detached);
      (3)   Greenhouse;
      (4)   Playhouse;
      (5)   Pump house;
      (6)   Screened recreation area (detached);
      (7)   Storage shed;
      (8)   Swimming pool;
      (9)   Tool shed;
      (10)    Work shop;
      (11)   Satellite antenna; and
      (12)   Carports.
   (C)   Special requirements for certain accessory uses and buildings.
      (1)   All swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall comply with existing
state regulations in 2012 North Carolina State Residential Code, Part IX,
Appendix G.
      (2)   No accessory building shall be started until the principal use
building has a Certificate of Occupancy subject to the following exceptions:
         (a)   Concrete footings and slabs of accessory buildings may be poured
simultaneously with footing of principal dwelling.
      (3)   No accessory building/structure shall contain any living quarters.
   (D)   Size and number of accessory buildings/structures.
      (1)   Pump house enclosures of no more than ten square feet and no higher
than four feet above ground covering a well head are excluded from the
following regulations.
      (2)   Accessory buildings/structures must be subordinate to the
residential building on the property.
      (3)   Maximum square footage of the exterior dimensions of the accessory
buildings/structure(s) shall be the lesser of 50% of the living area as noted
in the Pamlico County GIS footprint of the principal building or 780 total
square feet, except for the RMU zoning district where maximum square footage of
the exterior dimensions of the accessory buildings/structure(s) shall not
exceed the lesser of 50% of the living area as noted in the Pamlico County GIS
footprint of the principal building or 1,200 total square feet.
      (4)   On lots of five acres or more on which the owner maintains horses,
the shed/stable/barn is exempted from size restrictions with regard to the
principal building footprint allowed.
      (5)   In lots of less than 20,000 square feet there shall be a single
accessory building/structure allowed.
      (6)   In lots between 20,000 square feet and two acres there shall be two
accessory buildings/structures allowed.
      (7)   In lots over two acres there shall be a total of three accessory
buildings/structures allowed.
      (8)   On lots where multiple accessory buildings/structures are
permitted, the accessory buildings must be separated by a minimum of 15 feet
and may not be connected.
      (9)   Maximum height of any accessory building/structure shall be no
greater than the height of the principal structure.
      (10)   Maximum number of floors for any accessory building/structure
shall be no more than one and one-half. Overhead storage for materials shall be
allowed subject to the overall height limitation.
   (E)   Design of accessory buildings/structures. An accessory building/
structure shall be built and located in a way to preserve the character and
integrity of the neighborhood.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 8.2; Ord. passed 8-12-2014; Ord. passed 5-10-2022;
Ord. passed 2024; Ord. passed 8-12-2025)
STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES
§ 151.185 SALE OF MIND-ALTERING SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   Location. The sale of Delta Products and/or Kratom shall not be
permitted in any building or on any property located:
      (1)   Within 500 feet in any direction from any:
         (a)   Church, synagogue, or house of worship;
         (b)   Land or buildings owned by the Young Men's Christian Association
of Raleigh, Inc. and used for or in connection with the camp for children known
as Camp Sea Gull;
         (c)   Child day care or nursery school;
         (d)   Playground or public park; or
         (e)   School.
      (2)   Within 1,000 feet in any direction from a building or property
where Delta Products and/or Kratom is lawfully sold.
   (B)   Nonconforming business selling Delta Products and/or Kratom. Any
business lawfully selling Delta Products and/or Kratom on May 30, 2023, in
violation of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Any use which is
determined to be nonconforming by application of the provisions of this section
shall be permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year. The
nonconforming use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except
that the use may be changed to a conforming use. If any nonconforming business
selling Delta Products and/or Kratom is discontinued for a period of 30 days or
more, the nonconforming use may not thereafter be reestablished. If, prior to
the adoption of this section, two or more businesses selling Delta Products
and/or Kratom are within 1,000 feet of one another but are otherwise in a
permissible location under this section, the business which was first
established and continually operating at its present location shall be
considered the conforming use, and the later established business shall be
considered nonconforming. A business lawfully selling Delta Products and/or
Kratom under this section shall not be rendered nonconforming by the subsequent
location of a church, synagogue, house of worship, child day care, nursery
school, playground, public park, school, or an expansion of Camp Sea Gull.
(Ord. passed 2023, § 5)
PROVISIONS FOR SPECIAL USES AND CERTAIN PERMITTED USES
§ 151.195 GENERAL RESTRICTIONS.
   Permission may be granted for the establishment of uses listed as special
uses if the Board of Adjustment finds from the evidence produced after a study
of the complete records that:
   (A)   The proposed use does not affect adversely general plans for the
physical development of the town as embodied in these regulations or in any
plan or portion thereof adopted by the Planning Board;
   (B)   The proposed use will not be contrary to the purpose stated in these
regulations and all provisions of these regulations are complied with;
   (C)   The proposed use will not affect adversely the health and safety of
residents and workers in the town;
   (D)   The proposed use will not be detrimental to the use or development of
adjacent properties or other neighborhood uses; and
   (E)   The proposed use will not adversely affect existing uses and will not
be affected adversely by the existing uses.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 9.1; Ord. passed 2024)
§ 151.196 ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS AND REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   The Board of Adjustment may impose or require additional restrictions
and standards as may be necessary to protect the health and safety of workers
and residents of the community, and to protect the value and use of property in
the general neighborhood.
   (B)   Wherever the Board of Adjustment shall find, in the case of any permit
granted pursuant to the provisions of these regulations that any of the terms
upon which the permit was granted are not being complied with, the Board shall
rescind and revoke the permit after giving written notice to parties to whom
the permit was issued. In accordance with G.S. § 160D-403(f), the same
development review and approval process required for the issuance of the
development approval, including any required notice or hearing, shall be
followed in the review and approval of any revocation of that approval.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 9.2; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, § 2.19)
§ 151.197 USES WHICH MAY BE PERMITTED.
   The Board of Adjustment may grant permission for the establishment of the
following uses, subject to any specific conditions either set forth below or
which the Board may deem necessary to satisfy the conditions set forth in §
151.195. Parking shall be in accordance with §§
151.230 through
151.234.
   (A)   Church. A church or other place of worship may be permitted in an R
District subject to the requirements of the district and provided that:
      (1)   The lot size shall be no less than one acre;
      (2)   The structure shall have minimum side and rear yards and a front
yard at least as great as that required for single-family residences within the
district; and
      (3)   A church parking lot shall be provided.
   (B)   Golf course. A golf course may be permitted in an R District subject
to the requirements of the district and provided that:
      (1)   All greens and fairways shall be set back at least 20 feet from any
property line; and
      (2)   All trees and structures shall meet minimum setback requirements
for single-family residences within the district.
   (C)   Hospital. A hospital may be permitted in an R District subject to the
requirements of the district and provided that:
      (1)   The lot size shall be no less than three acres; and
      (2)   The structure shall have minimum side and rear yards of 50 feet and
a front yard of at least 25 feet greater than that required for single-family
residences within the district.
   (D)   Kindergarten or nursery. Kindergartens and nurseries may be permitted
in an R District subject to the requirements of the district provided that:
      (1)   Off-street parking requirements in this ordinance are met;
      (2)   At least 100 square feet of outdoor play area is supplied for each
child accommodated;
      (3)   The entire play area is enclosed by a fence having a minimum height
of at least four feet and constructed in a manner that maximum safety to the
children is ensured; and
      (4)   The site contains at least two acres.
   (E)   Mobile/manufactured home park. A manufactured home park may be
permitted in an RM Multi-Family District subject to the requirements of the
district and provided that:
      (1)   The minimum manufactured home park size shall be three acres;
      (2)   The park shall have minimum side and rear yards of 20 feet and a
front yard of at least 30 feet greater than that required for uses permitted as
a right in the district;
      (3)   A manufactured home shall not be occupied by more than one family;
      (4)   Each manufactured home shall be connected to a community water
system and to a sewage disposal system approved by the County Board of Health;
      (5)   The minimum lot size shall be no less than 3,600 square feet and
the minimum stall width is no less than 40 feet;
      (6)   The minimum front setback requirement for a manufactured home shall
be 15 feet from the interior access road right-of-way;
      (7)   The minimum side yard setback requirement for a stall shall be
eight feet;
      (8)   An unobstructed interior access road right-of-way of at least 30
feet wide shall be provided to serve all trailer stalls. Within the right-of-
way there shall be at least an 18-foot road;
      (9)   Where centrally located waste cans are used, they shall be no
further than 150 feet from any lot;
      (10)   Each manufactured home lot shall be clearly defined by means of
concrete or steel or iron pipe markers placed at all corners;
      (11)   At least 100 square feet for each manufactured home lot in the
park shall be provided in one or more locations for community playground and
recreation purposes;
      (12)   No manufactured home park shall be occupied by a greater number of
manufactured homes than that authorized in the approved building and inspection
permits. No manufactured home park shall be enlarged or extended unless a
separate building permit and a separate final inspection permit have been
issued;
      (13)   All dimensional requirements shall be in accordance with and each
manufactured home park shall operate in accordance with rules and regulations
of the County Health Department relative to the location, sanitation and
operation of manufactured home parks;
      (14)   Travel trailers and motor homes are permitted provided that sewage
and waste disposal is properly disposed of as provided in division (E)(4)
above; and
      (15)   The use of on-frame manufactured homes, manufactured homes, on-
frame modular homes, motor homes or travel trailers occupied as residences is
prohibited in all areas of the town except manufactured home parks. An
exception is made for out-of-town guests of residents who may use a
manufactured home, motor home or travel-trailer while visiting for a period not
exceeding two weeks.
   (F)   Private club or lodge. A private club or lodge permitted in an R
District is subject to the requirements of the district and provided that:
      (1)   All new sites shall be no less than one acre in size;
      (2)   The structures shall have minimum side and rear yards of 50 feet
and a front yard of at least 25 feet greater than that required for single-
family residences within the district; and
      (3)   Provisions for food, refreshment and entertainment for club members
and their guests may be allowed in conjunction with the use if the Board of
Adjustment determines that the provisions will not constitute a nuisance.
   (G)   Public utility building or use. A public utility building or use such
as sewage lift stations, pump stations, electrical substations and the like,
which do not create excessive noise, odor, smoke, dust and which do not possess
other objectionable characteristics which might be detrimental to surrounding
neighbors or to other uses permitted in the district may be permitted in any
district. Public utility buildings and uses in this case shall not be construed
to include post offices, armories, schools, churches and the like.
   (H)   School. A school located in an R District is subject to the
requirements of the district and off-street parking requirements in this
ordinance shall be met.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 9.3; Ord. passed 7-11-2017; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, §
2.28)
EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
§ 151.210 WALLS AND FENCES.
    It is the intent of this section to regulate materials, location, height
and maintenance of fences and retaining walls to prevent nuisances and protect
safety and general welfare of the public. A zoning permit is required in
accordance with §
151.093.
   (A)   Location. Property owners are responsible for installation of fences
and retaining walls on their property. If the exact location of lines is
unknown, a survey may be required.
   (B)   Height.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, solid fence is defined as having
less than 50% opening as viewed from outside the fence.
      (2)   When a fence transitions from one height to another, the height of
the fence will be measured from the ground to the tallest portion of the fence,
excluding support post.
      (3)   Height will be measured from the average grade three feet on each
side of the fence.
      (4)   Residential districts.
         (a)   Solid fences and retaining walls located within a front yard may
not exceed three feet in height. No fence may exceed a height of four feet in a
front yard.
         (b)   No fences in remaining yards of a residential district may
exceed a height of six feet.
      (5)   Non-residential districts. Fences in yards of districts other than
residential may not exceed a height of eight feet.
      (6)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit public utility companies
from installing security fences to protect utility sites from trespass or
access by the public.
   (C)   Maintenance.  
      (1)   Any fence or retaining wall which is or has become dangerous to
public safety, health or welfare, is considered a public nuisance.
      (2)   Fences and retaining walls shall be maintained in a condition of
reasonable repair and shall not be allowed to become and remain in a condition
of disrepair or danger or to constitute a nuisance, public or private.
   (D)   Additional. Fences and privacy screens shall only be installed with
finish sides facing away from the property (i.e., construction side in). All
fence posts must be located on the side of the fence facing the fence owner's
property.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 10.1; Ord. passed 8-12-2014; Ord. passed 10-8-2024, §
3)
§ 151.211 REDUCTION OF FRONT YARD SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   If a proposed structure is within 100 feet of an existing conforming use
structure within the same district and on the same side of the street, and the
distance of the front building line from the right-of-way of the existing
conforming use structure is less than the setback requirements for the district
within which it is located, then the setback of the proposed structure may be
established ten feet behind the front building line of the adjacent conforming
use.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 10.2)
§ 151.212 SUBSTANDARD LOTS OF RECORD.
   (A)   Generally. Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of
the original zoning ordinance adopted July 20, 1982 which has an area or a
width which is less than required by this ordinance, shall be considered to be
substandard as far as this ordinance is concerned and subject to remediation or
special treatment as outlined in this section.
   (B)   Adjoining lots. Where two or more adjoining lots with continuous
frontage are in one ownership at any time and the lots individually are less
than the minimum square footage and/or have less than the minimum width
required in the district in which they are located, then the group of lots
shall be considered as a single lot or several lots of minimum permitted area
and width of the district in which located.
   (C)   Lot not meeting minimum lot size requirements. Except as set forth in
division (B) above, in any district in which single-family dwellings are
permitted, any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of these
regulations which has an area or a width which is less than required by these
regulations may be used as a building site for a single-family dwelling as long
as the setback and house size requirements for the district are met and the
county sanitation requirements are met.
   (D)   Side yard requirements. Except as set forth in division (B) above,
where a lot of record existing at the time of the adoption of these regulations
has a width less than the width required in the district in which it is
located, then the Zoning Administrator shall be authorized to reduce the side
yard requirements for the lot; provided, however, no side yard shall be less
than eight feet wide. Further reduction in side yard requirements shall require
the approval of the Board of Adjustment.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 10.3; Ord. passed 2024)
§ 151.213 FALLOUT SHELTERS.
   Fallout shelters are permitted as principal or accessory uses and structures
in any district, subject to the yard requirements of the district. Shelters
shall be maintained so as not to become a hazard or blight to the community.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 10.4)
§ 151.214 REQUIRED BUFFER STRIPS IN ALL C DISTRICTS.
   Any commercial use established after the effective date of the original
zoning ordinance adopted July 20, 1982 in a commercial district which abuts an
R District or land occupied by a residential use permitted by these
regulations, shall provide and maintain along the property line a continuous
visual buffer strip with a minimum of six feet in height. No buffer strip shall
extend nearer to the street right-of-way than the established building line of
adjoining conforming residential lots. The buffer strip shall be a fence or
evergreen hedge or shrubbery screen.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 10.5; Ord. passed 6-8-2021)
§ 151.215 VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   On a corner lot, nothing shall be erected, placed, planted or continued to
exceed the height of three feet, or to protrude lower than eight feet, or to
inhibit the visibility of a motor vehicle operator within a triangular area
formed by the intersection of the right-of-way of two streets or railroads, or
of a street and a railroad, and a diagonal line which intersects the right-of-
way lines at two points each 25 feet from the intersection of the right-of-way
lines.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 10.6) Penalty, see §
151.999
§ 151.216 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT.
   A duly approved planned unit development, which meets all of the
requirements of this ordinance shall be allowed as a permitted use only in a
planned unit development overlay district approved prior to August 8, 2006.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 10.7)
§ 151.217 CONSERVATION LAND CLASSIFICATION.
   (A)   Generally. The official zoning map indicates approximate locations
within the town of areas of environmental concern (AEC) as defined by the State
Coastal Resources Commission. Permitting under the Coastal Area Management Act
(CAMA), being G.S. §§ 113A-100 et seq., permitting procedures and use
guidelines under 15A NCAC 7H, as well as provisions outlined in this section
will be followed if a proposed structure or modification of an existing
structure is determined by field inspection to be located within a conservation
land class. The local CAMA permit officer in consultation with the state field
representative will make the determination based on his or her field
examination.
   (B)   Coastal wetlands.
      (1)   COASTAL WETLANDS are defined as any salt marsh or other marsh
subject to regular or occasional flooding by tides, including wind tides, but
not including tropical storm or hurricane tides.
      (2)   The purpose of this provision shall be to ensure protection and
management of coastal wetlands so as to safeguard and perpetuate their
biological, social, economic and aesthetic values. Only uses compatible to the
conservation of existing coastal wetlands and/or uses that require water and
cannot function elsewhere will be allowed. Examples of uses that may be
permitted in coastal wetlands include utility easements, fishing piers, docks,
agricultural uses and/or forestry drainage. All projects must comply with the
current regulations of the State Department of Environmental Protection and the
State Division of Coastal Management as well as any applicable federal
statutes.
   (C)   Estuarine shorelines.
      (1)   ESTUARINE SHORELINES are those non-ocean shorelines that are
vulnerable to erosion, flooding or other adverse effects of wind and water.
      (2)   All projects that include estuarine shorelines must comply with the
current regulations of the State Department of Environmental Protection and the
State Division of Coastal Management, as well as any applicable federal
statutes.
   (D)   Public trust areas. Public trust areas located within the town limits
include the waters of the Alligator Gut above the estuarine area except for
privately owned lakes. The public has the rights of navigation and recreation
in these waters. Only those uses compatible to public trust areas will be
allowed on land adjacent to public trust areas.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 10.8; Ord. passed 2024)
OFF-STREET PARKING AND SERVICE REQUIREMENTS
§ 151.230 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Scope of provisions. Except as provided in this section, no
application for a permit for a church, school, multi-family, commercial or
industrial structure shall be approved unless there is included with the plan
for the building, improvement or use, a plot plan showing the required space
reserved for off-street parking and service purposes. An occupancy permit shall
not be issued unless the required off-street parking and service facilities
have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan.
   (B)   Off-street parking required. Off-street automobile parking or storage
shall be provided for every establishment and every dwelling on every lot or in
a case where no parking space can be reasonably provided on the same lot, the
off-street space shall be provided on any lot, a substantial portion of which
is within 400 feet of the establishment or dwelling.
   (C)   Combined lot permissible. The required parking space for any number of
separate establishments may be combined in one lot, but the required spaces
assigned to one establishment may not be assigned to another establishment.
   (D)   Exceptions and modifications. The provisions of this section do not
affect any structure or use in existence on the effective date of this
ordinance until a time as the existing gross floor area is increased 10% or
more.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 11.1)
§ 151.231 PLAN AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   Required area for each parking space. Each automobile parking space
shall contain not less than 200 square feet nor less than the minimum width for
stalls as specified under division (D) below.
   (B)   Drainage, construction and maintenance. All off-street parking,
loading and service areas shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting
properties and/or public streets. All areas shall at all times be maintained,
at the expense of the owners thereof, in a clean and serviceable condition.
   (C)   Separation from walkways, sidewalks and streets. All off-street
parking, loading and service areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks
and streets by curbing or other suitable protective device to eliminate the
possibility of vehicle overrun.
   (D)   Parking stalls and interior driveways.
      (1)   Parking stalls and interior driveways shall have at least the
following dimensions.
 
Type of Parking Width of Stall  Depth of Stall Minimum Driveway Width
90 degree       10 feet         20 feet        30 feet
60 degree       9 feet          20 feet        20 feet
45 degree       8 feet 6 inches 20 feet        15 feet
 
      (2)   Where there is no parking, interior driveways shall be at least ten
feet wide for one-way traffic and 20 feet wide for two-way traffic.
   (E)   Handicap parking. Parking areas must comply with ADA requirements.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 11.2; Ord. passed 2024)
§ 151.232 MINIMUM NUMBER OF OFF-STREET PARKING SPACES REQUIRED.
   For any use or class of uses not specifically mentioned in this section, the
requirements for off-street parking and loading facilities for a similar use or
class of uses specifically mentioned shall apply. For commercial, industrial,
institutional and governmental uses, the number of employees shall be computed
on the basis of the largest number of persons to be employed on the largest
shift.
Use Parking Spaces
Use                                   Parking Spaces
Apartment or dwelling                 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Auditorium or theater                 1 space for each 4 seats in the largest
                                      assembly area
                                      1 space for each 2 employees on shift of
                                      greatest employment, plus 1 space for
Auto wash                             the manager and reserve spaces equal to
                                      5 times the capacity of the auto washing
                                      establishment distributed at the
                                      locations of ingress and egress
                                      3 spaces per alley plus requirements for
Bowling alley                         any other use associated with the
                                      establishment such as a restaurant and
                                      the like
Church or other place of worship      1 space for each 4 seats in the main
                                      auditorium
Club or lodge                         1 space for each 100 square feet used
                                      for assembly or dancing
Commercial or personal service        1 space for each 100 square feet of non-
establishment                         storage area
                                      3 spaces for each hole plus requirements
Golf course                           for any other use associated with the
                                      golf course, such as a restaurant and
                                      the like
                                      1 space for each 1 bed plus 1 space for
                                      each 2 employees (nurses, attendants and
Hospital or care home                 the like) plus 1 space for each
                                      administrative employee and each staff
                                      or visiting doctor
Hotel                                 1 space for each guest room, suite or
                                      unit, plus 1 space for each 2 employees
                                      1 space for each employee and 4 spaces
Kindergarten or nursery               for off-street drive-in loading and
                                      unloading of children
Library                               1 space for each 3 seats provided for
                                      patron use
                                      4 spaces for each practicing doctor or
Medical or dental offices or clinic   dentist at the office or clinic, plus 1
                                      space for each employee
                                      2 spaces for each manufactured home
                                      stall plus 1 space for each 2 employees;
Manufactured home park                at least 1 space shall be located on
                                      each manufactured home lot if served by
                                      an interior access street or drive
                                      1 space for each 4 seats in the assembly
Mortuary or funeral home              rooms or chapels plus a minimum of 5
                                      spaces for funeral vehicles plus 1 space
                                      for each employee
                                      1 space for each unit plus 1 space for
Motel                                 each 2 employees plus requirements for
                                      any other use associated with the
                                      establishment
Office, professional building or      1 space for each 200 square feet of
similar use                           gross floor area
Outdoor recreation area (commercial), 1 space for each 3 persons able to use
driving range, miniature golf and the the facility at its maximum capacity
like                                  plus 10 spaces for waiting plus 1 space
                                      for each 2 employees
Restaurant or place dispensing food,  1 space for each 3 seats plus 1 space
drink or refreshments                 for each 2 employees
 
Use Parking Spaces
Use                            Parking Spaces
School                          
                               5 spaces for visitors plus 1 space for each
   Elementary and junior higteacher, employee and administrative person plus
                               10 spaces for off-street drive-in loading and
                               unloading of students
                               5 spaces for visitors plus 1 space for each
                               administrative employee plus 5 spaces for each
   High school              classroom and 1 space for each 8 seats in
                               largest auditorium plus 10 spaces for off-street
                               drive-in loading and unloading of students
                               2 spaces for each gasoline or kerosene pump, 5
Service station                spaces for each grease rack and 1 space for each
                               2 employees, but no fewer than 10 spaces
Shopping center                1 parking space for every 200 square feet of
                               overall floor area
Single- or two-family dwelling 2 spaces for each dwelling unit
Stadium                        1 space for each 4 seats including adjacent off-
                               street and on-street accommodations
 
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 11.3; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, § 2.28; Ord. passed 2024)
§ 151.233 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING SPACE.
   (A)   Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry
hereafter erected shall provide space as indicated herein for loading and
unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley.
   (B)   The space shall have access to an alley or if there is no alley, to
the street.
   (C)   For the purposes of this ordinance, an off-street loading and
unloading space shall have minimum dimensions of 12 feet by 50 feet and an
overhead clearance of 15 feet in height above the alley or street grade.
 
Use                      Parking Spaces
Retail business          1 space for each 5,000 square feet or less of floor
                         space
Wholesale and industrial 1 space for each 10,000 square feet or less of floor
                         space
 
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 11.4)
§ 151.234 CAMP EXEMPTION.
   Camp property is exempt from the requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 11.5)
SIGNS
§ 151.245 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this subchapter to permit signs of a commercial,
industrial and residential nature in districts that have appropriate uses and
to regulate the size, placement, and design of signs intended to be seen from a
public right-of-way. The sign regulations in this chapter are not intended to
censor speech or to regulate viewpoints, but instead are intended to regulate
the adverse secondary effects of signs. The sign regulations are especially
intended to address the secondary effects that may adversely impact aesthetics
and traffic and pedestrian safety. This subchapter is not intended to extend
its regulatory regime to objects that are not traditionally considered signs
for the purpose of government regulations.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 12.1; Ord. passed 5-30-2023, § 2)
§ 151.246 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   All signs within the jurisdictional area shall be covered by these
regulations and shall be erected and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of this subchapter. Only those signs that are listed in this
subchapter shall be erected within the jurisdictional area of this subchapter.
   (A)   Traffic safety. No sign shall be erected or continued that:
      (1)   Obstructs the line of sight at intersections or along a public
right-of-way;
      (2)   Would tend by its location, color or nature to be confused with or
obstruct the view of traffic signs or signals, or would tend to be confused
with a flashing light of an emergency vehicle; and
      (3)   Uses admonitions such as “stop,” “go,” “slow,” “danger” and the
like, which might be confused with traffic directional signals and signs.
   (B)   Maintenance.  
      (1)   Whenever a sign becomes structurally unsafe or endangers the safety
of a building or the public, the Zoning Administrator shall order that the sign
be made safe or removed. A period of ten days following receipt of the order by
the person, firm, or corporation owning or using the sign shall be allowed for
compliance.
      (2)   Temporary signs.
         (a)   Temporary banner signs must be removed after three months.
         (b)   All other temporary signs must be removed after 12 months.
      (3)   Discontinued signs must be removed within 60 days from the date of
discontinuance.
   (C)   Construction prohibited. No sign shall be attached to or painted on
any telephone pole, light pole, telegraph pole or other human-made object not
intended to support a sign or any tree, rock or other natural object.
   (D)   Illumination.  
      (1)   Illumination devices such as, but not limited to, floor or spot
lights shall be so placed and shielded as to prevent the rays of illumination
there from being cast on neighboring buildings or vehicles approaching on
public right-of-way from any direction.
      (2)   Temporary signs may not be illuminated.
   (E)   Prohibited signs. The following signs are specifically prohibited,
unless otherwise specified in this subchapter:
      (1)   Any sign that copies or imitates an official sign or purports to
have official status.
      (2)   Beacons.
      (3)   Windblown signs.
      (4)   Pennants.
      (5)   Canopy signs.
      (6)   Animated signs.
      (7)   Portable signs.
      (8)   Any sign that obstructs or substantially interferes with any
window, door, fire escape, stairway, ladder, or opening intended to provide
light, air, ingress, or egress to any building.
      (9)   Discontinued signs, including all structural, support, and other
related elements.
      (10)   Signs made wholly or partially of highly reflective material, so
as to generate a contrast between the sign and adjacent surfaces or the
surrounding area.
      (11)   Signs on roofs.
      (12)   Signs erected or lighted in such a manner or in such a location as
to obstruct the view of, or be confused with, any authorized traffic signal,
notice, or control device.
      (13)   Feather signs.
      (14)   Neon signs.
      (15)   Electronic changeable message signs.
      (16)   Digital signs.
      (17)   Intermittent signs.
      (18)   Flashing signs.
      (19)   Any sign which emits a sound, odor, or visible matter.
      (20)   Snipe signs.
      (21)   Holographic display signs.
      (22)   Moving signs.
      (23)   Scrolling signs.
      (24)   Signs attached to or painted on trees, rocks, or natural features.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, §
12.2; Ord. passed 5-30-2023, § 3)
§ 151.247 SIGN ADMINISTRATION, FILING PROCEDURE AND PERMITS.
   (A)   Administration. The Zoning Administrator shall only issue a permit for
the erection or construction of a sign which meets the requirements of this
subchapter.
   (B)   Filing procedure. Applications for permits to erect, hang, place,
paint or alter the structure of a sign shall be submitted on forms obtainable
from the Zoning Administrator. Each application shall be accompanied by a plan
showing the following:
      (1)   The area of the sign;
      (2)   The size, character, general layout and designs proposed for
painted displays;
      (3)   The method and type of illumination;
      (4)   The location proposed for the signs in relation to property lines,
zoning district boundaries, right-of-way lines and existing signs; and
      (5)   If conditions warrant it, the Zoning Administrator may require
additional information as will enable him or her to determine if the sign is to
be erected in conformance with these regulations.
      (6)   The applicant for a temporary sign permit shall deposit a sum in
accordance with the approved town fee schedule with the Zoning Administrator to
ensure proper removal of the temporary sign when its purpose ceases to exist or
when the permit period expires, whichever is the shorter period of time. The
deposit shall be returned to the applicant upon the satisfaction of the
requirements for removal.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 12.3; Ord. passed 5-30-2023, § 4)
§ 151.248 SIGNS WHICH DO NOT REQUIRE A PERMIT.
   (A)   Temporary signs. Temporary signs measuring nine square feet or smaller
may be erected, hung, or placed without a permit but must otherwise follow the
regulations in this subchapter.
   (B)   Municipal signs. Signs erected, hung, or placed by the Town of
Minnesott Beach do not require permits.
   (C)   Zoning and subdivision jurisdiction boundaries.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 12.4; Ord. passed 5-30-2023, § 5)
§ 151.249 SIGNS WHICH REQUIRE A PERMIT.
   No sign except those listed in §
151.248 shall be erected, hung, placed, or structurally altered without a
permit from the Zoning Administrator. The following signs shall be erected,
hung, placed or structurally altered only after the Zoning Administrator has
issued a permit and the minimum requirements for the signs are met.
   (A)   Principal use signs.
      (1)   Each principal use sign shall require a permit.
      (2)   Principal use signs may be illuminated.
      (3)   Principal use signs shall meet the setback requirements set forth
elsewhere in this subchapter.
   (B)   Outdoor advertising signs.
      (1)   Outdoor advertising signs are herein regulated in the interest of
promoting traffic safety, safeguarding health and community appearance,
prohibiting the overcrowding of land and protecting the character of the area
in which they are located. In general, it is intended that outdoor advertising
signs be regulated to permit standard size signs, to protect the character of
the area wherein outdoor advertising signs are located and to conserve property
value in these areas, and that outdoor advertising signs be located away from
adjoining properties and nearby buildings to prevent damage from wind toppled
signs.
      (2)   In addition:
         (a)   No outdoor advertising sign may exceed 32 square feet.
Extensions or cutouts are not allowed. The area of an outdoor advertising sign
is measured by finding the area of the minimum imaginary rectangle or square of
vertical and horizontal lines, which fully enclose the sign, excluding supports
and/or the base of the sign;
         (b)   The maximum height of outdoor advertising signs shall not exceed
ten feet;
         (c)   The minimum spacing requirement of outdoor advertising signs
shall be 1,000 feet apart on one side of the street;
         (d)   Outdoor advertising signs shall be set back a distance equal to
the minimum setback requirements for the district in which they are located. In
districts without setback requirements, these signs shall be at least ten feet
from any right-of-way line or property line and 50 feet from the center of any
road intersection;
         (e)   An outdoor advertising sign may be illuminated;
         (f)   Outdoor advertising signs shall require a permit;
         (g)   The backs of all structures shall be painted in a neutral color
to blend with surrounding areas; and
         (h)   Shrubbery may be planted around sign bases.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 12.5; Ord. passed 5-30-2023, § 6)
§ 151.250 SIGN SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   All signs described in §§
151.248 and
151.249 shall be set back at least ten feet from any public right-of-way or
property line.
   (B)   All signs described in §§
151.248 and
151.249 shall be set back at least 50 feet from the centerline of any road
intersection unless more stringent requirements are noted elsewhere in this
subchapter.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 12.6; Ord. passed 5-30-2023, § 7)
§ 151.251 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS.
   Any permanent conforming sign existing prior to May 30, 2023, which becomes
non-conforming by the application of the provisions of this subchapter, shall
have one year to bring such sign into conformance with these provisions. The
non-conforming sign shall not be enlarged, extended, or altered except that the
change may make the sign become conforming to this code. Temporary signs that
were conforming prior to May 30, 2023, which become non-conforming by the
application of this subchapter, shall have three months to make only such
alterations as will make the sign conforming.
(Ord. passed 5-30-2023, § 8)
AMENDMENTS
§ 151.265 WHO MAY PETITION.
   (A)   A petition for a zoning amendment may be initiated by the Town
Commissioners, the Planning Board, the owner of any property within the zoning
jurisdiction of the town, any resident within the zoning jurisdiction of the
town or any person with a legal interest in real property within the zoning
jurisdiction of the town.
   (B)   No amendment to zoning regulations or the zoning map that down-zones
property shall be initiated nor is it enforceable without the written consent
of all property owners whose property is the subject of the down-zoning
amendment, unless the down-zoning amendment is initiated by the town. For
purposes of this section, "down-zoning" means a zoning ordinance that affects
an area of land in one of the following ways:
      (1)   By decreasing the development density of the land to be less dense
than was allowed under its previous usage.
      (2)   By reducing the permitted uses of the land that are specified in a
zoning ordinance or land development regulation to fewer uses than were allowed
under its previous usage.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 13.1; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, § 2.20)
§ 151.266 FEE.
   A fee in accordance with the approved town fee schedule shall be paid to the
town for each application for amendment to this ordinance to cover the costs of
advertising and other administrative expenses involved.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 13.2)
2024 S-10
§ 151.267 APPLICATION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Any application for a zoning amendment to this ordinance shall be
filed with the Zoning Administrator at least ten days prior to the date on
which it is to be introduced to the Town Commissioners.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator shall be responsible for presenting the
application to the Town Commissioners.
   (C)   Each application shall be signed, be in triplicate and shall contain
at least the following information:
      (1)   The applicant’s name in full, applicant’s address and description
of the property to be rezoned;
      (2)   The applicant’s interest in the property and the type of rezoning
requested;
      (3)   If the proposed change would require a change in the zoning map, an
accurate diagram of the property proposed for rezoning showing:
         (a)   All property lines with dimensions; north arrow;
         (b)   Adjoining streets with rights-of-way and paving widths;
         (c)   The location of all structures;
         (d)   The use of all land; and
         (e)   Zoning classification of all abutting zoning districts.
      (4)   A statement regarding the changing conditions, if any, in the area
or in the town generally, that makes the proposed amendment reasonably
necessary to the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 13.3)
§ 151.268 AMENDMENT SUBMISSION.
   (A)   All proposed zoning amendments to this ordinance or to the zoning map
shall be submitted to the Planning Board for review and comment. The review and
comment on ordinance amendments cannot be assigned to the governing board and
must be performed by a separate board.
   (B)   The Planning Board shall advise and comment on whether the proposed
amendment is consistent with any comprehensive plan that has been adopted and
any other officially adopted plan that is applicable. The Planning Board shall
provide a written recommendation within 30 days of referral of the requested
amendment to the governing board that addresses plan consistency and other
matters as deemed appropriate by the Planning Board. A comment by the Planning
Board that a proposed amendment is inconsistent with the comprehensive plan
shall not preclude consideration or approval of the proposed amendment by the
governing board.
   (C)   The Planning Board recommendation is not binding on the Town
Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, §
13.4; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, § 2.21)
§ 151.269 REQUIRED PUBLIC HEARING.
   (A)   No ordinance that amends any of the provisions of this ordinance may
be adopted until a public hearing has been held on the ordinance.
   (B)   The Administrator shall publish a notice of the public hearing on any
amendments to this ordinance once a week for two successive weeks in a
newspaper having general circulation in the area. The notice shall be published
for the first time not less than ten days or more than 25 days before the date
fixed for the hearing. In computing this period, the date of publication shall
not be counted but the date of the hearing shall be.
   (C)   With respect to map amendments, the Administrator shall mail written
notice of the public hearing to the recorded owners as shown on the county tax
listing of all properties whose zoning classification are changed by the
proposed amendment as well as the owners of all properties which are within 150
feet of the property rezoned by the amendment or whose property may be
substantially impacted because of access or property activity as a result of
the proposed rezoning. This notice must be deposited in the mail at least ten
but not more than 25 days prior to the date of the public hearing. The person
or persons mailing the notices shall certify to the Town Commissioners that the
mailing was done and the certificate shall be deemed conclusive and absent of
fraud.
   (D)   When a zoning map amendment is proposed, the Administrator shall
prominently post a notice of the public hearing on the site proposed for
rezoning, or on an adjacent public street or highway right-of-way at least ten
but not more than 25 days prior to the date of the public hearing. When
multiple parcels are included within a proposed zoning map amendment, a posting
on each individual parcel is not required. However, the town shall post
sufficient notices to provide reasonable notice to interested persons.
   (E)   The notice required or authorized by this section shall:
      (1)   State the date, time; and place of the public hearing;
      (2)   Summarize the nature and character of the proposed change;
      (3)   Reasonably identify the property whose classification would be
affected by the amendment, if the proposed amendment involves a change in
zoning district classification;
      (4)   State the full text of the amendment can be obtained from the Town
Clerk; and
      (5)   State that substantial changes in the proposed amendment may be
made following the public hearing.
   (F)   If the adoption or modification would result in changes to the zoning
map or would change or affect the permitted uses of land located five miles or
less from the perimeter boundary of a military base, the town shall provide
written notice of the proposed changes by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the commander of the military base not less than ten days nor
more than 25 days before the date fixed for the hearing. If the commander of
the military base provides comments or analysis regarding the compatibility of
the proposed development regulation or amendment with military operations at
the base, the governing board shall take the comments and analysis into
consideration before making a final determination on the ordinance.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 13.5; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, §§ 2.22, 2.23; Ord.
passed 2024)
§ 151.270 TOWN COMMISSIONERS ACTION ON AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   In considering proposed changes in the text of this ordinance or in
the zoning map, the Town Commissioners act in their legislative capacity and
must proceed in accordance with the requirements and provisions set forth in
this subchapter.
   (B)   At the conclusion of the public hearing on a proposed amendment, the
Town Commissioners may proceed to vote on the amendment, refer it for further
study or take any other action consistent with the usual rules of procedure.
All development regulation adopted pursuant to G.S. Chapter 160D shall be
adopted by ordinance.
   (C)   The Town Commissioners are not required to take final action on a
proposed amendment within any specific period of time but should proceed as
expeditiously as practicable on petitions for amendments since inordinate
delays can result in the petitioner incurring unnecessary costs.
   (D)   If no written report is received from the Planning Board within 30
days of referral of the amendment to that Board, the governing board may
proceed in its consideration of the amendment without the Planning Board
report. The governing board is not bound by the recommendations, if any, of the
Planning Board.
   (E)   Prior to adopting or rejecting any zoning text or map amendment, the
Town Commissioners shall adopt a statement describing whether its action is
consistent or inconsistent with an adopted comprehensive or land-use plan. The
requirement for a plan consistency statement may also be met by a clear
indication in the minutes of the governing board that at the time of action on
the amendment the Board of Commissioners was aware of and considered the
Planning Board's recommendations and any relevant portions of an adopted
comprehensive or land-use plan. That statement is not subject to judicial
review.
   (F)   When adopting or rejecting any petition for a zoning map amendment, a
statement analyzing the reasonableness of the proposed rezoning shall be
approved by the Town Commissioners. This statement of reasonableness may
consider, among other factors, (i) the size, physical conditions, and other
attributes of the area proposed to be rezoned; (ii) the benefits and detriments
to the landowners, the neighbors, and the surrounding community; (iii) the
relationship between the current actual and permissible development on the
tract and adjoining areas and the development that would be permissible under
the proposed amendment; (iv) why the action taken is in the public interest;
and (v) any changed conditions warranting the amendment. If a zoning map
amendment qualifies as a "large-scale rezoning" under G.S. § 160D-602(b), the
governing board statement on reasonableness may address the overall rezoning.
   (G)   A Town Commissioner shall not vote on any zoning map or text amendment
where the outcome of the matter being considered is reasonably likely to have a
direct, substantial and readily identifiable financial impact on the member.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 13.6; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, § 2.24)
§ 151.271 PROTEST TO ZONING DISTRICT CHANGES.
   (A)   If a petition opposing a change in the zoning classification of any
property is filed in accordance with the provisions of this section, then the
proposed amendment may be adopted only by a favorable vote of three-fourths of
the Town Commissioners. For the purposes of this division, vacant positions on
the Town Board of Commissioners and members who are excused from voting shall
not be considered “members of the council” for calculation of the requisite
supermajority.
   (B)   To trigger the three-fourths vote requirement, the petition must:
      (1)   (a)   Be signed by the owners of either:
            1.   Twenty percent or more of the area included in the proposed
change; or
            2.   Five percent of a 100-foot-wide buffer strip extending along
the entire boundary of each discrete or separate area proposed to be rezoned.
         (b)   A street right-of-way shall not be considered in computing the
100-foot buffer strip area as long as that street right-of-way is 100 feet wide
or less. When less than the entire parcel of land is subject to the proposed
zoning map amendment, the 100-foot buffer strip shall be measured from the
property line of that parcel. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, the
town may rely on the county tax listing to determine the “owners” of
potentially qualifying areas.
      (2)   Be in the form of a written petition actually bearing the
signatures of the requisite number of property owners and stating that the
signers do protest the proposed change or amendment;
      (3)   Be received by the Town Clerk in sufficient time to allow the
governing body at least two normal working days before the date established for
a public hearing on the proposed amendment to determine the sufficiency and
accuracy of the petition; and
      (4)   Be on a form provided by the Town Clerk and contain all the
information requested on this form.
   (C)   A person who has signed a protest petition may withdraw his or her
name from the petition at any time prior to the vote on the proposed zoning
amendment. Only those protest petitions that meet the qualifying standards set
forth in G.S. §§ 160D-102, 160D-18(d) and 160D-603 at the time of the vote on
the zoning amendment shall trigger the supermajority voting requirement.
   (D)   The foregoing provisions concerning protests shall not be applicable
to any amendment which initially zones property added to the territorial
coverage of the ordinance as a result of annexation or otherwise, or to an
amendment to an adopted:
      (1)   Conditional zoning;
      (2)   Conditional zoning and special use permits; or
      (3)   If the amendment does not change the types of uses that are
permitted within the district or increase the total approved density for
residential development, or increase the total approved size of any buffers or
screening approved for the special use or conditional zoning.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 13.7; Ord. passed - -2021)
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Part I: Introductory Provisions
§ 151.285 TITLE.
   This subchapter shall be known and may be cited as subchapter §§
151.285 through
151.291,
151.305 through
151.312,
151.325 through
151.337,
151.350 through
151.358 and
151.370 through
151.377 of the Town Unified Development Ordinance and may be referred to as the
subdivision regulations.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.1)
§ 151.286 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this subchapter is to establish procedures and
standards for the development and subdivision of land within the territorial
jurisdiction of the town.
   (B)   It is further designed to provide for the orderly growth and
development of the town; for the coordination of streets and highways within
proposed subdivisions with existing or planned streets and highways and with
other public facilities; for the dedication or reservation of recreation areas
serving residents of the immediate neighborhood within the subdivision and of
rights-of-way or easements for street and utility purposes; and for the
distribution of population and traffic in a manner that will avoid congestion
and overcrowding and will create conditions essential to public health, safety
and the general welfare.
   (C)   This subchapter is designed to further facilitate adequate provision
of water, sewerage, parks, schools and playgrounds and also to facilitate the
further resubdivision of larger tracts into smaller parcels of land.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.2)
§ 151.287 AUTHORITY.
   This subchapter is hereby adopted under the authority and provisions of the
G.S. § 160D-801.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.3; Ord. passed - -2021)
§ 151.288 JURISDICTION.
   The regulations contained herein, as provided in G.S. § 160D-801, shall
govern each and every subdivision within the town and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction as shown on the official extraterritorial boundary map, if
applicable.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.4; Ord. passed - -2021)
§ 151.289 PREREQUISITE TO PLAT RECORDATION.
   After the effective date of this ordinance, each individual subdivision plat
of land within the town’s jurisdiction shall be considered by the Town
Commissioners on recommendation of the Planning Board of the town.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.5)
§ 151.290 ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS.
   No street shall be maintained by the town nor street dedication accepted for
ownership and maintenance in any subdivision for which a plat is required to be
approved unless and until the final plat has been approved by the Town
Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.6)
§ 151.291 ZONING AND OTHER PLANS.
   Similarly, proposed subdivisions must comply in all respects with the
requirements of other subchapters of the Unified Development Ordinance in
effect in the area to be subdivided and any other officially adopted plans.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.7)
Part II: Legal Provisions
§ 151.305 GENERAL PROCEDURE FOR PLAT APPROVAL.
   (A)   After the effective date of this ordinance, no subdivision plat of
land within the town’s jurisdiction shall be filed or recorded until it has
been submitted to and approved by the Town Commissioners as set forth in §
151.289, and until this approval is entered in writing on the face of the plat
by the Mayor and attested by the Town Clerk.
   (B)   The Register of Deeds shall not file or record a plat of a subdivision
of land located within the territorial jurisdiction of the town that has not
been approved in accordance with these provisions, nor shall the Clerk of
Superior Court order or direct the recording of a plat if the recording would
be in conflict with this section.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.8)
§ 151.306 STATEMENT BY OWNER.
   The owner of land shown on a subdivision plat submitted for recording, or
his or her authorized agent, shall sign a statement on the plat stating whether
or not any land shown thereon is within the subdivision regulation jurisdiction
of any city.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.9)
§ 151.307 EFFECT OF PLAT APPROVAL ON DEDICATIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to G.S. § 160D-806, the approval of a plat shall not be
deemed to constitute or effect the acceptance by the municipality or public of
the dedication of any street or other ground, public utility line or other
public facility shown on the plat. However, the Town Commissioners may by
resolution accept any dedication made to the public of lands or facilities for
streets, parks, public utility lines or other public purposes, when the lands
or facilities are located within its subdivision regulation jurisdiction.
   (B)   Acceptance of dedication of lands or facilities located within the
subdivision regulation jurisdiction but outside the corporate limits of the
town shall not place on the town any duty to open, operate, repair or maintain
any street, utility line or other land or facility, and the town shall in no
event be held to answer in any civil action or proceeding for failure to open,
repair or maintain any street located outside its corporate limits.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.10; Ord. passed - -2021)
§ 151.308 SEPARABILITY.
   Should any section or provision of this ordinance be decided by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, the decision shall
not affect the validity of the ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other
than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.12)
§ 151.309 VARIANCES.
   Where, because of severe topographical or other conditions peculiar to the
site, strict adherence to the provisions of this ordinance would cause an
unnecessary hardship, the Town Commissioners may authorize a variance to the
terms of this ordinance only to the extent that is absolutely necessary and not
to an extent which would violate the intent of this ordinance.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.13)
§ 151.310 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The Town Commissioners may from time to time amend the terms of this
ordinance but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been
proposed by or shall have been submitted to the Planning Board for review and
recommendation. The Planning Board shall have 30 days from the time the
proposed amendment is submitted to it within which to submit its report. If the
Planning Board fails to submit a report within the specified time, it shall be
deemed to have recommended approval of the amendment.
   (B)   The governing body shall adopt no amendment until they have held a
public hearing on the amendment. Notice of the hearing shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the area at least once a week for two
successive calendar weeks prior to the hearing. The initial notice shall appear
not more than 25 or less than ten days prior to the hearing date. In computing
the ten-day period, the date of publication is not to be counted, but the date
of the hearing is.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.14)
§ 151.311 ABROGATION.
   (A)   It is not intended that this ordinance repeal, abrogate, annul, impair
or interfere with any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions,
agreements or permits previously adopted or issued pursuant to law.
   (B)   However, where this ordinance imposes greater restrictions, the
provisions of this ordinance shall govern.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.15)
§ 151.312 REPEAL OF CONFLICTING ORDINANCES.
   All existing ordinances in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed
to the extent necessary to give this ordinance full force and effect.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.16)
Part III: Review and Approval of Subdivision Plats
§ 151.325 PLAT SHALL BE REQUIRED ON ANY SUBDIVISION OF LAND.
   Pursuant to G.S. § 160D-804, a final plat shall be prepared, approved and
recorded pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance whenever any subdivision
of land takes place.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.17; Ord. passed - -2021)
§ 151.326 APPROVAL PREREQUISITE TO PLAT RECORDATION.
   Pursuant to G.S. § 160D-803, no final plat of a subdivision within the
jurisdiction of the town as established in §
151.288 of this ordinance shall be recorded by the Register of Deeds of the
county until it has been approved by the Town Commissioners as provided herein.
To secure approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall follow the procedures
established in this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.18; Ord. passed - -2021)
§ 151.327 PROCEDURES FOR REVIEW OF MAJOR AND MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   All subdivisions shall be considered major subdivisions except those
defined as minor subdivisions in this section. Major subdivisions shall be
reviewed in accordance with the procedures in §§
151.330 through
151.333. Minor subdivisions shall be reviewed in accordance with the provisions
in §
151.328.
   (B)   A MINOR SUBDIVISION is a subdivision that meets the following
requirements to qualify for expedited review under §
151.328.
      (1)   The tract or parcel to be divided is not exempted under G.S. §
160D-802(a)(2).
      (2)   No part of the tract or parcel to be divided has been divided under
this division in the ten years prior to division.
      (3)   The entire area of the tract or parcel to be divided is greater
than five acres.
      (4)   After division, no more than three lots result from the division.
      (5)   After division, all resultant lots comply with all of the
following:
         (a)   All lot dimension size requirements of all applicable land-use
regulations, if any.
         (b)   The use of the lots is in conformity with all applicable zoning
requirements, if any.
         (c)   A permanent means of ingress and egress is recorded for each
lot.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.19; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, § 2.25)
§ 151.328 PROCEDURE FOR REVIEW OF MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Prior to any conveyance of property and the issuance of any building
permit, the subdivider of a tract eligible for the abbreviated procedure shall
submit to the Zoning Administrator and have approved a final plat. The final
plat shall meet the requirements set out in §
151.335 for the contents and specifications of a final plat, where applicable.
   (B)   Timing of final plat submission. The subdivider shall submit the final
plat so marked not less than seven days prior to the Planning Board meeting at
which it will be reviewed.
   (C)   Final plat preparation. A registered land surveyor currently licensed
and registered in the state by the State Board of Registration for Professional
Engineers and Land Surveyors shall prepare the final plat. The final plat shall
conform to the provisions for plats, subdivisions and mapping requirements set
forth in G.S. § 47-30 and the Standards of Practice for Land Surveying in North
Carolina.
   (D)   Final plat; number of copies. Nine copies of the final plat shall be
submitted, two of these shall be on reproducible material; seven shall be black
or blue line paper prints. Materials and drawing medium for the original shall
be in accordance with the Standards of Practice for Land Surveying in North
Carolina, where applicable, and the requirements of the County Register of
Deeds. In addition, one electronic copy shall be submitted to the town clerk in
PDF format.
   (E)   Final plat; size. The final plat shall be of a size suitable for
recording with the County Register of Deeds and shall be at a scale of not less
than one inch equals 200 feet. Maps may be placed on more than one sheet with
appropriate match lines.
   (F)   Final plat; filing fee. A filing fee, paid by the subdivider, in
accordance with the approved town fee schedule, shall accompany submission of
the final plat.
   (G)   Final plat; required contents. The final plat shall meet the
specifications in §
151.335.
   (H)   Final plat; certificates. The following signed certificates shall
appear on all nine copies of the final plat.
      (1)   Certificate of ownership and dedication.
   I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property shown and described
hereon, which is located in the subdivision jurisdiction of the Town of
Minnesott Beach and that I hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my free
consent and establish minimum building setback lines as noted.
         ___________________________
         Owner/Date
      (2)   Certificate of survey and notary. There shall appear on each plat a
certificate of survey and notary in accordance with the current version of G.S.
§ 47-30.
      (3)   Certificate of wastewater system approval. If septic tanks or on-
site wastewater systems are to be used in the subject subdivision, then the
following certificate is required:
   A valid septic system improvement permit will be obtained for each lot of
the subdivision prior to the transfer, sale, building or making any improvement
of the lot.
         ____________________________
         Owner/Date
   (I)   Planning Board review. The Planning Board shall review the final plat
at or before its next regularly scheduled meeting which follows at least seven
days after the Town Clerk receives the final plat and shall recommend approval,
conditional approval with modifications to bring the plat into compliance, or
disapproval of the final plat with reasons within 45 days of its first
consideration of the plat.
   (J)   Planning Board survey. During its review of the final plat, the
Planning Board may appoint an engineer or surveyor to confirm the accuracy of
the final plat if agreed to by the Town Commissioners. If substantial errors
are found, the costs shall be charged to the subdivider and the plat shall not
be recommended for approval until the errors have been corrected.
   (K)   Planning Board decisions. If the Planning Board recommends approval of
the final plat, it shall transmit all copies of the plat and its written
recommendations to the Town Commissioners.
   (L)   Conditional approval. If the Planning Board recommends conditional
approval of the final plat with modifications to bring the plat into
compliance, it shall retain one print of the plat for its minutes, return its
written recommendation and two reproducible copies of the plat to the
subdivider, and transmit one print of the plat and its written recommendation
to the Town Commissioners. Any condition of approval shall not include a
requirement of a developer to bury a power line existing above ground and
outside of the boundaries of the parcel of land that contains the subdivision
or property.
   (M)   Disapproval.
      (1)   If the Planning Board recommends disapproval of the final plat, it
shall instruct the subdivider concerning resubmission of a revised plat and the
subdivider may make changes as will bring the plat into compliance with the
provisions of this ordinance, and resubmit same for reconsideration by the
Planning Board.
      (2)   The subdivider has the option of appealing the decision directly to
the Town Commissioners.
   (N)   Failure to make recommendation. Failure of the Planning Board to make
a written recommendation within 45 days after its first review shall constitute
grounds for the subdivider to apply to the Town Commissioners for approval.
   (O)   Town Commissioner review. If the Planning Board recommends approval or
conditional approval with modifications to bring the plat into compliance, or
if the subdivider appeals to the Town Commissioners, the Town Commissioners
shall review and approve or disapprove the final plat within 65 days after the
plat and the Planning Board's recommendations have been received.
   (P)   Certificate of approval. If the Town Commissioners approve the final
plat, the approval shall be shown on each copy of the plat by the following
signed certificate:
   Certificate of Approval for Recording
   I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to
comply with the subdivision regulations of the Town of Minnesott Beach, North
Carolina and that this plat has been approved by the Board of Commissioners of
the Town of Minnesott Beach for recording in the office of the Register of
Deeds of Pamlico County.
      __________________________________________         ___________
      Mayor, Town of Minnesott Beach, NC               Date
   (Q)   Denial of approval. If the Town Commissioners do not approve the final
plat, the reasons for the disapproval shall be stated in writing, specifying
the provisions of this chapter with which the final plat does not comply. The
Town Commissioners shall retain one copy of the reasons and one print of the
plat as part of its proceedings; one copy of the reasons and three copies of
the plat shall be transmitted to the subdivider. If the final plat is
disapproved, the subdivider may make changes as will bring the final plat into
compliance and resubmit same for reconsideration by the Planning Board and Town
Commissioners or by the Town Commissioners as determined by the Town
Commissioners.
   (R)   Plat approval. If the final plat is approved by the Town
Commissioners, the original tracing and one print of the plat shall be retained
by the subdivider. One reproducible tracing and one print shall be filed with
the Town Clerk, and one print shall be returned to the Planning Board for its
records.
   (S)   Plat filing. The subdivider shall file the approved final plat with
the Register of Deeds of the county within 60 days of the Town Commissioners'
approval; otherwise, the approval shall be null and void.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, §
14.20; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, § 2.26)
§ 151.329 SKETCH PLAN FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Number of copies and contents. Prior to the preliminary plat
submission, the subdivider shall submit to the Planning Board seven copies of a
sketch plan of the proposed subdivision containing the following information:
      (1)   A sketch vicinity map showing the location of the subdivision in
relation to neighboring tracts, subdivisions, roads and waterways;
      (2)   The boundaries of the tract and the portion of the tract to be
subdivided;
      (3)   The total acreage to be subdivided;
      (4)   The existing and proposed uses of the land within the subdivision
and the existing uses of land adjoining it;
      (5)   The proposed street layout with approximate pavement and right-of-
way width, lot layout and size of lots;
      (6)   The name, address and telephone number of the owner;
      (7)   The name, if any, of the proposed subdivision;
      (8)   The streets and lots of adjacent developed or platted properties;
      (9)   The zoning classification of the tract and of adjacent properties;
and
      (10)   The boundaries of any floodway and floodway fringe areas in the
subdivision from federal emergency management maps.
   (B)   Submission and review procedure. The sketch plan shall be submitted at
least seven days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which it will be
reviewed. The Planning Board shall review the sketch plan for general
compliance with the requirements of this ordinance and shall advise the
subdivider or his or her authorized agent of the regulations pertaining to the
proposed subdivision and the procedures to be followed in the preparation and
submission of the preliminary and final plats.
   (C)   Retention of sketch plan. One copy of the sketch plan shall be
retained as a part of the minutes of the Planning Board and one copy shall be
returned to the subdivider or his or her authorized agent.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.21)
§ 151.330 REVIEW BY OTHER AGENCIES.
   (A)   After receiving preliminary approval of the sketch plan from the
Planning Board, the developer shall submit copies of the preliminary plat and
any accompanying material required to other officials and agencies concerned
with new development including, where applicable, but not limited to:
      (1)   The town representative(s) responsible for street maintenance and
public works;
      (2)   The County Health Department;
      (3)   The District Engineer of the State Department of Transportation
(four copies); and
      (4)   The County Soil Conservation Service, for review and
recommendation.
   (B)   Approvals from the requisite agencies are a required part of the
preliminary plat submission.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.22)
§ 151.331 PRELIMINARY PLAT FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Submission procedure. For every subdivision within the territorial
jurisdiction established by §
151.288, which does not qualify for the abbreviated procedure of §
151.327(B), the subdivider shall submit a preliminary plat which shall be
reviewed by the Planning Board and approved by the Town Commissioners before
any construction or installation of improvements may begin.
   (B)   Submission; number of copies. Nine copies of the preliminary plat (as
well as any additional copies, which need to be sent to other agencies) as well
as one electronic copy in PDF format shall be submitted to the Town Clerk at
least seven days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which the subdivider
desires the Planning Board to review the preliminary plat.
   (C)   Filing fee. A filing fee, paid by the subdivider, in accordance with
the approved town fee schedule, shall accompany submission of the preliminary
plat.
   (D)   Preliminary plat requirements. Preliminary plats shall meet the
specifications in §
151.335.
   (E)   Review procedure. The Planning Board shall review the preliminary plat
at or before its next regularly scheduled meeting, which follows at least seven
days after the Board receives the preliminary plat and the comments from the
appropriate agencies.
   (F)   Planning Board decision. The Planning Board shall, in writing,
recommend approval, conditional approval with recommended changes to bring the
plat into compliance or disapproval with reasons within 45 days of its first
consideration of the plat.
   (G)   Approval. If the Planning Board recommends approval of the preliminary
plat, it shall retain one copy of the plat for its minutes and transmit two
copies of the plat to the Town Commissioners with its recommendation.
   (H)   Conditional approval. If the Planning Board recommends conditional
approval of the preliminary plat, it shall keep one copy of the plat for its
minutes, transmit two copies of the plat and its recommendation to the Town
Commissioners, and return the remaining copy of the plat and its recommendation
to the subdivider.
   (I)   Disapproval. If the Planning Board disapproves the preliminary plat,
it shall retain one copy of the plat for its minutes, transmit one copy of the
plat and its recommendation to the Board of Commissioners, and return one copy
of the plat and its recommendation to the subdivider. If the plat is
disapproved, the subdivider may make the recommended changes and submit a
revised preliminary plat, or appeal the decision to the Town Commissioners.
   (J)   Failure to make recommendation. Failure of the Planning Board to make
a written recommendation within 45 days after its first consideration shall
constitute grounds for the subdivider to apply to the Town Commissioners for
approval.
   (K)   Town Commissioner decision; approval. If the Town Commissioners
approves the preliminary plat, the approval shall be noted on two copies of the
plat. The Town Commissioners shall retain one copy of the plat and one copy
shall be returned to the subdivider.
   (L)   Town Commissioner decision; approval with conditions. If the Town
Commissioners approve the preliminary plat with conditions, approval shall be
noted on two copies of the plat along with a reference to the conditions. The
Town Commissioners shall retain one copy of the plat along with the conditions
and one copy of the preliminary plat along with the conditions shall be
returned to the subdivider.
   (M)   Town Commissioner decision; disapproval. If the Town Commissioners
disapprove the preliminary plat, the reasons for the disapproval shall be
specified in writing. The Town Commissioners shall retain one copy of the plat
and the reasons and one copy of the plat and the reasons shall be returned to
the subdivider.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.23)
§ 151.332 FINAL PLAT FOR MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   (A)   Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the Town Commissioners, the
subdivider may proceed with the preparation of the final plat, and the
installation of or arrangement for required improvements in accordance with the
approved preliminary plat and the requirements of this ordinance.
   (B)   Prior to approval of a final plat by the Town Commissioners, the
subdivider shall have installed the improvements specified in this ordinance or
guaranteed their installation as provided herein.
   (C)   The final plat shall constitute only that portion of the preliminary
plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at that time. The
portion shall conform to all requirements of this ordinance. The first final
plat shall be submitted within 18 months and the last final plat within 60
months after the date on which the preliminary plat was approved; otherwise,
the preliminary plat shall become null and void unless an extension of time is
applied for and granted by the Town Commissioners before the date on which the
preliminary plat would become null and void.
   (D)   Information required for final plat submissions is included in §
151.335.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.24)
§ 151.333 IMPROVEMENTS GUARANTEES.
   (A)   Agreement and security required. In lieu of requiring the completion,
installation and dedication of all improvements prior to final plat approval,
the town may enter into an agreement with the subdivider whereby the subdivider
shall agree to complete all required improvements. Once the agreement is signed
by both parties and the security required herein is provided, the final plat
may be approved by the Town Commissioners if all other requirements of this
ordinance are met. To secure this agreement, the subdivider shall provide,
subject to the approval of the Town Commissioners, either one
or a combination of the following guarantees, not exceeding one and one-fourth
times the entire cost as provided herein:
      (1)   Surety performance bond(s). The subdivider shall obtain a
performance bond(s) from a surety bonding company authorized to do business in
the state. The bonds shall be payable to the town and shall be in an amount
equal to one and one-fourth times the entire cost, as estimated by the
subdivider and approved by the Town Commissioners, of installing all required
improvements. The duration of the bond(s) shall be until a time as the Town
Commissioners accept the improvements.
      (2)   Cash or equivalent security. The subdivider shall deposit cash, an
irrevocable letter of credit or other instrument readily convertible into cash
at face value, either with the town or in escrow with a financial institution
licensed to do business in the state of North Carolina. The use of any
instrument other than cash shall be subject to the approval of the Town
Commissioners. The amount of deposit shall be equal to one and one-fourth times
the cost, as estimated by the subdivider and approved by the Town
Commissioners, of installing all required improvements.
   (B)   Security requirements. If cash or other instrument is deposited in
escrow with a financial institution as provided above, then the subdivider
shall file with the Town Commissioners an agreement between the financial
institution and himself or herself guaranteeing the following:
      (1)   The escrow account should be held in trust until released by the
Town Commissioners and may not be used or pledged by the subdivider in other
matters during the term of escrow; and
      (2)   In the case of a failure on the part of the subdivider to complete
the improvements, the financial institution shall, upon notification by the
Town Commissioners and submission by the Town Commissioners to the financial
institution of an engineer’s estimate of the amount needed to complete the
improvements, immediately either pay to the town the funds needed to complete
the improvement, up to the full balance of the escrow account, or deliver to
the town any other instruments fully endorsed or otherwise made payable in full
to the town.
   (C)   Default. Upon default, meaning failure on the part of the subdivider
to complete the required improvements in a timely manner as spelled out in the
performance bond or escrow agreement, then the surety, or the financial
institution holding the escrow account shall, if requested by the Town
Commissioners, pay all or any portion of the bond or escrow fund to the town up
to the amount needed to complete the improvements based on an engineering
estimate. Upon payment, the Town Commissioners, in its discretion, may expend a
portion of the funds as it deems necessary to complete all or any portion of
the required improvements. The town shall return to the subdivider any funds
not spent in completing the improvements.
   (D)   Release of guarantee security. The Town Commissioners may release a
portion of any security posted as the improvements are completed. Within 45
days, the Town Commissioners shall approve or disapprove the improvements. If
the Town Commissioners approve the improvements, then they shall immediately
release any security posted on that portion.
   (E)   Defects guarantee. The Town Commissioners shall require a bond from
the subdivider guaranteeing utility taps, curbs, gutters, street construction
including pavement, sidewalks, drainage facilities, seeding and grading of road
shoulders, water and sewer lines and other required improvements for one year.
The one year shall begin from the date of approval of improvements by the Town
Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, §
14.25; Ord. passed 7-6-2022, § 2.27)
§ 151.334 SUBMISSION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   The subdivider shall submit the final plat, so marked, not less than
seven days prior to the Planning Board meeting at which it will be reviewed.
   (B)   A registered land surveyor currently licensed and registered in the
state by the State Board of Registration for Professional Engineers and Land
Surveyors shall prepare the final plat. The final plat shall conform to the
provisions for plats, subdivisions and mapping requirements set forth in G.S. §
47-30 and the Standards of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina.
   (C)   Nine copies of the final plat shall be submitted; two of these shall
be on reproducible material; seven shall be black or blue line paper prints.
Material and drawing medium for the original shall be in accordance with the
Standards of Practice for Land Surveying in North Carolina, where applicable,
and the requirements of the County Register of Deeds. One electronic copy shall
be submitted in PDF format.
   (D)   The final plat shall be of a size suitable for recording with the
County Register of Deeds and shall be at a scale of not less than one inch
equals 200 feet. Maps may be placed on more than one sheet with appropriate
match lines.
   (E)   A filing fee, paid by the subdivider, in accordance with the approved
town fee schedule, shall accompany submission of the final plat.
   (F)   The final plat shall meet the specifications in §
151.335.
   (G)   The following signed certificates shall appear on all copies of the
final plat:
      (1)   Certificate of ownership and dedication.
   I hereby certify that I am the owner of the property shown and described
hereon, which is located in the subdivision jurisdiction of the Town of
Minnesott Beach and that I hereby adopt this plan of subdivision with my free
consent, establish minimum building setback lines and dedicate all streets,
alleys, walks, parks and other sites and easements to public or private use as
noted. Furthermore I hereby dedicate all sanitary sewers, storm sewers and
water lines to the Town of Minnesott Beach or as the town shall designate.
                                                              
         Owner/Date
      (2)   Certificate of survey and notary. The certificates of survey and
notary shall appear on each plat in conformance with the current version of
G.S. § 47-30.
      (3)   Certificate of approval of street design.
   This is to certify that the street design specifications shown on this
subdivision map have been examined and found to be in accordance with the
minimum right-of-way and construction standards established by the Secondary
Roads Council of the North Carolina Department of Transportation for acceptance
on the State Highway System.
         This                day of                                 , 20     .
                                                                           
         District Engineer NC Dept. of Transportation
      (4)   Certificate of wastewater systems approval. If septic tanks or
other on-site wastewater systems are to be used in the subdivision, the
following certificate is required:
   A valid septic system improvement permit will be obtained for each lot of
the subdivision prior to the transfer, sale, building or making improvement of
the lot.
                                                              
         Owner/Date
   (H)   The Planning Board shall review the final plat at or before its next
regularly scheduled meeting which follows at least seven days after the
Planning Board Chairperson receives the completed final plat and shall
recommend approval, conditional approval with modifications to bring the plat
into compliance, or disapproval of the final plat with reasons within 45 days
of its first consideration of the plat.
   (I)   During its review of the final plat, the Planning Board may appoint a
registered land surveyor to confirm the accuracy of the final plat (if agreed
to by the Town Commissioners). If substantial errors are found, the costs shall
be charged to the subdivider and the plat shall not be recommended for approval
until the errors have been corrected.
   (J)   If the Planning Board recommends approval of the final plat, it shall
transmit all copies of the plat and its written recommendations to the Town
Commissioners.
   (K)   If the Planning Board recommends conditional approval of the final
plat with modifications to bring the plat into compliance, it shall retain one
print of the plat for its minutes, return its written recommendations and two
reproducible copies of the plat to the subdivider and transmit one print of the
plat and its written recommendation to the Town Commissioners.
   (L)   If the Planning Board recommends disapproval of the final plat, it
shall instruct the subdivider concerning resubmission of a revised plat and the
subdivider may make changes as will bring the plat into compliance with the
provisions of this ordinance, and resubmit same for reconsideration by the
Planning Board. The subdivider has the option to appeal the decision to the
Town Commissioners.
   (M)   Failure of the Planning Board to make a written recommendation within
45 days shall constitute grounds for the subdivider to apply to the Town
Commissioners for approval.
   (N)   If the Planning Board recommends approval or conditional approval with
modifications to bring the plat into compliance, or the subdivider appeals to
the Town Commissioners, the Town Commissioners shall review and approve or
disapprove the final plat within 65 days after the plat and recommendations of
the Planning Board have been received.
   (O)   If the Town Commissioners approves the final plat, the approval shall
be shown on each copy of the plat by the following signed certificate:
   Certificate of Approval for Recording
I hereby certify that the subdivision plat shown hereon has been found to
comply with the subdivision regulations of the Town of Minnesott Beach, North
Carolina and that this plat has been approved by the Town Commissioners of the
Town of Minnesott Beach for recording in the office of the Register of Deeds of
Pamlico County.
                                                                                             
                                             Mayor
                                 Town of Minnesott Beach, North Carolina
                                                                                             
                                             Date
   (P)   If the Town Commissioners disapproves the final plat, the reasons for
the disapproval shall be stated in writing, specifying the provisions of this
ordinance with which the final plat does not comply. The Town Commissioners
shall retain one copy of the reasons and one print of the plat as part of its
proceedings; one copy of the reasons and three copies of the plat shall be
transmitted to the subdivider. If the final plat is disapproved, the subdivider
may make changes as will bring the final plat into compliance and resubmit same
for reconsideration by the Planning Board and Town Commissioners or by the Town
Commissioners as determined by the Town Commissioners.
   (Q)   If the Town Commissioners approve the final plat, the original tracing
of the final plat and one print of the plat shall be retained by the
subdivider. One reproducible tracing and one print shall be filed with the Town
Clerk, and one print shall be returned to the Planning Board for its records.
   (R)   The subdivider shall file the approved final plat with the Register of
Deeds of the county within 60 days of the Town Commissioners’ approval;
otherwise, the approval shall be null and void.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.26)
§ 151.335 INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS FOR PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS.
   (A)   Summary. Except where specifically noted, preliminary and final plat
submissions shall contain the following information:
      (1)   Title block;
      (2)   Site sketch;
      (3)   Street data;
      (4)   Public and utility data;
      (5)   Utility plans; and
      (6)   Site calculations and comparative statistics.
   (B)   Title block. The title block of both preliminary and final plats shall
include the following:
      (1)   Property designation;
      (2)   Name of owner;
      (3)   Location including township, county and state;
      (4)   Date or dates survey was conducted and plat prepared;
      (5)   A scale of drawing in feet per inch listed in words or figures;
      (6)   A bar graph;
      (7)   Name, address, registration number and seal of the registered land
surveyor; and
      (8)   Any other information requested by the Town Planning Board and/or
Town Commissioners.
   (C)   General information. Both the preliminary and final plat submissions
shall include the following unless otherwise noted:
      (1)   The name of the subdivider;
      (2)   A sketch vicinity map showing the relationship between the proposed
subdivision and surrounding area;
      (3)   Corporate limits, township boundaries, county lines, if on the
subdivision tract;
      (4)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners,
mortgagees, registered land surveyors, land planners, architects, landscape
architects and professional engineers responsible for the subdivision;
      (5)   The registration numbers and seals of the professional engineers
and land surveyors;
      (6)   Date of plat preparation;
      (7)   North arrow and orientation;
      (8)   For the preliminary plat submission: the boundaries of the tract or
portion thereof to be subdivided, distinctly and accurately represented with
all bearings and distances shown;
      (9)   For all final plat submissions: the exact boundary lines of the
tract to be subdivided, fully dimensioned by lengths and bearings, and the
location of existing boundary lines of adjoining lands;
      (10)   The names of owners of adjoining properties;
      (11)   The names of any adjoining subdivisions of record or proposed and
under review;
      (12)   Minimum building setback lines;
      (13)   The zoning classifications of the tract to be subdivided and
adjoining properties;
      (14)   Existing property lines on the tract to be subdivided and on
adjoining properties;
      (15)   Existing buildings or other structures, water courses, railroads,
bridges, culverts, storm drains, both on the land to be subdivided and land
immediately adjoining;
      (16)   Proposed lot lines, lot and block numbers and approximate
dimensions;
      (17)   For final plat submissions: the lots numbered consecutively
throughout the subdivision;
      (18)   Wooded areas, marshes, swamps, rock outcrops, ponds or lakes,
streams or streambeds and any other natural features affecting the site;
      (19)   The exact location of the flood hazard areas from the appropriate
Federal Emergency Management Agency maps; and
      (20)   Any other information requested by the Town Planning Board and/or
Town Commissioners.
   (D)   Street data. The street data for both the preliminary and final plat
submission shall, unless otherwise noted, contain the following information:
      (1)   Proposed streets;
      (2)   Existing and platted streets on adjoining properties and in the
proposed subdivision;
      (3)   Location and dimensions of all rights-of-way;
      (4)   Pavement widths;
      (5)   Approximate grades;
      (6)   The preliminary plat shall include approximations of all corners
and curves in the drawings. Final plat submissions shall contain sufficient
engineering data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground every
straight or curved line, street line, lot line, right-of-way line, easement
line and setback line, including dimensions, bearings or deflection angles,
radii, central angles and tangent distances for the centerline of curved
property lines that are not the boundary line of curved streets. All dimensions
shall be measured to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and all angles to the
nearest minute;
      (7)   Typical street cross-sections;
      (8)   Street names;
      (9)   Public streets dedicated to the town; see §
151.354(C);
      (10)   Public streets not dedicated to the town but accepted by the state
highway system; see §
151.354(D);
      (11)   Public streets not dedicated to the town and not eligible for the
state highway system; see §
151.354(E);
      (12)   Street maintenance agreement in accordance with §
151.354(E) of this ordinance;
      (13)   Intersection with state maintained highway approval shall be
obtained prior to preliminary plat submission; §
151.354(F);
      (14)   Evidence that the subdivider has obtained approval shall be
included in the preliminary plat submission and proof that this approval is
still in effect shall be included with all final plat submissions; and
      (15)   Any other information requested by the Town Planning Board and/or
Town Commissioners.
   (E)   Public use data. The public use data for both the preliminary and
final plat submission shall, unless otherwise noted, contain the location and
dimensions of the following:
      (1)   Riding trails;
      (2)   Natural buffers;
      (3)   Pedestrian or bicycle paths;
      (4)   Parks and recreation areas with specific type indicated;
      (5)   School sites;
      (6)   Areas to be dedicated to or reserved for public use;
      (7)   Areas to be used for purposes other than residential with purpose
of each stated;
      (8)   The future ownership (dedication or reservation for public use to
governmental body, for owners to duly constituted homeowner’s association, or
for tenants remaining in subdivider’s ownership) of recreation and open space
lands shall be indicated on the preliminary plat and a copy of the instrument
shall be included with final plat submissions; and
      (9)   Any other information requested by the Town Planning Board and/or
Town Commissioners.
   (F)   Utility data. The utility data for both the preliminary and final plat
submission shall, unless otherwise noted, contain the following information:
      (1)   Utility and other easements;
      (2)   Sanitary sewers, prepared by a registered engineer;
      (3)   Storm sewers, prepared by a registered engineer;
      (4)   Other drainage facilities, if any, prepared by a registered
engineer, except incidental drainage; required for final plat submissions only
for minor subdivisions;
      (5)   Water distribution lines, prepared by a registered engineer
illustrating connections to existing systems, showing line sizes, the location
of fire hydrants, blowoffs, manholes, force mains and gate valves;
      (6)   Natural gas lines;
      (7)   Telephone lines;
      (8)   Electric lines;
      (9)   Plans for individual water supply and sewage disposal systems, if
any;
      (10)   Profiles based upon mean sea level datum for sanitary sewers and
storm sewers are only required for preliminary plat submission; and
      (11)   Any other information requested by the Town Planning Board and/or
Town Commissioners.
   (G)   Site calculations and comparative statistics. The site calculation and
comparative statistics for both the preliminary and final plat submission
shall, unless otherwise noted, contain the following information:
      (1)   Acreage in total tract to be subdivided;
      (2)   Acreage in parks and recreation areas and other nonresidential
uses;
      (3)   Number of parcels created by type of parcel and total number
created;
      (4)   Acreage in the smallest lot in the subdivision;
      (5)   Linear feet in streets;
      (6)   The name and location of any property or buildings within the
proposed subdivision or within any contiguous property that is located on the
U.S. Department of Interior’s National Register of Historic Places;
      (7)   The accurate locations and descriptions of all monuments, markers
and control points shall be included only in final plat submissions;
      (8)   A copy of any proposed deed restrictions or similar covenants.
These restrictions are mandatory when private recreation areas are established;
      (9)   A copy of the erosion control plan submitted to the appropriate
authority, if a plan is required;
      (10)   Topographic map with contour intervals of no greater than two feet
at a scale of no less than one inch equals 200 feet;
      (11)   All applicable certifications required in §§
151.328(K) or 151.334(G);
      (12)   Any other information considered by the subdivider, Planning Board
or Town Commissioners to be pertinent to the review of the plat;
      (13)   Seals and telephone numbers of the professional engineers and land
surveyors; and
      (14)   Any other information requested by the Town Planning Board and/or
Town Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.27)
§ 151.336 RECOMBINATION OF LAND.
   (A)   Any plat or any part of any plat may be vacated by the owner at any
time before the sale of any lot in the subdivision by a written instrument to
which a copy of the plat shall be attached, declaring the same to be vacated.
   (B)   (1)   The instrument shall be approved by the same agencies as did
approve the final plat.
      (2)   The governing body may reject any instrument, which abridges or
destroys any public rights in any of its public uses, improvements, streets or
alleys.
   (C)   The instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or approved and
recorded and filed in the same manner as a final plat; and being duly recorded
or filed, shall operate to destroy the force and effect of the recording of the
plat so vacated, and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys and
public grounds, and all dedications laid out or described in the plat.
   (D)   When lots have been sold, the plat may be vacated in the manner
provided in divisions (A) through (C) above by all owners of the lots in the
plat joining in the execution of the writing.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.28)
§ 151.337 RESUBDIVISION PROCEDURES.
   For any replatting or resubdivision of land, the same procedures, rules and
regulations shall apply as prescribed herein for an original subdivision.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.29)
Part IV: Minimum Standards of Design
§ 151.350 GENERAL.
   Each subdivision shall contain the improvements specified in this
subchapter, which shall be installed in accordance with the requirements of
this ordinance and paid for by the subdivider, unless other means of financing
is specifically stated in this ordinance. Land shall be dedicated and reserved
in each subdivision as specified in this subchapter. Each subdivision shall
adhere to the minimum standards of design established by this subchapter.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.30)
§ 151.351 SUITABILITY OF LAND.
   (A)   Safety exclusion. Land, which has been determined by the Town
Commissioners on the basis of engineering or other expert surveys to pose an
ascertainable danger to life or property by reason of its unsuitability for the
use proposed shall not be platted for that purpose, unless and until the
subdivider has taken the necessary measures to correct the conditions and to
eliminate the dangers.
   (B)   Soil toxicity. Areas that have been used for disposal of solid waste
shall not be subdivided unless tests by the County Health Department, a
structural engineer and a soils expert determine that the land is suitable for
the purpose provided.
   (C)   Flood damage. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage.
   (D)   Utilities and flood damage. All subdivision proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.31)
§ 151.352 NAME DUPLICATION.
   The name of the subdivision shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the
name of an existing subdivision within the county.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.32)
§ 151.353 SUBDIVISION DESIGN.
   (A)   Blocks.
      (1)   General considerations. The lengths, widths and shapes of blocks
shall be determined with due regard to provision of adequate building sites
suitable to the special needs of the type of use
contemplated, zoning requirements, needs for vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, control and safety of street traffic, limitations and
opportunities of topography, and convenient access to water areas.
      (2)   Length. Blocks shall not be less than 400 feet or more than 1,800
feet in length.
      (3)   Width. Blocks shall have sufficient width to allow two tiers of
lots of minimum depth except where single tier lots are required to separate
residential development from through vehicular traffic or another type of use,
in nonresidential subdivisions or where abutting a water area.
      (4)   Crosswalks. Where deemed necessary by the Town Commissioners, a
pedestrian crosswalk at least 15 feet in width may be required to provide
convenient public access to a public area such as a park or school, to a water
area or to areas such as shopping centers, religious or transportation
facilities.
      (5)   Block numbers. Block numbers shall conform to the town street
numbering system, if applicable.
   (B)   Lots.
      (1)   Conformity to zoning districts. All lots in new subdivisions shall
conform to the zoning requirements of the district in which the subdivision is
located. Conformance to zoning requirements means, among other things, that the
smallest lot in the subdivision must meet all dimensional requirements of this
ordinance. It is not sufficient merely for the average lot to meet the
dimensional requirements of the zoning district.
      (2)   Health requirements. Lots shall meet any applicable County Health
Department requirements.
      (3)   Lots; double frontage. Double frontage lots shall be avoided
wherever possible.
      (4)   Side lots. Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles to
or radial to street lines.
   (C)   Easements.
      (1)   Utility easements. Easements for underground or aboveground
utilities shall be provided, where necessary, across lots or centered on rear
or side lot lines and shall be at least 20 feet wide for water and sanitary
sewer lines and as required by the companies involved, for telephone, gas and
power lines.
      (2)   Easement sufficiency. The Town Commissioners will determine whether
one easement is sufficient or whether several easements are necessary to
accommodate the various facilities and the subdivider shall provide the
required easements.
      (3)   Drainage easements. Where a subdivision is traversed by a stream or
drainage way, an easement shall be provided conforming to the lines of the
stream and of sufficient width as will be adequate for the purpose.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.33)
§ 151.354 STREETS.
   (A)   Type of street required. All subdivision lots shall abut on a paved
public street, except those lots platted on an existing unpaved public street
or road. The Town Commissioners shall dedicate all public streets to the town,
the state or the public, as determined appropriate.
   (B)   Minimum standards. All public streets shall be built to the standards
of North Carolina Department of Transportation, Division of Highways
Subdivision Roads, Minimum Construction Standards, current issue and all other
applicable standards of the town and the State Department of Transportation.
   (C)   Public streets dedicated to the town. Where public streets are
involved which will be dedicated to the town, the subdivider must submit all
street plans to the Planning Board for review and to the Town Commissioners for
approval as part of the preliminary plat approval process.
   (D)   Public streets not dedicated to the town. Public streets not dedicated
to the town which are eligible for acceptance into the state highway system
shall be constructed to the standards necessary to be put on the state highway
system or the standards in this ordinance, whichever is stricter, in regard to
each particular item, and shall be put on the system. The subdivider must
submit the following documents to the State Department of Transportation
District Highway office for review:
      (1)   A complete site layout, including any future expansion anticipated;
      (2)   Horizontal alignment indicating general curve data on site layout
plan;
      (3)   Vertical alignment indicated by percent grade;
      (4)   PI station and vertical curve length on site plan layout;
      (5)   The District Engineer may require the plotting of the ground
profile and grade line for roads where special conditions or problems exist;
      (6)   Typical section indicating the pavement design and width and the
slopes;
      (7)   Widths and details for either the curb and gutter or the shoulder
and ditch proposed;
      (8)   Drainage facilities and drainage areas; and
      (9)   A written maintenance agreement with provisions for maintenance of
the street until it is put on the state system shall be included with the final
plat.
   (E)   Streets not dedicated to town and not eligible for state highway
system. Streets not dedicated to the town which are not eligible to be put on
the state highway system because there are too few lots or residences shall
nevertheless be dedicated to the public and shall be in accordance with the
standards in this ordinance or the standards necessary to be put on the state
highway system, whichever is stricter in regard to each particular item, so as
to be eligible to be put on the system at a later date. A written maintenance
agreement with provisions for maintenance of the street until it is put on the
state system shall be included with the final plat.
   (F)   Intersection with state maintained road. If any street is proposed to
intersect with a state maintained road, the subdivider shall apply for driveway
approval as required by the North Carolina Department of Transportation,
Division of Highways Manual on Driveway Regulations.
   (G)   Subdivision street disclosure statement. All streets shown on the
final plat shall be designated in accordance with G.S. § 136-102.6 and
designation as public shall be conclusively presumed an offer of dedication to
the public. Where streets are dedicated to the public but not accepted into a
municipal or the state system, before lots are sold, a statement explaining the
status of the street shall be included with the final plat.
   (H)   Half-streets. The dedication of half-streets of less than 60 feet at
the perimeter of a new subdivision shall be prohibited. If circumstances render
this impractical, the subdivider shall furnish adequate provision for the
concurrent dedication of the remaining half of the street. Where there exists a
half-street in an adjoining subdivision, the remaining half shall be provided
by the proposed subdivision. However, in circumstances where more than 60 feet
of right-of-way is required, a partial width right-of-way, not less than 60
feet in width, may be dedicated when adjoining undeveloped property is owned or
controlled by the subdivider, provided that the width of the partial dedication
is such as to permit the installation of the facilities as may be necessary to
serve abutting lots. When the adjoining property is subdivided, the remainder
of the full-required right-of-way shall be dedicated.
   (I)   Marginal access streets. Where a tract of land to be subdivided
adjoins a principal arterial street, the subdivider may be required to provide
a marginal access street parallel to the arterial street or reverse frontage on
a minor street for the lots to be developed adjacent to the arterial. Where
reverse frontage is established, private driveways shall be prevented from
having direct access to the principal arterial.
   (J)   Access to adjacent properties. Where, in the opinion of the Town
Commissioners, it is necessary to provide for street access to an adjoining
property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication to the boundary of
the property and a temporary turnaround provided. The extension dedicated shall
have the same right-of-way width as the street being extended.
   (K)   Nonresidential streets. The subdivider of a nonresidential subdivision
shall provide streets in accordance with I. F-4 of the North Carolina
Department of Transportation, Division of Highways Subdivision Roads, Minimum
Construction Standards and the standards in this ordinance, whichever are
stricter in regard to each particular item.
   (L)   Design standards. The design of all streets and roads within the
jurisdiction of this ordinance shall be in accordance with the accepted
policies of the State Department of Transportation, Division of Highways, as
taken or modified from the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) manuals. The current issue of the North
Carolina Department of Transportation, Division of Highways Subdivision Roads,
Minimum Construction Standards shall apply for any items not included in this
ordinance or where stricter than this ordinance.
   (M)   Intersections. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly
as possible at right angles and no street shall intersect any other street at
an angle less than 60 degrees.
   (N)   Property lines at intersections. Property lines at intersections
should be set so that the distance from the edge of pavement, of the street
turnout, to the property line will be at least as great as the distance from
the edge of pavement to the property line along the intersecting streets. This
property line can be established as a radius or as a sight triangle. Greater
offsets from the edge of pavement to the property lines will be required, if
necessary, to provide sight distance for the vehicle on the side street.
   (O)   Offset intersections. Offset intersections are to be avoided unless
exception is granted by the Division of Highways or the town as applicable. A
minimum length of 200 feet between survey and centerlines should separate
intersections, which cannot be aligned.
   (P)   Cul-de-sacs. Permanent dead end streets should not exceed 500 feet in
length unless necessitated by topography or property accessibility and in no
case shall be permitted to be over 900 feet. Measurement shall be from the
point where the centerline of the dead end street intersects with the center of
a through street to the center of the turnaround of the cul-de-sac. Where one
cul-de-sac intersects with another cul-de-sac, the end of each cul-de-sac shall
be no more than 500 to 900 feet from a through street, measured as stated
above. The distance from the edge of pavement on the vehicular turnaround to
the right-of-way line shall not be less than the distance from the edge of
pavement to the right-of-way line on the street approaching the turnaround.
Cul-de-sacs should not be used to avoid connection with an existing street or
to avoid the extension of an important street, unless the Town Commissioners
grants exception.
   (Q)   Alleys. Alleys shall be required to serve lots used for commercial and
industrial purposes except that this requirement may be waived where other
definite and assured provision is made for service access.
   (R)   Alleys in residential subdivisions. Alleys shall not be provided in
residential subdivisions unless necessitated by unusual circumstances.
   (S)   Alley width. The width of an alley shall be at least 20 feet.
   (T)   Dead end alleys. Dead end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but
if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turnaround facilities at the
dead end as may be approved by the Town Commissioners.
   (U)   Alley alignment and grade. Sharp changes in alignment and grade shall
be avoided.
   (V)   Alley standards. All alleys shall be designated in accordance with the
State Department of Transportation standards.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.34)
§ 151.355 STREETS; OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Through traffic discouraged on residential collector and local
streets. Residential collector and local streets shall be laid out in a way
that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. Streets shall be
designed or walkways dedicated to assure convenient access to parks,
playgrounds, schools or other places of public assembly.
   (B)   Sidewalks. The Town Commissioners may require sidewalks on one or both
sides of the street in areas likely to be subject to heavy pedestrian traffic
such as near schools and shopping areas. The sidewalks shall be constructed to
a minimum width of four feet, and shall consist of a minimum thickness of four
inches of concrete. All sidewalks shall be placed in the right-of-way, unless
the development is platted as a planned unit or group development. Sidewalks
shall consist of a minimum of six inches of concrete at driveway crossings.
   (C)   Street names. Proposed streets, which are obviously in alignment with
existing streets, shall be given the same name. In assigning new names,
duplication of existing names shall be avoided and in no case shall the
proposed name be phonetically similar to existing names in the county
irrespective of the use of a suffix such as street, road, drive, place, court
and the like. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Town
Commissioners and the county.
   (D)   Street name signs. The subdivider shall be required to provide and
erect street name signs to town standards at all intersections within the
subdivision.
   (E)   Permits for connection to state roads. An approved permit is required
for connection to any existing state system road. This permit is required prior
to any construction on the street or road. The application is available at the
office of the nearest district engineer of the Division of Highways.
   (F)   Offsets to utility poles. Poles for overhead utilities should be
located clear of roadway shoulders, preferably a minimum of at least 30 feet
from the edge of pavement on major thoroughfares. On streets with curb and
gutter, utility poles should be set back a minimum distance of six feet from
the face of curb.
   (G)   Wheelchair ramps. In accordance with G.S. Chapter 136, Article 2A, §
136-44.14, all street curbs in the state being constructed or reconstructed for
maintenance procedures, traffic operations, repairs, correction of utilities or
altered for any reason after September 1, 1973, shall provide wheelchair ramps
for the physically disabled at all intersections where both curb and gutter and
sidewalks are provided and at other major points of pedestrian flow.
   (H)   New bridges. Any proposed new bridge shall conform to State Department
of Transportation standards.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.35)
§ 151.356 UTILITIES.
   (A)   Connection expense. If the subdivision proposes to use county water
and/or sanitary sewer system, each lot in a subdivision within the corporate
limits of the town shall be provided, at the subdivider’s expense, with an
extension of the municipal water and/or sewer systems. The subdivider shall
provide a letter from the agency of jurisdiction stating that the subdivider
has satisfactorily met any financial requirements for the service extension.
   (B)   Extraterritorial connections. Each subdivision in the extraterritorial
area of the town may be connected at the subdivider’s expense to the water and
sanitary sewer systems if approved by the Town Commissioners.
   (C)   Utilities specifications. Water and sanitary sewer lines, connections
and equipment shall be in accordance with the county standards and policies.
Water and sewer taps and meters, meter curb boxes and conservation stops shall
be installed at the subdivider’s expense on each lot within the subdivision.
   (D)   Storm water retention plan. The subdivider shall provide a surface
water drainage system constructed to the standards of the State Department of
Transportation, as reflected in the current issue of the Handbook for the
Design of Highway Surface Drainage Structures, subject to review by the Town
Commissioners. The plan shall ensure that:
      (1)   No surface water shall be channeled or directed into a sanitary
sewer;
      (2)   Where feasible, the subdivider shall connect to an existing storm
drainage system;
      (3)   Where an existing storm drainage system cannot feasibly be extended
to the subdivision, a surface drainage system shall be designed to protect the
proposed development from water damage;
      (4)   Surface drainage courses shall have side slopes of at least three
feet of horizontal distance for each one foot of vertical distance, and courses
shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the drainage area without flooding,
and designed to comply with the standards and specifications for erosion
control of the State Sedimentation Pollution Control Act, Chapter 113A, Article
4 and NCAC Title 15A, Chapter 4, and any locally adopted erosion and
sedimentation control ordinances;
      (5)   The minimum grade along the bottom of a surface drainage course
should be a vertical fall of at least one foot in each 200 feet of horizontal
distance;
      (6)   Stream banks and channels downstream from any land disturbing
activity shall be protected from increased degradation by accelerated erosion
caused by increased velocity of runoff from the land disturbing activity in
accordance with the State Sedimentation Pollution Control Act, Chapter 113A,
Article 4 and NCAC Title 15A, Chapter 4;
      (7)   Anyone constructing a dam or impoundment within the subdivision
must comply with the State Dam Safety Law of 1967 and NCAC Title 15A,
Subchapter 2K; and
      (8)   In all areas of special flood hazards, all subdivision proposals
shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage.
   (E)   Electricity. The subdivider shall provide a letter from the
appropriate electric utility company stating that the subdivider has
satisfactorily met any financial requirements for the new electric substations
or power lines.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.36)
§ 151.357 OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Placement of monuments. Unless otherwise specified by this ordinance,
the Standards of Practice for Land Surveying as adopted by the State Board of
Registration for Professional Engineers and Land Surveyors, under the
provisions of 21 NCAC 56 shall apply when conducting surveys for subdivisions,
to determine the accuracy for surveys and placement of monuments, control
corners, markers and property corner ties; to determine the location, design
and material of monuments, markers, control corners and property corner ties;
and to determine other standards and procedures governing the practice of land
surveying for subdivisions.
   (B)   Construction procedures. No construction or installation of
improvements shall commence in a proposed subdivision until the preliminary
plat has been approved, and the appropriate authorities have approved all plans
and specifications.
   (C)   Issue of permits. No building, zoning or other permits shall be issued
for erection of a structure on any lot not of record at the time of adoption of
this ordinance until all the requirements of this ordinance have been met. The
subdivider, prior to commencing any work within the subdivision, shall provide
for adequate inspection. The approving authorities having jurisdiction or their
representatives shall inspect and approve all completed work prior to release
of the sureties.
   (D)   Oversized improvements. The town may require installation of certain
oversized utilities or the extension of utilities to adjacent property when it
is in the interest of future development. If the town
requires the installation of improvements in excess of the standards required
in this ordinance, including all standards adopted by reference, the town shall
pay the cost differential between the improvement required and the standards in
this ordinance. The town may recoup this cost through fees.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.37)
§ 151.358 BUFFERING, RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Buffering. Whenever a residential subdivision is located adjacent to
an office, institutional, commercial or industrial use, which does not have a
buffer or property zoned for these uses, and a buffer is not required between
these and the subdivision, the subdivider shall provide a buffer strip as
defined in §
151.037. The width of the buffer shall be in addition to the lot area required
by the Unified Development Ordinance of the town. The buffer shall become part
of the lot on which it is located, or in the case of commonly owned property,
shall be deeded to the homeowner’s association.
   (B)   Recreation and open space. Every person or corporation who subdivides
land into ten or more lots for residential purposes may be required to dedicate
a portion of the land, as set forth in this ordinance, to the town or a
homeowner’s association for the purposes of park, recreation and open space
sites to serve the residents of the neighborhood in which the subdivision is
located.
   (C)   Minimum size. The minimum amount of land shall be dedicated for
recreation, parks or open space in all subdivisions shall be one-half acre for
each subdivision or 5% of the gross acreage, whichever is greater.
   (D)   Requirements. Criteria for evaluating suitability of proposed
recreation, parks and open space areas shall include, but not be limited to,
the following, as determined by the Town Commissioners in consultation with the
Planning Board and the Recreation Advisory Committee.
      (1)   Unity. The dedicated land shall be a single parcel except where it
is determined that two or more parcels would be in the public interest. The
Town Commissioners may require that parcels be connected, and may require the
dedication of a connecting path of up to 60 feet, and in no case less than 30
feet in width in addition to the land required in division (C) above.
      (2)   Location. The dedicated land shall be located so as to serve the
recreation needs of the immediate neighborhood within the subdivision.
      (3)   Accessibility. Public access to the dedicated land shall be
provided either by an abutting street or public easement. The easement may
require being 60 feet in width and shall in no case be less than 30 feet in
width.
      (4)   Usability. The dedicated land shall be usable for active recreation
(play areas, ball fields, tennis courts or similar recreation uses). Lakes may
not be included in computing the amount of land to be dedicated unless
acceptable to the Town Commissioners. If the Town Commissioners determine that
other dedicated parcels or existing recreation facilities are meeting active
recreation needs, then land that is suitable for open space may be dedicated.
   (E)   Adjustments. The Town Commissioners may in cases of unusual or
exceptional nature, allow adjustments in the dedication requirements
established in or required by this ordinance. The Planning Board and the
Recreation Advisory Committee before action by the Town Commissioners shall
review the adjustments.
   (F)   Homeowner’s association. Where parks and recreation space is deeded to
a homeowner’s association, the subdivider or owner shall file with the town and
record with the final subdivision plat a declaration of covenants and
restrictions as well as regulations and bylaws that will govern the open space.
Provisions shall include but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   The association shall be established before the homes are sold;
      (2)   Membership shall be mandatory for each homebuyer and all successive
buyers, unless another arrangement is approved by the locality, which
adequately protects the interests of the locality and the owners;
      (3)   The association shall be responsible for the liability insurance,
local taxes and maintenance of recreation and other facilities;
      (4)   Any sums levied by the association that remain unpaid shall become
a lien on the individual homeowner’s property which shall be subordinate only
to tax and mortgagee liens unless another arrangement is approved by the
locality which adequately protects the interests of the locality and the
owners;
      (5)   If all or any portion of the property held by the association is
being disposed of, or if the association is dissolved, adequate open space
shall be deeded to the locality to satisfy the requirements for public
recreation space under this subchapter;
      (6)   An owner of each dwelling unit shall have voting rights in the
association with one vote for each unit owned;
      (7)   Uses of common property shall be appropriately limited;
      (8)   The following information shall also be provided:
         (a)   The name of the association;
         (b)   The manner in which directors of the association are to be
selected;
         (c)   The number of directors constituting the initial Board of
Directors;
         (d)   The post office address of the initial registered office; and
         (e)   The name of the city and county in which the registered office
is located.
      (9)   Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the amount of privately
controlled open space land, which may be included under this agreement, over
and above the recreation and park site obligation.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.38)
Part V: Residential Mixed Use Development
§ 151.370 APPLICABILITY.
   Any development(s) begun under the previous ordinance shall be permitted to
continue under the provisions of that ordinance.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.39)
§ 151.371 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this subchapter is to encourage comprehensive planning of
tracts of land of 20 acres or more under single ownership or control, so as to
promote the construction and use of the appropriate residential, commercial,
retail, marina and recreational areas. Property zoned Residential Mixed Use (R-
MU) is subject to the requirements set forth below.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.40)
§ 151.372 PLAT SUBMISSION.
   (A)   The owner of any property seeking to have the property developed in
the R-MU District shall submit a master plan for all property designated (or
requested to be designated) as an R-MU development at least 30 days prior to
the Planning Board meeting at which the owner desires the Board to review the
master plan.
   (B)   Ten copies of the master plan shall be submitted to the Town Clerk.
   (C)   The master development plan must show, at a minimum, the following
items:
      (1)   All proposed public or private street rights-of-way and easements;
      (2)   The proposed location of all single-family dwellings and
developments;
      (3)   The proposed location of all two-family and multi-family
developments;
      (4)   The proposed location of all recreational areas;
      (5)   The proposed location of all office and professional areas;
      (6)   The proposed location of all commercial areas;
      (7)   The proposed location of all utility areas;
      (8)   The proposed density of development for each site designated for
the following uses: single- family residential, two-family residential, multi-
family residential, office and professional and commercial. Furthermore, the
development plan shall include the gross acreage for the project, and each use
therein and the gross residential density (including recreational and open
spaces); and
      (9)   Any other information requested by the Planning Board or Town
Commissioners.
   (D)   The Town Commissioners, following review and recommendation by the
Planning Board, may approve the proposed master plan if it determines that it
is in the best interest of the town because the plan meets the requirements of
§
151.168 and the requirements of this subchapter and represents a comprehensive
and coordinated approach to land planning and use of the property so
designated. Once the master plan is approved by the Town Commissioners, the
applicant may proceed under §
151.374.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.41)
§ 151.373 CHANGE IN PLANS.
   The owner of each tract designated as an R-MU development shall be allowed
to submit plats for subdivision approval that are inconsistent with the
submitted and approved master plan. If the developer chooses to do so they must
first re-submit a modified Master Plan for approval indicating the desired
changes and detailing the impact on all R-MU specification requirements. Upon
approval of the modified Master Plan by the Planning Board and the Town
Commissioners, the modified plat, now in conformance with the newly approved
Master Plan may be submitted for approval and recordation.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.42; Ord. passed 7-11-2017)
§ 151.374 PLAT APPROVAL.
   Within 12 months after master plan approval (unless the time is extended by
the Planning Board), one or more plats of some or all of the phases of a
proposed R-MU development shall be submitted and reviewed in accordance with §§
151.332 through
151.335 inclusive.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.43)
§ 151.375 WAIVER OF GENERAL SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS.
   Except as required by §
151.168, property approved as an R-MU development shall be exempted from §§
151.350 through
151.358.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.44)
§ 151.376 PERMITS.
   Before any building permit is issued within an R-MU development, a storm
water management plan must be submitted to and approved by the state in
accordance with its coastal storm water rules and regulations.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.45)
§ 151.377 PARKING.
   Off-street parking requirements shall be in accordance with §§
151.230 through
151.234 of the Unified Development Ordinance unless otherwise approved by the
Town Commissioners.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, § 14.46)
§ 151.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty; enforcement and penalties for violations. Violations
of the provisions of this ordinance or failure to comply with any of its
requirements shall not constitute a misdemeanor as provided in G.S. § 14-
4 unless specifically provided in this ordinance. When town staff determines
work or activity has been undertaken in violation of a this ordinance or other
town development regulation or any state law delegated to the town for
enforcement purposes in lieu of the state or in violation of the terms of a
development approval, a written notice of violation may be issued. The notice
of violation shall be delivered to the holder of the development approval and
to the landowner of the property involved, if the landowner is not the holder
of the development approval, by personal delivery, electronic delivery, or
first-class mail and may be provided by similar means to the occupant of the
property or the person undertaking the work or activity. The notice of
violation may be posted on the property. The person providing the notice of
violation shall certify to the town that the notice was provided, and the
certificate shall be deemed conclusive in the absence of fraud.
      [Text continues on pg. 116]
   (B)   Subdivisions; penalties for violation.
      (1)   After the effective date of this ordinance any person who, being
the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within the territorial
jurisdiction of this ordinance, thereafter subdivides his or her land in
violation of this ordinance or transfers or sells land by reference to,
exhibition of or any other use of a plat showing a subdivision of the land
before the plat has been properly approved under the terms of this ordinance
and recorded in the office of the County Register of Deeds, shall be guilty of
a Class 1 misdemeanor. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of
transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transferring land
shall not exempt the transaction from this penalty. The town may bring an
action for injunction of any illegal subdivision, transfer, conveyance or sale
of land and the court shall, upon appropriate findings, issue an injunction and
order requiring the offending party to comply with this ordinance. Building
permits required pursuant to G.S. §§ 160D-403 and 160D-1108 may be denied for
lots that have been illegally subdivided. In addition to other remedies, the
town may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent the
unlawful subdivision of land, to restrain, correct or abate the violation, or
to prevent any illegal act or conduct. Further, violations of this ordinance
shall be subject, upon conviction, to fine and/or imprisonment as provided by
G.S. § 14-4 of up to $500 per day. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
      (2)   The provisions of this division shall not prohibit any owner or its
agent from entering into contracts to sell or lease by reference to an approved
preliminary plat for which a final plat has not yet been properly approved
under this ordinance or recorded with the register of deeds, provided the
contract does all of the following:
         (a)   Incorporates as an attachment a copy of the preliminary plat
referenced in the contract and obligates the owner to deliver to the buyer a
copy of the recorded plat prior to closing and conveyance;
         (b)   Plainly and conspicuously notifies the prospective buyer or
lessee that a final subdivision plat has not been approved or recorded at the
time of the contract, that no governmental body will incur any obligation to
the prospective buyer or lessee with respect to the approval of the final
subdivision plat, that changes between the preliminary and final plats are
possible, and that the contract or lease may be terminated without breach by
the buyer or lessee if the final recorded plat differs in any material respect
from the preliminary plat;
         (c)   Provides that if the approved and recorded final plat does not
differ in any material respect from the plat referred to in the contract, the
buyer or lessee may not be required by the seller or lessor to close any
earlier than five days after the delivery of a copy of the final recorded plat;
and
         (d)   Provides that if the approved and recorded final plat differs in
any material respect from the preliminary plat referred to in the contract, the
buyer or lessee may not be required by the seller or lessor to close any
earlier than 15 days after the delivery of the final recorded plat, during
which 15-day period the buyer or lessee may terminate the contract without
breach or any further obligation and may receive a refund of all earnest money
or prepaid purchase price.
      (3)   The provisions of this division shall not prohibit any owner or its
agent from entering into contracts to sell or lease land by reference to an
approved preliminary plat for which a final plat has not been properly approved
under this ordinance or recorded with the register of deeds where the buyer or
lessee is any person who has contracted to acquire or lease the land for the
purpose of engaging in the business of construction of residential, commercial
or industrial buildings on the land, or for the purpose of resale or lease of
the land to persons engaged in that kind of business, provided that no
conveyance of that land may occur and no contract to lease it may become
effective until after the final plat has been properly approved under this
ordinance and recorded with the register of deeds.
      (4)   Each day’s continuing violation of this ordinance shall be a
separate and distinct offense.
      (5)   Notwithstanding division (B)(4) above, this ordinance may be
enforced by appropriate equitable remedies issuing from a court of competent
jurisdiction.
      (6)   Nothing in this division shall be construed to limit the use of
remedies available to the town. The town may seek to enforce this ordinance by
using any one, all or a combination of remedies.
      (7)   Any act constituting a violation of the provisions of §§
151.285 through
151.291,
151.305 through
151.312,
151.325 through
151.337,
151.350 through
151.358 and
151.370 through
151.377 or a failure to comply with any of its requirements shall also subject
the offender to a civil penalty of $500 per day, which includes administrative
fees. If the offender fails to correct this violation within ten days after
being notified of the violation, the penalty may be recovered in a civil action
in the nature of a debt.
(Ord. passed 2-10-2009, §§ 3.19, 14.11; Ord. passed - -2021; Ord. passed 7-6-
2022, § 2.29)
CHAPTER 152: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives
   
152.01   Statutory authorization
   
152.02   Findings of fact
   
152.03   Statement of purpose
   
152.04   Objectives
   
152.05   Definitions
General Provisions
   
152.10   Lands to which this chapter applies
   
152.11   Basis for establishing the special flood hazard areas
   
152.12   Establishment of floodplain development permit
   
152.13   Compliance
   
152.14   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
152.15   Interpretation
   
152.16   Warning and disclaimer of liability
Administration
   
152.20   Designation of Floodplain Administrator
   
152.21   Floodplain development application, permit and certification
requirements
   
152.22   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
152.23   Corrective procedures
   
152.24   Variance procedures
Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
152.30   General standards
   
152.31   Specific standards
   
152.32   Standards for floodplains without established base flood elevations
   
152.33   Standards for riverine floodplains with base flood elevations but
without established floodways or non-encroachment areas
   
152.34   Floodways and non-encroachment areas
   
152.35   Coastal high hazard area (Zone VE)
   
152.36   Standards for coastal A zones (Zone CAZ) LiMWA
   
152.37   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (Zone AO)
   
152.38   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (Zone AH)
Legal Status Provisions
   
152.40   Effect upon outstanding liabilities under the existing flood damage
prevention ordinance
   
152.41   Effect upon outstanding floodplain development permits.
 
   
152.99   Penalty
STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES
§ 152.01 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   The Legislature of the State of North Carolina has in G.S. Chapter
143, Article 21, Part 6; Chapter 153A, Article 6; Chapter 160A, Article 8; and
Chapter 160D, Articles 7, 9, and 11 (effective January 1, 2021), delegated to
local governmental units the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote
the public health, safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of the Town of Minnesott Beach,
North Carolina, does ordain as follows.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.02 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (A)   The flood prone areas within the jurisdiction of the Town of Minnesott
Beach are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life,
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental
services, extraordinary public expenditures of flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety, and general welfare.
   (B)   These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions
in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities and by the
occupancy in flood prone areas of uses vulnerable to floods or other hazards.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.03 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote public health, safety, and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions within flood prone areas by provisions designed to:
   (A)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety, and
property due to water or erosion hazards or that result in damaging increases
in erosion, flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters;
   (D)   Control filling, grading, dredging, and all other development that may
increase erosion or flood damage; and
   (E)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers that will
unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.04 OBJECTIVES.
   The objectives of this chapter are to:
   (A)   Protect human life, safety, and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business losses and interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities (i.e. water and gas
mains, electric, telephone, cable and sewer lines, streets, and bridges) that
are located in flood prone areas;
   (F)   Minimize damage to private and public property due to flooding;
   (G)   Make flood insurance available to the community through the National
Flood Insurance Program;
   (H)   Maintain the natural and beneficial functions of floodplains;
   (I)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood prone areas; and
   (J)   Ensure that potential buyers are aware that property is in a special
flood hazard area.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.05 DEFINITIONS.
   These definitions apply ONLY to this chapter. The following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE (APPURTENANT STRUCTURE). A structure located on the same
parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure. Garages, carports and storage
sheds are common urban accessory structures. Pole barns, hay sheds and the like
qualify as accessory structures on farms, and may or may not be located on the
same parcel as the farm dwelling or shop building.
   ADDITION (to an existing building). An extension or increase in the floor
area or height of a building or structure.
   ALTERATION OF A WATERCOURSE. A dam, impoundment, channel relocation, change
in channel alignment, channelization, or change in cross-sectional area of the
channel or the channel capacity, or any other form of modification which may
alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the riverine
flow of water during conditions of the base flood.
   APPEAL. A request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A designated Zone AO or AH on a community's Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths determined to be from one to
three feet. These areas are located where a clearly defined channel does not
exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where
velocity flow may be evident.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. See SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA).
   BASE FLOOD. The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE). A determination of the water surface elevations
of the base flood as published in the Flood Insurance Study. When the BFE has
not been provided in a special flood hazard area, it may be obtained from
engineering studies available from a federal, state, or other source
using FEMA approved engineering methodologies. This elevation, when combined
with the freeboard, establishes the REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.
   BASEMENT. Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
   BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the
building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces without causing damage to the elevated portion
of the building or the supporting foundation system.
   BUILDING. See STRUCTURE.
   CHEMICAL STORAGE FACILITY. A building, portion of a building, or exterior
area adjacent to a building used for the storage of any chemical or chemically
reactive products.
   COASTAL A ZONE (CAZ). An area within a special flood hazard area, landward
of a V Zone or landward of an open coast without mapped V Zones. In a Coastal A
Zone, the principal source of flooding must be astronomical tides, storm
surges, seiches, or tsunamis, not riverine flooding. During the base flood
conditions, the potential for wave heights shall be greater than or equal to
one and one-half feet. Coastal A Zones are not normally designated on FIRMs.
(See LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LiMWA))
   COASTAL AREA MANAGEMENT ACT (CAMA). North Carolina's Coastal Area Management
Act, this act, along with the Dredge and Fill Law and the Federal Coastal Zone
Management Act, is managed through North Carolina Department of Environmental
Quality (NCDEQ) Division of Coastal Management (DCM).
   COASTAL BARRIER RESOURCES SYSTEM (CBRS). Consists of undeveloped portions of
coastal and adjoining areas established by the Coastal Barrier Resources Act
(CoBRA) of 1982, the Coastal Barrier Improvement Act (CBIA) of 1990, and
subsequent revisions, and includes areas owned by federal or state governments
or private conservation organizations identified as OTHERWISE PROTECTED AREAS
(OPA).
   COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA. A special flood hazard area extending from
offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune along an open coast and
any other area subject to high velocity wave action from storms or seismic
sources. The area is designated on a FIRM, or other adopted flood map as
determined in §
152.11, as Zone VE.
   DESIGN FLOOD. See REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION.
   DEVELOPMENT. Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations, or storage of
equipment or materials.
   DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY. Any activity defined as development which will
necessitate a floodplain development permit. This includes buildings,
structures, and non-structural items, including (but not limited to) fill,
bulkheads, piers, pools, docks, landings, ramps, and erosion control/
stabilization measures.
   DIGITAL FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM). The digital official map of a
community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), on which
both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community are delineated.
   DISPOSAL. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(6), the discharge, deposit,
injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste into or on
any land or water so that the solid waste or any constituent part of the solid
waste may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into
any waters, including groundwaters.
   ELEVATED BUILDING. A non-basement building which has its lowest elevated
floor raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers,
pilings, or columns.
   ENCROACHMENT. The advance or infringement of uses, fill, excavation,
buildings, structures or development into a special flood hazard area, which
may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.
   EXISTING BUILDING and EXISTING STRUCTURE. Any building and/or structure for
which the start of construction commenced before August 5, 1985, the effective
date of the initial FIRM.
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK or MANUFACTURED HOME SUBDIVISION. A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities
for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) was
completed before August 5, 1985, the effective date of the initial floodplain
management regulations (Pamlico County) adopted by the community.
   FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM). An official map of a community,
issued by the FEMA, on which the special flood hazard areas and the floodways
are delineated. This official map is a supplement to and shall be used in
conjunction with the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM).
   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by
the FEMA, where the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas have been
defined as Zone A.
   FLOOD INSURANCE. The insurance coverage provided under the National Flood
Insurance Program.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM). An official map of a community, issued by
the FEMA, on which both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium
zones applicable to the community are delineated.    (See also DIGITAL FLOOD
INSURANCE RATE MAP (DFIRM))
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). An examination, evaluation, and determination
of flood hazards, corresponding water surface elevations (if appropriate),
flood hazard risk zones, and other flood data in a community issued by the
FEMA. The Flood Insurance Study report includes Flood Insurance Rate Maps
(FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), if published.
   FLOOD PRONE AREA. See FLOODPLAIN.
   FLOOD ZONE. A geographical area shown on a Flood Hazard Boundary Map or
Flood Insurance Rate Map that reflects the severity or type of flooding in the
area.
   FLOOD-RESISTANT MATERIAL. Any building product (material, component or
system) capable of withstanding direct and prolonged contact (minimum 72 hours)
with floodwaters without sustaining damage that requires more than low-cost
cosmetic repair. Any material that is water-soluble or is not resistant to
alkali or acid in water, including normal adhesives for above-grade use, is not
flood-resistant. Pressure-treated lumber or naturally decay-resistant lumbers
are acceptable flooring materials. Sheet-type flooring coverings that restrict
evaporation from below and materials that are impervious, but dimensionally
unstable are not acceptable. Materials that absorb or retain water excessively
after submergence are not flood-resistant. Please refer to Technical Bulletin
2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials Requirements, and available from the FEMA.
Class 4 and 5 materials, referenced therein, are acceptable flood-resistant
materials.
   FLOODPLAIN. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any
source.
   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR. The individual appointed to administer and enforce
the floodplain management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT. Any type of permit that is required in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, prior to the commencement of
any development activity.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and
preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing,
where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited
to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management
regulations, and open space plans.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. This chapter and other zoning ordinances,
subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose
ordinances, and other applications of police power. This term describes
federal, state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
   FLOODPROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitation facilities,
structures, and their contents.
   FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse, including the area
above a bridge or culvert when applicable, and the adjacent land areas that
must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
   FLOODWAY ENCROACHMENT ANALYSIS. An engineering analysis of the impact that a
proposed encroachment into a floodway or non-encroachment area is expected to
have on the floodway boundaries and flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge. The evaluation shall be prepared by a qualified North
Carolina licensed engineer using standard engineering methods and hydraulic
models meeting the minimum requirement of the National Flood Insurance Program.
   FREEBOARD. The height added to the BFE to account for the many unknown
factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height
calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave
action, blockage of bridge or culvert openings, storm surge or precipitation
exceeding the base flood, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the
watershed. The BFE plus the freeboard establishes the REGULATORY FLOOD
PROTECTION ELEVATION.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT FACILITY. A facility which cannot be used for its
intended purpose unless it is located in close proximity to water, limited to a
docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, shipbuilding, or ship repair. The term does not include long-term
storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITY. As defined in G.S. Chapter130A, Article
9, a facility for the collection, storage, processing, treatment, recycling,
recovery, or disposal of hazardous waste.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE (HAG). The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface, prior to construction, immediately next to the proposed walls of the
structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. 
      (1)   Any structure that is:
         (a)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places
(a listing maintained by the US Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
         (b)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district;
         (c)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic landmarks
in communities with a Certified Local Government (CLG) Program; or
         (d)   Certified as contributing to the historical significance of a
historic district designated by a community with a Certified Local Government
(CLG) Program.
      (2)   CERTIFIED LOCAL GOVERNMENT (CLG) PROGRAMS are approved by the US
Department of the Interior in cooperation with the North Carolina Department of
Cultural Resources through the State Historic Preservation Officer as having
met the requirements of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as
amended in 1980.
   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). An official determination issued by FEMA that
amends or revises an effective Flood Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance
Study. LETTERS OF MAP CHANGE include:
      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): An official amendment, by letter,
to an effective National Flood Insurance Program map. A LOMA is based on
technical data showing that a property had been inadvertently mapped as being
in the floodplain, but is actually on natural high ground above the base flood
elevation. A LOMA amends the current effective Flood Insurance Rate Map and
establishes that a specific property, portion of a property, or structure is
not located in a special flood hazard area.
      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): A revision based on technical data
that may show changes to flood zones, flood elevations, special flood hazard
area boundaries and floodway delineations, and other planimetric features.
      (3)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION BASED ON FILL (LOMR-F): A determination that
a structure or parcel of land has been elevated by fill above the BFE and is,
therefore, no longer located within the special flood hazard area. In order to
qualify for this determination, the fill must have been permitted and placed in
accordance with the community's floodplain management regulations.
      (4)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A formal review and
comment as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum NFIP
requirements for such projects with respect to delineation of special flood
hazard areas. A CLOMR does not revise the effective Flood
Insurance Rate Map or Flood Insurance Study; upon submission and approval of
certified as-built documentation, a Letter of Map Revision may be issued by
FEMA to revise the effective FIRM.
   LIGHT DUTY TRUCK. Any motor vehicle rated at 8,500 pounds gross vehicular
weight rating or less which has a vehicular curb weight of 6,000 pounds or less
and which has a basic vehicle frontal area of 45 square feet or less as defined
in 40 CFR 86.082-2 and is:
      (1)   Designed primarily for purposes of transportation of property or is
a derivation of such a vehicle, or
      (2)   Designed primarily for transportation of persons and has a capacity
of more than 12 persons; or
      (3)   Available with special features enabling off-street or off-highway
operation and use.
   LIMIT OF MODERATE WAVE ACTION (LiMWA). The boundary line given by FEMA on
coastal map studies marking the extents of Coastal A Zones (CAZ).
   LOWEST ADJACENT GRADE (LAG). The lowest elevation of the ground, sidewalk or
patio slab immediately next to the building, or deck support, after completion
of the building.
   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage in an area other than
a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
an enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
MANUFACTURED HOME does not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE.
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of
land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
   MAP REPOSITORY. The location of the official flood hazard data to be applied
for floodplain management. It is a central location in which flood data is
stored and managed; in North Carolina, FEMA has recognized that the application
of digital flood hazard data products carry the same authority as hard copy
products. Therefore, the NCEM's Floodplain Mapping Program websites house
current and historical flood hazard data. For effective flood hazard data, the
NC FRIS website (http://FRIS.NC.GOV/FRIS) is the map repository, and for
historical flood hazard data the FloodNC website (http://FLOODNC.GOV/NCFLOOD)
is the map repository.
   MARKET VALUE. The building value, not including the land value and that of
any accessory structures or other improvements on the lot. MARKET VALUE may be
established by independent certified appraisal; replacement cost depreciated
for age of building and quality of construction (actual cash value); or
adjusted tax assessed values.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION. Structures for which the start of construction commenced
on or after August 5, 1985, the effective date of the initial floodplain
management regulations (Pamlico County) and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   NON-ENCROACHMENT AREA (NEA). The channel of a river or other watercourse,
including the area above a bridge or culvert when applicable, and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without
cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot as
designated in the Flood Insurance Study report.
   OTHERWISE PROTECTED AREA (OPA). See COASTAL BARRIER RESOURCES SYSTEM (CBRS).
   POST-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred on or after August 5, 1985, the effective date of the
initial Flood Insurance Rate Map.
   PRE-FIRM. Construction or other development for which the start of
construction occurred before August 5, 1985, the effective date of the initial
Flood Insurance Rate Map.
   PRIMARY FRONTAL DUNE (PFD). A continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge
of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward
and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high
tides and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary
frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a
relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope.
   PRINCIPALLY ABOVE GROUND. At least 51% of the actual cash value of the
structure is above ground.
   PUBLIC SAFETY and/or NUISANCE. Anything which is injurious to the safety or
health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of
persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary
manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV). 
      (1)   A vehicle, which is:
         (a)   Built on a single chassis;
         (b)   400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection;
         (c)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light
duty truck;
         (d)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use,
and
         (e)   Is fully licensed and ready for highway use.
      (2)   For the purpose of this chapter, TINY HOMES/HOUSES and PARK MODELS
that do not meet the items listed above are not considered recreational
vehicles and should meet the standards of and be permitted as residential
structures.
   REFERENCE LEVEL. The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of
the lowest floor for structures within all special flood hazard areas.
   REGULATORY FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION. The base flood elevation plus the
freeboard. In special flood hazard areas where base flood elevations (BFEs)
have been determined, this elevation shall be the BFE plus four feet freeboard.
In special flood hazard areas where no BFE has been established, this elevation
shall be at least four feet above the highest adjacent grade.
   REMEDY A VIOLATION. To bring the structure or other development into
compliance with state and community floodplain management regulations, or, if
this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that
impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the
ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing federal
financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.
   RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
   SALVAGE YARD. Any non-residential property used for the storage, collection,
and/or recycling of any type of equipment, and including but not limited to
vehicles, appliances and related machinery.
   SAND DUNES. Naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds
landward of the beach.
   SHEAR WALL. Walls used for structural support but not structurally joined or
enclosed at the end (except by breakaway walls). Shear walls are parallel or
nearly parallel to the flow of the water.
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL FACILITY. Any facility involved in the disposal of
solid waste, as defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(35).
   SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL SITE. As defined in G.S. § 130A-290(a)(36), any place
at which solid wastes are disposed of by incineration, sanitary landfill, or
any other method.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA). The land in the floodplain subject to a 1%
or greater chance of being flooded in any given year, as determined in §
152.11.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION. Includes substantial improvement, and means the date
the building permit was issued provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of
excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and
filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor
does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as
dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building, a manufactured home, or a gas,
liquid, or liquefied gas storage tank that is principally above ground.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure during any
one-year period whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred. See definition of SUBSTANTIAL
IMPROVEMENT. SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE also means flood-related damage sustained by a
structure on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place
during any one-year period for which the cost equals or exceeds 50% of the
market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
      (1)   Any correction of existing violations of state or community health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the
community code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (2)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure and the alteration is approved by variance issued pursuant
to §
152.24.
   TECHNICAL BULLETIN AND TECHNICAL FACT SHEET. A FEMA publication that
provides guidance concerning the building performance standards of the NFIP,
which are contained in Title 44 of the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations at
Section 60.3. The bulletins and fact sheets are intended for use primarily by
state and local officials responsible for interpreting and enforcing NFIP
regulations and by members of the development community, such as design
professionals and builders. New bulletins, as well as updates of existing
bulletins, are issued periodically as needed. The bulletins do not create
regulations; rather they provide specific guidance for complying with the
minimum requirements of existing NFIP regulations.
   TEMPERATURE CONTROLLED. Having the temperature regulated by a heating and/or
cooling system, built-in or appliance.
   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter.
   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in §§
152.20 through
152.24 and 152.30 through 152.38 is presumed to be in violation until such time
as that documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION (WSE). The height, in relation to NAVD 1988, of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
   WATERCOURSE. A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, channel or other
topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically.
WATERCOURSE includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood
damage may occur.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.10 LANDS TO WHICH THIS CHAPTER APPLIES.
   This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Minnesott Beach, including extra-territorial
jurisdictions (ETJs) as allowed by law.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.11 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.
   The special flood hazard areas are those identified under the Cooperating
Technical State (CTS) agreement between the State of North Carolina and FEMA in
its FIS dated June 19, 2020 for Pamlico County and associated DFIRM panels,
including any digital data developed as part of the FIS, which are adopted by
reference and declared a part of this chapter, and all revisions thereto after
January 1, 2021. Future revisions to the FIS and DFIRM panels that do not
change flood hazard data within the jurisdictional authority of the town are
also adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. Subsequent
Letter of Map Revisions (LOMRs) and/or Physical Map Revisions (PMRs) shall be
adopted within three months.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.12 ESTABLISHMENT OF FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be required in conformance with the
provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development
activities within special flood hazard areas determined in accordance with the
provisions of §
152.11.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.13 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted,
altered, or developed in any way without full compliance with the terms of this
chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.14 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and
another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions
shall prevail.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.15 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall
be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.16 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
consideration. Larger floods can and will occur. Actual flood heights may be
increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land
outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will
be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability
on the part of the town or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 152.20 DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Mayor, hereinafter referred to as the Floodplain Administrator, or his/
her designee, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of
this chapter. In instances where the Floodplain Administrator receives
assistance from others to complete tasks to administer and implement this
chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall be responsible for the coordination
and community's overall compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program
and the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.21 FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT APPLICATION, PERMIT AND CERTIFICATION
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Application requirements. Application for a floodplain development
permit shall be made to the Floodplain Administrator prior to any development
activities located within special flood hazard areas. The following items shall
be presented to the Floodplain Administrator to apply for a floodplain
development permit:
      (1)   A plot plan drawn to scale which shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the following specific details of the proposed floodplain
development:
         (a)   The nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area of
development/ disturbance; existing and proposed structures, utility systems,
grading/pavement areas, fill materials, storage areas, drainage facilities, and
other development;
         (b)   The boundary of the special flood hazard area as delineated on
the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
152.11, or a statement that the entire lot is within the special flood hazard
area;
         (c)   Flood zone(s) designation of the proposed development area as
determined on the FIRM or other flood map as determined in §
152.11;
         (d)   The boundary of the floodway(s) or non-encroachment area(s) as
determined in §
152.11;
         (e)   The base flood elevation (BFE) where provided as set forth in §§
542.11, 152.22 or 152.32;
         (f)   The old and new location of any watercourse that will be altered
or relocated as a result of proposed development; and
         (g)   The boundary and designation date of the Coastal Barrier
Resource System (CBRS) area or otherwise protected areas (OPA), if applicable.
      (2)   Proposed elevation, and method thereof, of all development within a
special flood hazard area including but not limited to:
         (a)   Elevation in relation to NAVD 1988 of the proposed reference
level (including basement) of all structures;
         (b)   Elevation in relation to NAVD 1988 to which any non-residential
structure in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99 will be floodproofed; and
         (c)   Elevation in relation to NAVD 1988 to which any proposed utility
systems will be elevated or floodproofed.
      (3)   If floodproofing, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-34)
with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and maintenance
plan that include, but are not limited to, installation, exercise, and
maintenance of floodproofing measures.
      (4)   A foundation plan, drawn to scale, which shall include details of
the proposed foundation system to ensure all provisions of this chapter are
met. These details include but are not limited to:
         (a)   The proposed method of elevation, if applicable (i.e., fill,
solid foundation perimeter wall, solid backfilled foundation, open foundation
on columns/posts/piers/piles/shear walls); and
         (b)   Openings to facilitate automatic equalization of hydrostatic
flood forces on walls in accordance with §
152.31(D)(3) when solid foundation perimeter walls are used in Zones A, AE, AH,
AO, A99.
         (c)   The following, in coastal high hazard areas, in accordance with
the provisions of §§
152.31(D)(4) and 152.35 and (§
152.36 if applicable):
            1.   V-Zone Certification with accompanying plans and
specifications verifying the engineered structure and any breakaway wall
designs; in addition, prior to the certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance, a registered professional engineer or architect shall certify the
finished construction is compliant with the design, specifications and plans
for VE Zone construction.
            2.   Plans for open wood latticework or insect screening, if
applicable; and
            3.   Plans for non-structural fill, if applicable. If non-
structural fill is proposed, it must be demonstrated through coastal
engineering analysis that the proposed fill would not result in any increase in
the BFE or otherwise cause adverse impacts by wave ramping and deflection on to
the subject structure or adjacent properties.
      (5)   Usage details of any enclosed areas below the lowest floor.
      (6)   Plans and/or details for the protection of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems to be located and
constructed to minimize flood damage.
      (7)   Certification that all other local, state and federal permits
required prior to floodplain development permit issuance have been received.
      (8)   Documentation for placement of recreational vehicles and/or
temporary structures, when applicable, to ensure that the provisions of §
152.31(F) and (G) are met.
      (9)   A description of proposed watercourse alteration or relocation,
when applicable, including an engineering report on the effects of the proposed
project on the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse and the effects to
properties located both upstream and downstream; and a map (if not shown on
plot plan) showing the location of the proposed watercourse alteration or
relocation.
   (B)   Permit requirements. The floodplain development permit shall include,
but not be limited to:
      (1)   A complete description of all the development to be permitted under
the floodplain development permit (e.g. house, garage, pool, septic, bulkhead,
cabana, pier, bridge, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations, or storage of equipment or materials, etc.).
      (2)   The special flood hazard area determination for the proposed
development in accordance with available data specified in §
152.11.
      (3)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
reference level and all attendant utilities.
      (4)   The regulatory flood protection elevation required for the
protection of all public utilities.
      (5)   All certification submittal requirements with timelines.
      (6)   A statement that no fill material or other development shall
encroach into the floodway or non-encroachment area of any watercourse unless
the requirements of §
152.34 have been met.
      (7)   The flood openings requirements, if in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99.
      (8)   Limitations of below BFE enclosure uses (i.e., parking, building
access and limited storage only).
      (9)   A statement, if in Zone VE, that there shall be no alteration of
sand dunes which would increase potential flood damage.
      (10)   A statement, if in Zone VE, that there shall be no fill used for
structural support.
      (11)    A statement, that all materials below BFE/RFPE must be flood
resistant materials.
   (C)   Certification requirements.
      (1)   Elevation certificates.
         (a)   An Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33) is required prior
to the actual start of any new construction. It shall be the duty of the permit
holder to submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the
elevation of the reference level, in relation to NAVD 1988. The Floodplain
Administrator shall review the certificate data submitted. Deficiencies
detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder prior to the
beginning of construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure to
make required corrections shall be cause to deny a floodplain development
permit.
         (b)   An Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form 086-0-33) is required after
the reference level is established. Within seven calendar days of establishment
of the reference level elevation, it shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the elevation of the
reference level, in relation to NAVD 1988. Any work done within the seven-day
calendar period and prior to submission of the certification shall be at the
permit holder's risk. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate
data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to further work being permitted to proceed.
Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections
shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project.
         (c)   A final Finished Construction Elevation Certificate (FEMA Form
086-0-33) is required after construction is completed and prior to certificate
of compliance/occupancy issuance. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a certification of final as-built
construction of the elevation of the reference level and all attendant
utilities. The Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data
submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the
permit holder immediately and prior to certificate of compliance/occupancy
issuance. In some instances, another certification may be required to certify
corrected as-built construction. Failure to submit the certification or failure
to make required corrections shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy. The Finished Construction Elevation
Certificate certifier shall provide at least two photographs showing the front
and rear of the building taken within 90 days from the date of certification.
The photographs must be taken with views confirming the building description
and diagram number provided in this chapter. To the extent possible, these
photographs should show the entire building including foundation. If the
building has split-level or multi-level areas, provide at least two additional
photographs showing side views of the building. In addition, when applicable,
provide a photograph of the foundation showing a representative example of the
flood openings or vents. All photographs must be in color and measure at least
three inches by three inches. Digital photographs are acceptable.
      (2)   Floodproofing certificate.
         (a)   If non-residential floodproofing is used to meet the regulatory
flood protection elevation requirements, a Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA Form
086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection and
maintenance plan are required prior to the actual start of any new
construction. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to the
Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design elevation
of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to NAVD 1988.
Floodproofing certification shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational
plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such
review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to permit approval. Failure to
submit the certification or failure to make required corrections shall be cause
to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in accordance
with the certified design shall be cause to withhold the issuance of a
certificate of compliance/occupancy.
         (b)   A final Finished Construction Floodproofing Certificate (FEMA
Form 086-0-34), with supporting data, an operational plan, and an inspection
and maintenance plan are required prior to the issuance of a certificate of
compliance/occupancy. It shall be the duty of the permit holder to submit to
the Floodplain Administrator a certification of the floodproofed design
elevation of the reference level and all attendant utilities, in relation to
NAVD 1988. Floodproofing certificate shall be prepared by or under the direct
supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. The
Floodplain Administrator shall review the certificate data, the operational
plan, and the inspection and maintenance plan. Deficiencies detected by such
review shall be corrected by the applicant prior to certificate of occupancy.
Failure to submit the certification or failure to make required corrections
shall be cause to deny a floodplain development permit. Failure to construct in
accordance with the certified design shall be cause to deny a certificate of
compliance/occupancy.
      (3)   If a manufactured home is placed within Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99
and the elevation of the chassis is more than 36 inches in height above grade,
an engineered foundation certification is required in accordance with the
provisions of §
152.31(C)(2).
      (4)   If a watercourse is to be altered or relocated, a description of
the extent of watercourse alteration or relocation; a professional engineer's
certified report on the effects of the proposed project on the flood-carrying
capacity of the watercourse and the effects to properties located both upstream
and downstream; and a map showing the location of the proposed watercourse
alteration or relocation shall all be submitted by the permit applicant prior
to issuance of a floodplain development permit.
      (5)   Certification exemptions. The following structures, if located
within Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99, are exempt from the elevation/floodproofing
certification requirements specified in divisions (C)(1) and (2) above:
         (a)   Recreational vehicles meeting requirements of §
152.31(F)(1);
         (b)   Temporary structures meeting requirements of §
152.31(G); and
         (c)   Accessory structures that are 150 square feet or less or $5,000
or less and meeting requirements of §
152.31(H).
      (6)   A V-Zone Certification with accompanying design plans and
specifications is required prior to issuance of a floodplain development permit
within coastal high hazard areas. It shall be the duty of the permit applicant
to submit to the Floodplain Administrator said certification to ensure the
design standards of this ordinance are met. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop or review the structural design, plans, and
specifications for construction and certify that the design and methods of
construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice
for meeting the provisions of this chapter. This certification is not a
substitute for an elevation certificate. In addition, prior to the certificate
of compliance/occupancy issuance, a registered professional engineer or
architect shall certify the finished construction is compliant with the design,
specifications and plans for VE Zone construction.
   (D)   Determinations for existing buildings and structures. For applications
for building permits to improve buildings and structures, including
alterations, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, change of occupancy,
additions, rehabilitations, renovations, substantial improvements, repairs of
substantial damage, and any other improvement of or work on such buildings and
structures, the Floodplain Administrator, in coordination with the Building
Official, shall:
      (1)   Estimate the market value, or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building or structure before the start of construction of the proposed
work; in the case of repair, the market value of the building or structure
shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any repairs are
made;
      (2)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair a
damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building or
structure;
      (3)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage; and
      (4)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work constitutes
substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that compliance
with the flood resistant construction requirements of the NC Building Code and
this ordinance is required.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.22 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall perform, but not be limited to, the
following duties.
   (A)   Review all floodplain development applications and issue permits for
all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to assure that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied.
   (B)   Review all proposed development within special flood hazard areas to
assure that all necessary local, state and federal permits have been received,
including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
   (C)   Notify adjacent communities and the North Carolina Department of
Public Safety, Division of Emergency Management, State Coordinator for the
National Flood Insurance Program prior to any alteration or relocation of a
watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA).
   (D)   Assure that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated
portion of said watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is maintained.
   (E)   Prevent encroachments into floodways and non-encroachment areas unless
the certification and flood hazard reduction provisions of §
152.34 are met.
   (F)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to NAVD 1988) of the reference
level (including basement) and all attendant utilities of all new and
substantially improved structures, in accordance with the provisions of §
152.21(C).
   (G)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to NAVD 1988) to which all new
and substantially improved structures and utilities have been floodproofed, in
accordance with the provisions of §
152.21(C).
   (H)   Obtain actual elevation (in relation to NAVD 1988) of all public
utilities in accordance with the provisions of §
152.21(C).
   (I)   When floodproofing is utilized for a particular structure, obtain
certifications from a registered professional engineer or architect in
accordance with the provisions of §§
152.21(C) and 152.31(B).
   (J)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries
of the special flood hazard areas, floodways, or non-encroachment areas (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), make the necessary interpretation. The person
contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to appeal the interpretation as provided in this subchapter.
   (K)   When BFE data has not been provided in accordance with the provisions
of §
152.11, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any BFE data, along with
floodway data or non-encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or
other source, including data developed pursuant to §
152.32(B)(3), in order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   (L)   When BFE data is provided but no floodway or non-encroachment area
data has been provided in accordance with the provisions of §
152.11, obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any floodway data or non-
encroachment area data available from a federal, state, or other source in
order to administer the provisions of this chapter.
   (M)   When the lowest floor and the lowest adjacent grade of a structure or
the lowest ground elevation of a parcel in a special flood hazard area is above
the BFE, advise the property owner of the option to apply for a Letter of Map
Amendment (LOMA) from FEMA. However, if the property is to be removed from the
V Zone it must not be located seaward of the landward toe of the primary
frontal dune. Maintain a copy of the LOMA issued by FEMA in the floodplain
development permit file.
   (N)   Permanently maintain all records that pertain to the administration of
this chapter and make these records available for public inspection,
recognizing that such information may be subject to the Privacy Act of 1974, as
amended.
   (O)   Make on-site inspections of work in progress. As the work pursuant to
a floodplain development permit progresses, the Floodplain Administrator shall
make as many inspections of the work as may be necessary to ensure that the
work is being done according to the provisions of the local ordinance and the
terms of the permit. In exercising this power, the Floodplain Administrator has
a right, upon presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises
within the jurisdiction of the community at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
   (P)   Issue stop-work orders as required. Whenever a building or part
thereof is being constructed, reconstructed, altered, or repaired in violation
of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator may order the work to be
immediately stopped. The stop-work order shall be in writing and directed to
the person
doing or in charge of the work. The stop-work order shall state the specific
work to be stopped, the specific reason(s) for the stoppage, and the condition
(s) under which the work may be resumed. Violation of a stop-work order
constitutes a misdemeanor.
   (Q)   Revoke floodplain development permits as required. The Floodplain
Administrator may revoke and require the return of the floodplain development
permit in accordance with G.S. § 160D-403(f) by notifying the permit holder in
writing stating the reason(s) for the revocation. Permits shall be revoked for
any substantial departure from the approved application, plans, and
specifications; for refusal or failure to comply with the requirements of state
or local laws; or for false statements or misrepresentations made in securing
the permit. Any floodplain development permit mistakenly issued in violation of
an applicable state or local law may also be revoked.
   (R)   Make periodic inspections throughout the special flood hazard areas
within the jurisdiction of the community. The Floodplain Administrator and each
member of his or her inspections department shall have a right, upon
presentation of proper credentials, to enter on any premises within the
territorial jurisdiction of the department at any reasonable hour for the
purposes of inspection or other enforcement action.
   (S)   Follow through with corrective procedures of §
152.23
   (T)   Review, provide input, and make recommendations for variance requests.
   (U)   Maintain a current map repository to include, but not limited to,
historical and effective FIS Report, historical and effective FIRM and other
official flood maps and studies adopted in accordance with the provisions of §
152.11, including any revisions thereto including Letters of Map Change, issued
by FEMA. Notify state and FEMA of mapping needs.
   (V)   Coordinate revisions to FIS reports and FIRMs, including Letters of
Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-Fs) and Letters of Map Revision (LOMRs).
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020; Ord. passed 7-6-2022)
§ 152.23 CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Violations to be corrected. When the Floodplain Administrator finds
violations of applicable state and local laws, it shall be his or her duty to
notify the owner or occupant of the building of the violation. The owner or
occupant shall immediately remedy each of the violations of law cited in such
notification.
   (B)   Actions in event of failure to take corrective action.  If the owner
of a building or property shall fail to take prompt corrective action, the
Floodplain Administrator shall give the owner written notice, by certified or
registered mail to the owner's last known address or by personal service,
stating:
      (1)   That the building or property is in violation of the floodplain
management regulations;
      (2)   That a hearing will be held before the Floodplain Administrator at
a designated place and time, not later than ten days after the date of the
notice, at which time the owner shall be entitled to be heard in person or by
counsel and to present arguments and evidence pertaining to the matter; and
      (3)   That following the hearing, the Floodplain Administrator may issue
an order to alter, vacate, or demolish the building; or to remove fill as
applicable.
   (C)   Order to take corrective action. If, upon a hearing held pursuant to
the notice prescribed above, the Floodplain Administrator shall find that the
building or development is in violation of this chapter, he or she shall issue
an order in writing to the owner, requiring the owner to remedy the violation
within a specified time period, not less than 60 calendar days, nor more than
least 180 calendar days. Where the Floodplain Administrator finds that there is
imminent danger to life or other property, he or she may order that corrective
action be taken in such lesser period as may be feasible.
   (D)   Appeal. Any owner who has received an order to take corrective action
may appeal the order to the local elected governing body by giving notice of
appeal in writing to the Floodplain Administrator and the clerk within ten days
following issuance of the final order. In the absence of an appeal, the order
of the Floodplain Administrator shall be final. The local governing body shall
hear an appeal within a reasonable time and may affirm, modify and affirm, or
revoke the order.
   (E)   Failure to comply with order. If the owner of a building or property
fails to comply with an order to take corrective action for which no appeal has
been made or fails to comply with an order of the governing body following an
appeal, the owner shall be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor pursuant to G.S. §
143-215.58 and shall be punished at the discretion of the court.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.24 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Board of Commissioners as established by the town, hereinafter
referred to as the "Appeal Board", shall hear and decide requests for variances
from the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Board may appeal
such decision to the Court, as provided in G.S. Chapter 7A.
   (C)   Variances may be issued for:
      (1)   The repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon the
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure and that the variance
is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure;
      (2)   Functionally dependent facilities if determined to meet the
definition as stated in §
152.05, provided provisions of division (I)(2), (3) and (5) of this section
have been satisfied, and such facilities are protected by methods that minimize
flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public
safety; or
      (3)   Any other type of development provided it meets the requirements of
this section.
   (D)   In passing upon variances, the appeal board shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, all standards specified in other
sections of this chapter, and:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location as defined
under §
152.05 as a functionally dependent facility, where applicable;
      (6)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (E)   A written report addressing each of the above factors shall be
submitted with the application for a variance.
   (F)   Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of
this chapter, the Appeal Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes and objectives of this
chapter.
   (G)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice specifying the difference between the BFE and the elevation to which the
structure is to be built and that such construction below the BFE increases
risks to life and property, and that the issuance of a variance to construct a
structure below the BFE may result in increased premium rates for flood
insurance up to $25 per $100 of insurance coverage. Such notification shall be
maintained with a record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance.
   (H)   The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal
actions and report any variances to the FEMA and the State of North Carolina
upon request.
   (I)   Conditions for variances:
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued when the variance will make the
structure in violation of other federal, state, or local laws, regulations, or
ordinances.
      (2)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway or
non-encroachment area if the variance would result in any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge.
      (3)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (4)   Variances shall only be issued prior to development permit
approval.
      (5)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship; and
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
   (J)   A variance may be issued for solid waste disposal facilities or sites,
hazardous waste management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage
facilities that are located in special flood hazard areas provided that all of
the following conditions are met.
      (1)   The use serves a critical need in the community.
      (2)   No feasible location exists for the use outside the special flood
hazard area.
      (3)   The reference level of any structure is elevated or floodproofed to
at least the regulatory flood protection elevation.
      (4)   The use complies with all other applicable federal, state and local
laws.
      (5)   The town has notified the Secretary of the North Carolina
Department of Public Safety of its intention to grant a variance at least 30
calendar days prior to granting the variance.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 152.30 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas, the following provisions are required:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be designed
(or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement of the structure.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage in accordance
with the FEMA Technical Bulletin 2, Flood Damage-Resistant Materials
Requirements.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damages.
   (D)   All new electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service equipment shall be located at or above the RFPE or
designed and installed to prevent water from entering or accumulating within
the components during the occurrence of the base flood. These include, but are
not limited to, HVAC equipment, water softener units, bath/kitchen fixtures,
ductwork, electric/gas meter panels/boxes, utility/cable boxes, water heaters,
and electric outlets/switches.
      (1)   Replacements part of a substantial improvement, electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning equipment, and other service
equipment shall also meet the above provisions.
      (2)   Replacements that are for maintenance and not part of a substantial
improvement, may be installed at the original location provided the addition
and/or improvements only comply with the standards for new construction
consistent with the code and requirements for the original structure.
   (E)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
   (F)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and
discharges from the systems into flood waters.
   (G)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to
avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
   (H)   Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the repair, reconstruction, or
replacement of a building or structure existing on the effective date of this
chapter and located totally or partially within the floodway, non-encroachment
area, or stream setback, provided there is no additional encroachment below the
regulatory flood protection elevation in the floodway, non-encroachment area,
or stream setback, and provided that such repair, reconstruction, or
replacement meets all of the other requirements of this chapter.
   (I)   New solid waste disposal facilities and sites, hazardous waste
management facilities, salvage yards, and chemical storage facilities shall not
be permitted, except by variance as specified in §
152.24(J). A structure or tank for chemical or fuel storage incidental to an
allowed use or to the operation of a water treatment plant or wastewater
treatment facility may be located in a special flood hazard area only if the
structure or tank is either elevated or floodproofed to at least the regulatory
flood protection elevation and certified in accordance with the provisions of §
152.21(C).
   (J)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall be
consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.
   (K)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
   (L)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
   (M)   All subdivision proposals and other development proposals shall have
received all necessary permits from those governmental agencies for which
approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334.
   (N)   When a structure is partially located in a special flood hazard area,
the entire structure shall meet the requirements for new construction and
substantial improvements.
   (O)   When a structure is located in multiple flood hazard zones or in a
flood hazard risk zone with multiple base flood elevations, the provisions for
the more restrictive flood hazard risk zone and the highest BFE shall apply.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.31 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all special flood hazard areas where BFE data has been provided, as set
forth in §§
152.11 or
152.32, the following provisions, in addition to the provisions of §
152.30, are required:
   (A)   Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement
of any residential structure (including manufactured homes) shall have the
reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
152.05.
   (B)   Non-residential construction. New construction and substantial
improvement of any commercial, industrial, or other non-residential structure
shall have the reference level, including basement, elevated no lower than the
regulatory flood protection elevation, as defined in §
152.05. Structures located in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99 may be floodproofed to
the regulatory flood protection elevation in lieu of elevation provided that
all areas of the structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, below the regulatory flood protection elevation are watertight with
walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, using structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads and the effect of buoyancy. For AO Zones, the floodproofing elevation
shall be in accordance with §
152.37(B). A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that
the floodproofing standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such
certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator as set forth in
§
152.21(C), along with the operational plan and the inspection and maintenance
plan.
   (C)   Manufactured homes.
      (1)   New and replacement manufactured homes shall be elevated so that
the reference level of the manufactured home is no lower than the regulatory
flood protection elevation, as defined in §
152.05.    
      (2)   Manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, either
by certified engineered foundation system, or in accordance with the most
current edition of the State of North Carolina Regulations for Manufactured
Homes adopted by the Commissioner of Insurance pursuant to G.S. § 143-143.15.
Additionally, when
the elevation would be met by an elevation of the chassis 36 inches or less
above the grade at the site, the chassis shall be supported by reinforced piers
or engineered foundation. When the elevation of the chassis is above 36 inches
in height, an engineering certification is required.
      (3)   All enclosures or skirting below the lowest floor shall meet the
requirements of division (D) of this section.
      (4)   An evacuation plan must be developed for evacuation of all
residents of all new, substantially improved or substantially damaged
manufactured home parks or subdivisions located within flood prone areas. This
plan shall be filed with and approved by the Floodplain Administrator and the
local Emergency Management Coordinator.
   (D)   Elevated buildings. Fully enclosed area, of new construction and
substantially improved structures, which is below the lowest floor or below the
lowest horizontal structural member in VE zones:
      (1)   Shall not be designed or used for human habitation, but shall only
be used for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of
maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. Access to the
enclosed area shall be the minimum necessary to allow for parking of vehicles
(garage door) or limited storage of maintenance equipment (standard exterior
door), or entry to the living area (stairway or elevator). The interior portion
of such enclosed area shall not be finished or partitioned into separate rooms,
except to enclose storage areas;
      (2)    Shall be constructed entirely of flood resistant materials at
least to the regulatory flood protection elevation; and
      (3)   Shall include, in Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A99 flood openings to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the
entry and exit of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must
either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed
the following minimum design criteria:
         (a)   A minimum of two flood openings on different sides of each
enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (b)   The total net area of all flood openings must be at least one
square inch for each square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;
         (c)   If a building has more than one enclosed area, each enclosed
area must have flood openings to allow floodwaters to automatically enter and
exit;
         (d)   The bottom of all required flood openings shall be no higher
than one foot above the higher of the interior or exterior adjacent grade;
         (e)   Flood openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in
both directions; and
         (f)   Enclosures made of flexible skirting are not considered
enclosures for regulatory purposes, and, therefore, do not require flood
openings. Masonry or wood underpinning, regardless of structural status, is
considered an enclosure and requires flood openings as outlined above;
      (4)   Shall, in coastal high hazard areas (Zone VE), meet the
requirements of §
152.35.
   (E)   Additions/improvements.
      (1)   Additions and/or improvements to pre-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
must be designed to minimize flood damages and must not be any more non-
conforming than the existing structure;
         (b)   A substantial improvement, with modifications/rehabilitations/
improvements to the existing structure or the common wall is structurally
modified more than installing a doorway, both the existing structure and the
addition must comply with the standards for new construction.
      (2)   Additions to pre-FIRM or post-FIRM structures that are a
substantial improvement with no modifications/rehabilitations/improvements to
the existing structure other than a standard door in the common wall, shall
require only the addition to comply with the standards for new construction.
      (3)   Additions and/or improvements to post-FIRM structures when the
addition and/or improvements in combination with any interior modifications to
the existing structure are:
         (a)   Not a substantial improvement, the addition and/or improvements
only must comply with the standards for new construction consistent with the
code and requirements for the original structure;
         (b)   A substantial improvement, both the existing structure and the
addition and/or improvements must comply with the standards for new
construction.
      (4)   Any combination of repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition
or improvement of a building or structure taking place during a one- year
period, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value
of the structure before the improvement or repair is started must comply with
the standards for new construction. For each building or structure, the one-
year period begins on the date of the first improvement or repair of that
building or structure subsequent to the effective date of this chapter.
Substantial damage also means flood-related damage sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of
each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred. If the structure has
sustained substantial damage, any repairs are considered substantial
improvement regardless of the actual repair work performed. The requirement
does not, however, include either:
         (a)   Any project for improvement of a building required to correct
existing health, sanitary or safety code violations identified by the building
official and that are the minimum necessary to assume safe living conditions.
         (b)   Any alteration of a historic structure provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.
   (F)   Recreational vehicles. Recreational vehicles shall either:
      (1)   Temporary placement:
         (a)   Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
         (b)   Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. (A recreational
vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is
attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities, and has no
permanently attached additions.)
      (2)   Permanent placement. Recreational vehicles that do not meet the
limitations of temporary placement shall meet all the requirements for new
construction.
   (G)   Temporary non-residential structures. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit for a temporary structure, the applicant must
submit to the Floodplain Administrator a plan for the removal of such structure
(s) in the event of a hurricane, flash flood or other type of flood warning
notification. The following information shall be submitted in writing to the
Floodplain Administrator for review and written approval:
      (1)   A specified time period for which the temporary use will be
permitted. Time specified may not exceed three months, renewable up to one
year;
      (2)   The name, address, and phone number of the individual responsible
for the removal of the temporary structure;
      (3)   The time frame prior to the event at which a structure will be
removed (i.e., minimum of 72 hours before landfall of a hurricane or
immediately upon flood warning notification);
      (4)   A copy of the contract or other suitable instrument with the entity
responsible for physical removal of the structure; and
      (5)   Designation, accompanied by documentation, of a location outside
the special flood hazard area, to which the temporary structure will be moved.
   (H)   Accessory structures.
      (1)   When accessory structures (sheds, detached garages, etc.) are to be
placed within a special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met:
         (a)   Accessory structures shall not be used for human habitation
(including working, sleeping, living, cooking or restroom areas);
         (b)   Accessory structures shall not be temperature-controlled;
         (c)   Accessory structures shall be designed to have low flood damage
potential;
         (d)   Accessory structures shall be constructed and placed on the
building site so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
         (e)   Accessory structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance with
the provisions of §
152.30(A);
         (f)   Accessory structures, regardless of the size or cost, shall not
be placed below elevated buildings in V and VE Zones;
         (g)   All service facilities such as electrical shall be installed in
accordance with the provisions of §
152.30(D); and
         (h)   Flood openings to facilitate automatic equalization of
hydrostatic flood forces shall be provided below regulatory flood protection
elevation in conformance with the provisions of division (D)(3) of this
section.
      (2)   An accessory structure with a footprint less than 150 square feet
or that is a minimal investment of $5,000 or less and satisfies the criteria
outlined above is not required to meet the elevation or floodproofing standards
of division (B) of this section. Elevation or floodproofing certifications are
required for all other accessory structures in accordance with §
152.21(C).
   (I)   Tanks. When gas and liquid storage tanks are to be placed within a
special flood hazard area, the following criteria shall be met:
      (1)   Underground tanks. Underground tanks in flood hazard areas shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads during conditions of the design flood,
including the effects of buoyancy assuming the tank is empty;
      (2)   Above-ground tanks, elevated. Above-ground tanks in flood hazard
areas shall be elevated to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation
on a supporting structure that is designed to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement during conditions of the design flood. Tank-supporting
structures shall meet the foundation requirements of the applicable flood
hazard area;
      (3)   Above-ground tanks, not elevated. Above-ground tanks that do not
meet the elevation requirements of division (B) of this section shall not be
permitted in V or VE Zones. Tanks may be permitted in other flood hazard areas
provided the tanks are designed, constructed, installed, and anchored to resist
all flood-related and other loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during
conditions of the design flood and without release of contents in the
floodwaters or infiltration by floodwaters into the tanks. Tanks shall be
designed, constructed, installed, and anchored to resist the potential buoyant
and other flood forces acting on an empty tank during design flood conditions.
      (4)   Tank inlets and vents. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets and
vents shall be:
         (a)   At or above the regulatory flood protection elevation or fitted
with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater or outflow of the
contents of the tanks during conditions of the design flood; and
         (b)   Anchored to prevent lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic
and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy, during conditions of
the design flood.
   (J)   Other development.
      (1)   Fences in regulated floodways and NEAs that have the potential to
block the passage of floodwaters, such as stockade fences and wire mesh fences,
shall meet the limitations of §
152.34.
      (2)   Retaining walls, sidewalks and driveways in regulated floodways and
NEAs. Retaining walls and sidewalks and driveways that involve the placement of
fill in regulated floodways shall meet the limitations of §
152.34.
      (3)   Roads and watercourse crossings in regulated floodways and NEAs.
Roads and watercourse crossings, including roads, bridges, culverts, low-water
crossings and similar means for vehicles or pedestrians to travel from one side
of a watercourse to the other side, that encroach into regulated floodways
shall meet the limitations of §
152.34.
      (4)   Commercial storage facilities are not considered limited storage as
noted in this chapter, and shall protected to the regulatory flood protection
elevation as required for commercial structures.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.32 STANDARDS FOR FLOODPLAINS WITHOUT ESTABLISHED BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS.
   Within the special flood hazard areas designated as Approximate Zone A and
established in §
152.11, where no BFE data has been provided by FEMA, the following provisions,
in addition to the provisions of §
152.30, shall apply:
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements or new development shall be permitted within a distance of 20 feet
each side from top of bank or five times the width of the stream, whichever is
greater, unless certification with supporting technical data by a registered
professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachments shall
not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
   (B)   The BFE used in determining the regulatory flood protection elevation
shall be determined based on the following criteria:
      (1)   When BFE data is available from other sources, all new construction
and substantial improvements within such areas shall also comply with all
applicable provisions of this chapter and shall be elevated or floodproofed in
accordance with standards in §§
152.30 and
152.31.
      (2)   When floodway or non-encroachment data is available from a federal,
state, or other source, all new construction and substantial improvements
within floodway and non-encroachment areas shall also comply with the
requirements of §§
152.31 and
152.34.
      (3)   All subdivision, manufactured home park and other development
proposals shall provide BFE data if development is greater than five acres or
has more than 50 lots/manufactured home sites. Such BFE data shall be adopted
by reference in accordance with §
152.11 and utilized in implementing this chapter.
      (4)   When BFE data is not available from a federal, state, or other
source as outlined above, the reference level shall be elevated or floodproofed
(nonresidential) to or above the regulatory flood protection elevation, as
defined in §
152.05. All other applicable provisions of §
152.31 shall also apply.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.33 STANDARDS FOR RIVERINE FLOODPLAINS WITH BASE FLOOD ELEVATIONS BUT
WITHOUT ESTABLISHED FLOODWAYS OR NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   Along rivers and streams where BFE data is provided by FEMA or is available
from another source but neither floodway nor non-encroachment areas are
identified for a special flood hazard area on the FIRM or in the FIS report,
the following requirements shall apply to all development within such areas:
   (A)   Standards of §§
152.30 and
152.31; and
   (B)   Until a regulatory floodway or non-encroachment area is designated, no
encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, or
other development, shall be permitted unless certification with supporting
technical data by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating
that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all
other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.34 FLOODWAYS AND NON-ENCROACHMENT AREAS.
   Areas designated as floodways or non-encroachment areas are located within
the special flood hazard areas established in §
152.11. The floodways and non-encroachment areas are extremely hazardous areas
due to the velocity of floodwaters that have erosion potential and carry debris
and potential projectiles. The following provisions, in addition to standards
outlined in §§
152.30 and
152.31, shall apply to all development within such areas:
   (A)   No encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments shall be permitted unless:
      (1)   It is demonstrated that the proposed encroachment would not result
in any increase in the flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood
discharge, based on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance
with standard engineering practice and presented to the Floodplain
Administrator prior to issuance of floodplain development permit; or
      (2)   A Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) has been approved by
FEMA. A Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) must also be obtained within six months
of completion of the proposed encroachment.
   (B)   If division (A) of this section is satisfied, all development shall
comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Manufactured homes may be permitted provided the following provisions
are met:
      (1)   The anchoring and the elevation standards of §
152.31(C); and
      (2)   The encroachment standards of division (A) of this section.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.35 COASTAL HIGH HAZARD AREA (ZONE VE).
   Coastal high hazard areas are special flood hazard areas established in §
152.11, and designated as Zones VE. These areas have special flood hazards
associated with high velocity waters from storm surges or seismic activity and,
therefore, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
following provisions in addition to the provisions of §§
152.30 and
152.31:
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall:
      (1)   Be located landward of the reach of mean high tide;
      (2)   Comply with all applicable CAMA setback requirements.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated so
that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
(excluding pilings or columns) is no lower than the regulatory flood protection
elevation. Floodproofing shall not be utilized on any structures in coastal
high hazard areas to satisfy the regulatory flood protection elevation
requirements.
   (C)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space
below the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
either be free of obstruction or constructed with breakaway walls, open wood
latticework or insect screening, provided they are not part of the structural
support of the building and are designed so as to breakaway, under abnormally
high tides or wave action without causing damage to the elevated portion of the
building or supporting foundation system or otherwise jeopardizing the
structural integrity of the building. The following design specifications shall
be met:
      (1)   Material shall consist of open wood or plastic lattice having at
least 40% of its area open, or
      (2)   Insect screening; or
      (3)   Breakaway walls shall meet the following design specifications:
         (a)   Breakaway walls shall have flood openings that allow for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters to minimize damage caused by
hydrostatic loads, per §
152.31(D)(3)(a)-(f); and
         (b)   Design safe loading resistance shall be not less than 10 nor
more than 20 pounds per square foot; or
         (c)   Breakaway walls that exceed a design safe loading resistance of
20 pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by state or
local codes) shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the breakaway wall will collapse from a water load less than
that
which would occur during the base flood event, and the elevated portion of the
building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water
loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and non-
structural). The water loading values used shall be those associated with the
base flood. The wind loading values used shall be those required by the North
Carolina State Building Code.
   (D)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be securely
anchored to pile or column foundations. All pilings and columns and the
structure attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and
lateral movement due to the effect of wind and water loads acting
simultaneously on all building components.
      (1)   Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base
flood.
      (2)   Wind loading values used shall be those required by the current
edition of the North Carolina State Building Code.
   (E)   For concrete pads, including patios, decks, parking pads, walkways,
driveways, pool decks, etc. the following is required:
      (1)   Shall be structurally independent of the primary structural
foundation system of the structure and shall not adversely affect structures
through redirection of floodwaters or debris; and
      (2)    Shall be constructed to breakaway cleanly during design flood
conditions, shall be frangible, and shall not produce debris capable of causing
damage to any structure. (The installation of concrete in small segments
(approximately four feet x four feet) that will easily break up during the base
flood event, or score concrete in four feet x four feet maximum segments is
acceptable to meet this standard); and
      (3)   Reinforcing, including welded wire fabric, shall not be used in
order to minimize the potential for concreted pads being a source of debris;
and
      (4)   Pad thickness shall not exceed four inches; or
      (5)   Provide a design professional's certification stating the design
and method of construction to be used meet the applicable criteria of this
section.
   (F)   For swimming pools and spas, the following is required:
      (1)   Be designed to withstand all flood-related loads and load
combinations.
      (2)   Be elevated so that the lowest horizontal structural member is
elevated above the RFPE; or
      (3)   Be designed and constructed to break away during design flood
conditions without producing debris capable of causing damage to any structure;
or
      (4)   Be sited to remain in the ground during design flood conditions
without obstructing flow that results in damage to any structure.
      (5)   Registered design professionals must certify to local officials
that a pool or spa beneath or near a VE Zone building will not be subject to
flotation or displacement that will damage building foundations or elevated
portions of the building or any nearby buildings during a coastal flood.
      (6)   Pool equipment shall be located above the RFPE whenever
practicable. Pool equipment shall not be located beneath an elevated structure.
   (G)   All elevators, vertical platform lifts, chair lifts, etc., the
following is required:
      (1)   Elevator enclosures must be designed to resist hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic forces as well as erosion, scour, and waves.
      (2)   Utility equipment in coastal high hazard areas (VE Zones) must not
be mounted on, pass through, or be located along breakaway walls.
      (3)   The cab, machine/equipment room, hydraulic pump, hydraulic
reservoir, counter weight and roller guides, hoist cable, limit switches,
electric hoist motor, electrical junction box, circuit panel, and electrical
control panel are all required to be above RFPE. When this equipment cannot be
located above the RFPE, it must be constructed using flood damage-resistant
components.
      (4)   Elevator shafts/enclosures that extend below the RFPE shall be
constructed of reinforced masonry block or reinforced concrete walls and
located on the landward side of the building to provide increased protection
from flood damage. Drainage must be provided for the elevator pit.
      (5)   Flood damage-resistant materials can also be used inside and
outside the elevator cab to reduce flood damage. Use only stainless steel doors
and door frames below the BFE. Grouting in of door frames and sills is
recommended.
      (6)   If an elevator is designed to provide access to areas below the
BFE, it shall be equipped with a float switch system that will activate during
a flood and send the elevator cab to a floor above the RFPE.
   (H)   Accessory structures, regardless of size or cost, shall not be
permitted below elevated structures.
   (I)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the
provisions of §
152.21 and divisions (C) and (D) of this section, on the current version of the
North Carolina V-Zone certification form or equivalent local version. In
addition, prior to the certificate of compliance/occupancy issuance, a
registered professional engineer or architect shall certify the finished
construction is compliant with the design, specifications and plans for VE Zone
construction.
   (J)   Fill/grading.
      (1)   Minor grading and the placement of minor quantities of
nonstructural fill may be permitted for landscaping and for drainage purposes
under and around buildings and for support of parking slabs, pool decks, patios
and walkways.
      (2)   The fill material must be similar and consistent with the natural
soils in the area.
      (3)   The placement of site-compatible, non-structural fill under or
around an elevated building is limited to two feet. Fill greater than two feet
must include an analysis prepared by a qualified registered design professional
demonstrating no harmful diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave
reflection that would increase damage to adjacent elevated buildings and
structures.
      (4)   Nonstructural fill with finished slopes that are steeper than five
units horizontal to one unit vertical shall be permitted only if an analysis
prepared by a qualified registered design professional demonstrates no harmful
diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase
damage to adjacent elevated buildings and structures.
   (K)   There shall be no alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands which
would increase potential flood damage.
   (L)   No manufactured homes shall be permitted except in an existing
manufactured home park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be
placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided
the anchoring and elevation standards of this section have been satisfied.
   (M)   Recreational vehicles may be permitted in coastal high hazard areas
provided that they meet the recreational vehicle criteria of §
152.31(F)(1).
   (N)   A deck that is structurally attached to a building or structure shall
have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member at or above the
regulatory flood protection elevation and any supporting members that extend
below the regulatory flood protection elevation shall comply with the
foundation requirements that apply to the building or structure, which shall be
designed to accommodate any increased loads resulting from the attached deck.
The increased loads must be considered in the design of the primary structure
and included in the V-Zone certification required under §
152.21(C)(6).
   (O)   A deck or patio that is located below the regulatory flood protection
elevation shall be structurally independent from buildings or structures and
their foundation systems, and shall be designed and constructed either to
remain intact and in place during design flood conditions or to break apart
into small pieces to minimize debris during flooding that is capable of causing
structural damage to the building or structure or to adjacent buildings and
structures.
   (P)   In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than
buildings and structures shall be permitted only if also authorized by the
appropriate state or local authority; if located outside the footprint of, and
not structurally attached to, buildings and structures; and if analyses
prepared by qualified registered design professionals demonstrate no harmful
diversion of floodwaters or wave runup and wave reflection that would increase
damage to adjacent buildings and structures. Such other development activities
include but are not limited to:
      (1)   Bulkheads, seawalls, retaining walls, revetments, and similar
erosion control structures;
      (2)   Solid fences and privacy walls, and fences prone to trapping
debris, unless designed and constructed to fail under flood conditions less
than the design flood or otherwise function to avoid obstruction of
floodwaters.
      (3)   Docks, piers, and similar structures.
   (Q)   No more than four electrical outlets and no more than four electrical
switches may be permitted below RFPE unless required by Building Code.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.36 STANDARDS FOR COASTAL A ZONE (CAZ) LiMWA.
   Structures in CAZs shall be designed and constructed to meet V Zone
requirements, including requirements for breakaway walls. However, the NFIP
regulations also require flood openings in walls surrounding enclosures below
elevated buildings in CAZs (see Technical Bulletin 1, Openings in Foundation
Walls and Walls of Enclosures). Breakaway walls used in CAZs must have flood
openings that allow for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters to minimize
damage caused by hydrostatic loads. Openings also function during smaller
storms or if anticipated wave loading does not occur with the base flood.
   (A)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated so
that the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
(excluding pilings or columns) is no lower than the regulatory flood protection
elevation. Floodproofing shall not be utilized on any structures in Coastal A
Zones to satisfy the regulatory flood protection elevation requirements.
   (B)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall have the space
below the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor
either be free of obstruction or constructed with breakaway walls, open wood
latticework or insect screening, provided they are not part of the structural
support of the building and are designed so as to breakaway, under abnormally
high tides or wave action without causing damage to the elevated portion of the
building or supporting foundation system or otherwise jeopardizing the
structural integrity of the building. The following design specifications shall
be met:
      (1)   Material shall consist of open wood or plastic lattice having at
least 40% of its area open; or
      (2)   Insect screening; or
      (3)   Breakaway walls shall meet the following design specifications:
         (a)   Breakaway walls shall have flood openings to automatically
equalize hydrostatic flood forces on walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. To meet this requirement, the openings must either be certified
by a professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the design criteria
in §
152.31(D)(3); and
         (b)   Design safe loading resistance shall be not less than 10 nor
more than 20 pounds per square foot; or
         (c)   Breakaway walls that exceed a design safe loading resistance of
20 pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by State or
local codes) shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the breakaway wall will collapse from a water load less than
that which would occur during the base flood event, and the elevated portion of
the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse,
displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water
loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and non-
structural). The water loading values used shall be those associated with the
base flood. The wind loading values used shall be those required by the North
Carolina State Building Code.
   (C)   Concrete pads, including patios, decks, parking pads, walkways,
driveways, etc. must meet the provisions of §
152.35(E).
   (D)   All new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
provisions of §
152.35(C).
   (E)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the
design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the
provisions of §§
152.21 and
152.35(C) and (D), on the current version of the North Carolina V-Zone
certification form or a locally developed V-Zone certification form.
   (F)   Recreational vehicles may be permitted in coastal A Zones provided
that they meet the recreational vehicle criteria of §
152.31(F)(1).
   (G)   Fill/grading must meet the provisions of §
152.35(J).
   (H)   Decks and patios must meet the provisions of §
152.35(N) and (O).
   (I)   In coastal high hazard areas, development activities other than
buildings and structures must meet the provisions of §
152.35(P).
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.37 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (ZONE AO).
   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
152.11, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas have
special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding
is unpredictable and indeterminate. In addition to §§
152.30 and
152.31, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
following requirements:
   (A)   The reference level shall be elevated at least as high as the depth
number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), in feet, plus a
freeboard of four feet, above the highest adjacent grade; or at least four feet
above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.
   (B)   Non-residential structures may, in lieu of elevation, be floodproofed
to the same level as required in division (A) of this section so that the
structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below that
level shall be watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. Certification is
required in accordance with §§
152.21(C) and 152.31(B).
   (C)   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes,
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.38 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (ZONE AH).
   Located within the special flood hazard areas established in §
152.11, are areas designated as shallow flooding areas. These areas are subject
to inundation by 1%-annual-chance shallow flooding (usually areas of ponding)
where average depths are one to three feet. Base flood elevations are derived
from detailed hydraulic analyses are shown in this zone. In addition to §§
152.30 and
152.31, all new construction and substantial improvements shall meet the
following requirements:
   (A)   Adequate drainage paths shall be provided around structures on slopes,
to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
LEGAL STATUS PROVISIONS
§ 152.40 EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES UNDER THE EXISTING FLOOD DAMAGE
PREVENTION ORDINANCE.
   (A)   This chapter in part comes forward by re-enactment of some of the
provisions of the Pamlico County Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance enacted
August 5, 1985 as amended, and it is not the intention to repeal but rather to
re-enact and continue to enforce without interruption of such existing
provisions, so that all rights and liabilities that have accrued thereunder are
reserved and may be enforced. The enactment of this chapter shall not affect
any action, suit or proceeding instituted or pending. All provisions of the
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of Pamlico County enacted on August 5, 1985,
as amended, which are not reenacted herein are repealed. The Pamlico County
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance was adopted by the Town of Minnesott Beach
prior to its enrollment in the Regular Program of the National Flood Insurance
Program on September 23, 1985.
   (B)   The date of the initial Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance for Pamlico
County is August 5, 1985.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.41 EFFECT UPON OUTSTANDING FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the plans,
construction, size, or designated use of any development or any part thereof
for which a floodplain development permit has been granted by the Floodplain
Administrator or his or her authorized agents before the time of passage of
this chapter; provided, however, that when construction is not begun under such
outstanding permit within a period of six months subsequent to the date of
issuance of the outstanding permit, construction or use shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020)
§ 152.99 PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to comply with any of
its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established
in connection with grants of variance, shall constitute a Class 1 misdemeanor
pursuant to G.S. § 143-215.58. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to
comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined
not more than $100 or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both. Each day
such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein
contained shall prevent the town from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(Ord. passed 5-12-2020; Ord. passed 7-6-2022)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   [Reserved]
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to North Carolina General Statutes
References to 1981 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NORTH CAROLINA GENERAL STATUTES
 
G.S. Cites Code Section
G.S. Cites                         Code Section
1-593                              10.05
Chapter 7A                         152.24
14-4                               10.99,
                                   151.999
20-171.1                           75.02
20-219.11                          76.09,
                                   76.10
20-219.12                          76.11
Chapter 29                         151.037
44A-4                              76.12
44A-5                              76.12
44A-6                              76.12
                                   151.037,
47-30                              151.328,
                                   151.334
105-330.9(a)                       93.31
Chapter 113A, Article 4            151.356
113A-100 et seq.                   151.217
122C-3(11)                         151.037
Chapter 130A, Article 9            152.05
130A-19                            93.45
130A-290(a)(6)                     152.05
130A-290(a)(35)                    152.05
130A-290(a)(36                     152.05
132-1 et seq.                      39.01
Chapter 136, Article 2A, 136-44.14 151.355
136-102.6                          151.354
136-143                            76.15
Chapter 143, Article 21, Part 6    152.01
Chapter 143, Article 33            30.02
143-143.15                         152.31
143-145(7)                         151.037
143-215.58                         152.23,
                                   152.99
143-318.11                         151.055
143-755                            151.024,
                                   151.025
Chapter 153A, Article 6            152.01
Chapter 160A, Article 8            152.01
Chapter 160A, Article 10           91.07
160A-175                           93.50
160A-193                           93.50
Chapter 160D                       151.024,
                                   151.270
Chapter 160D, Articles 7, 9, 11    152.01
Chapter 160D, Article 7            151.037
Chapter 160D, Article 8            151.037
Chapter 160D, Article 11           151.024
Chapter 160D, Article 12           91.07
Chapter 160D, Part 2               151.037
160D-1-02                          151.076
160D-1-9(d)                        151.070
160D-18(d)                         151.271
                                   Ch. 151,
160D-102                           151.002,
                                   151.271
160D-103                           36.03
160D-105                           Ch. 151
160D-106                           10.99
160D-107                           36.03
160D-108                           151.024
160D-108(b)                        151.003
160D-108(c)                        151.024
160D-108.1                         151.024
160D-109                           Ch. 151
160D-111                           10.18
160D-200                           151.053
160D-202                           151.053
                                   151.037,
160D-301                           151.050,
                                   151.052
160D-302                           151.070
160D-402(b)                        150.02
160D-403                           151.999
160D-403(b)                        151.070
160D-403(f)                        151.196,
                                   152.22
160D-404                           151.024
                                   10.99,
160D-404(c)                        93.45,
                                   150.02
160D-405                           151.024,
                                   151.070
160D-405(f)                        151.024
160D-406                           151.070
160D-501                           151.037
160D-502                           151.051
160D-601                           151.074
160D-601(a)                        91.07
160D-602(b)                        151.270
160D-603                           151.271
160D-605(b)                        151.051
160D-702                           151.070
160D-703                           151.051
160D-705                           151.070
160D-801                           151.287,
                                   151.288
160D-802                           151.037
160D-802(a)(2)                     151.327
160D-803                           151.326
160D-804                           151.325
160D-806                           151.307
160D-903                           151.053
160D-909                           151.051
160D-949                           91.07
160D-1102                          150.02
160D-1104                          150.02
160D-1108                          151.999
160D-1201                          91.07
160D-1203                          91.07
160D-1203(8)                       91.07
160D-1206                          91.07
160D-1210                          91.07
160D-1402                          151.075,
                                   151.076
160D-1402(c)                       151.072,
                                   151.075
160D-1402(h)                       151.076
160D-1402(j)                       151.076
160D-1405                          151.070
164-7                              10.14
166A-19.31(b)                      36.02
                                   
 
REFERENCES TO 1981 CODE
1981 Code Section 2011 Code Section
1981 Code Section  2011 Code Section
Ch. A, Art. I, 2   30.02
Ch. A, Art. I, 3   30.03
Ch. A, Art. I, 4   30.04
Ch. A, Art. I, 6   30.06
Ch. A, Art. II, 1  31.01
Ch. A, Art. II, 2  31.02
Ch. A, Art. II, 3  31.03
Ch. A, Art. III, 1 32.01
Ch. A, Art. III, 2 32.03
Ch. A, Art. III, 3 32.04
Ch. A, Art. III, 4 32.06
Ch. A, Art. III, 5 32.07
Ch. C, Art. II, 1  35.15
Ch. C, Art. II, 2  35.19
Ch. C, Art. II, 3  35.20
Ch. C, Art. II, 4  35.21
Ch. C, Art. II, 5  35.17
Ch. D, Art. I, 1   90.01
Ch. D, Art. I, 2   90.02
Ch. D, Art. I, 3   90.03
Ch. D, Art. I, 4   90.04
Ch. D, Art. I, 5   90.05
Ch. D, Art. I, 6   90.06
Ch. D, Art. I, 7   90.07
Ch. D, Art. I, 8   90.08
Ch. D, Art. II, 1  90.20
Ch. D, Art. II, 2  90.21
Ch. D, Art. II, 3  90.22
Ch. D, Art. III, 1 90.35
Ch. D, Art. III, 2 90.36
Ch. D, Art. III, 3 90.37
Ch. D, Art. III, 4 90.38
Ch. F, Art. I, 1   70.01
Ch. F, Art. II, 1  71.01
Ch. F, Art. II, 2  71.02
Ch. F, Art. II, 3  71.06
Ch. F, Art. II, 4  71.03
Ch. F, Art. II, 5  71.04
Ch. F, Art. II, 6  71.05
Ch. F, Art. III, 1 72.01
Ch. F, Art. III, 2 72.02
Ch. F, Art. III, 3 72.03
Ch. F, Art. IV, 1  73.01
Ch. F, Art. IV, 2  73.02
Ch. F, Art. IV, 3  73.03
Ch. F, Art. IV, 4  73.04
Ch. F, Art. IV, 5  73.05
Ch. F, Art. IV, 6  73.06
Ch. F, Art. IV, 7  73.07
Ch. F, Art. IV, 8  73.07
Ch. F, Art. IV, 9  73.09
Ch. F, Art. V, 8   74.01
Ch. F, Art. V, 9   75.01
Ch. F, Art. V, 12  74.02
Ch. F, Art. V, 14  74.03
Ch. F, Art. VI, 1  70.15
Ch. F, Art. VI, 2  70.16
Ch. F, Art. VI, 3  70.17
Ch. F, Art. VI, 4  70.18
Ch. G, Art. I, 2   91.01
Ch. G, Art. I, 4   91.02
Ch. G, Art. I, 5   91.03
Ch. G, Art. I, 6   91.04
Ch. G, Art. I, 7   91.05
Ch. G, Art. I, 8   91.06
Ch. G, Art. II, 1  92.01
Ch. G, Art. II, 2  92.02
Ch. G, Art. II, 3  92.03
Ch. G, Art. II, 4  92.04
Ch. G, Art. II, 5  92.05
Ch. G, Art. II, 6  92.06
Ch. G, Art. II, 7  92.07
Ch. G, Art. III, 1 91.25
Ch. G, Art. III, 2 91.26
Ch. H, Art. I, 1   130.01
Ch. H, Art. I, 2   130.02
Ch. H, Art. I, 3   130.03
Ch. H, Art. I, 4   130.04
Ch. H, Art. I, 6   130.05
Ch. H, Art. I, 7   130.06
Ch. H, Art. II, 1  93.01
Ch. H, Art. II, 2  93.02
Ch. H, Art. II, 3  131.01
Ch. H, Art. II, 4  93.15
Ch. H, Art. III, 1 94.02
Ch. H, Art. III, 2 94.03
Ch. H, Art. III, 3 94.05
Ch. H, Art. III, 4 94.06
                   
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. No.    Date Passed Description
-           --          Charter 3
-           2-9-1999    94.03,
                        94.06
-           9-9-2003    94.07
- , 1.1     2-10-2009   151.001
- , 1.2     2-10-2009   151.002
- , 1.3     2-10-2009   151.003
- , 1.4     2-10-2009   151.004
- , 1.5     2-10-2009   151.005
- , 1.6     2-10-2009   151.006
- , 1.7     2-10-2009   151.007
- , 1.8     2-10-2009   151.008
- , 1.9     2-10-2009   151.009
- , 1.10    2-10-2009   151.010
- , 1.11    2-10-2009   151.011
- , 1.12    2-10-2009   151.012
- , 1.13    2-10-2009   151.013
- , 1.14    2-10-2009   151.014
- , 1.15    2-10-2009   151.015
- , 1.16    2-10-2009   151.016
- , 1.17    2-10-2009   151.017
- , 1.18    2-10-2009   151.018
- , 1.19    2-10-2009   151.019
- , 1.20    2-10-2009   151.020
- , 1.21    2-10-2009   151.021
- , 1.22    2-10-2009   151.022
- , 2.1     2-10-2009   151.035
- , 2.2     2-10-2009   151.036
- , 2.3     2-10-2009   151.037
- , 3.1     2-10-2009   151.050
- , 3.2     2-10-2009   151.051
- , 3.3     2-10-2009   151.052
- , 3.4     2-10-2009   151.053
- , 3.5     2-10-2009   151.054
- , 3.6     2-10-2009   151.055
- , 3.7     2-10-2009   151.056
- , 3.14    2-10-2009   151.090
- , 3.15    2-10-2009   151.091
- , 3.16    2-10-2009   151.092
- , 3.17    2-10-2009   151.093
- , 3.18    2-10-2009   151.094
- , 3.19    2-10-2009   151.999
- , 3.20    2-10-2009   151.095
- , 3.21    2-10-2009   151.096
- , 3.22    2-10-2009   151.097
- , 4.1     2-10-2009   151.110
- , 4.2     2-10-2009   151.111
- , 4.3     2-10-2009   151.112
- , 4.4     2-10-2009   151.113
- , 5.1     2-10-2009   151.125
- , 5.2     2-10-2009   151.126
- , 5.3     2-10-2009   151.127
- , Art. VI 2-10-2009   151.140
- , 6.1     2-10-2009   151.140
- , 6.2     2-10-2009   151.140
- , 6.3     2-10-2009   151.140
- , 6.4     2-10-2009   151.140
- , 6.5     2-10-2009   151.140
- , 6.6     2-10-2009   151.140
- , 6.7     2-10-2009   151.140
- , 7.1     2-10-2009   151.160
- , 7.2     2-10-2009   151.161
- , 7.3     2-10-2009   151.162
- , 7.4     2-10-2009   151.163
- , 7.5     2-10-2009   151.164
- , 7.6     2-10-2009   151.165
- , 7.7     2-10-2009   151.166
- , 7.8     2-10-2009   151.167
- , 7.9     2-10-2009   151.168
- , 8.1     2-10-2009   151.180
- , 8.2     2-10-2009   151.181
- , 9.1     2-10-2009   151.195
- , 9.2     2-10-2009   151.196
- , 9.3     2-10-2009   151.197
- , 10.1    2-10-2009   151.210
- , 10.2    2-10-2009   151.211
- , 10.3    2-10-2009   151.212
- , 10.4    2-10-2009   151.213
- , 10.5    2-10-2009   151.214
- , 10.6    2-10-2009   151.215
- , 10.7    2-10-2009   151.216
- , 10.8    2-10-2009   151.217
- , 11.1    2-10-2009   151.230
- , 11.2    2-10-2009   151.231
- , 11.3    2-10-2009   151.232
- , 11.4    2-10-2009   151.233
- , 11.5    2-10-2009   151.234
- , 12.1    2-10-2009   151.245
- , 12.2    2-10-2009   151.246
- , 12.3    2-10-2009   151.247
- , 12.4    2-10-2009   151.248
- , 12.5    2-10-2009   151.249
- , 12.6    2-10-2009   151.250
- , 13.1    2-10-2009   151.265
- , 13.2    2-10-2009   151.266
- , 13.3    2-10-2009   151.267
- , 13.4    2-10-2009   151.268
- , 13.5    2-10-2009   151.269
- , 13.6    2-10-2009   151.270
- , 13.7    2-10-2009   151.271
- , 14.1    2-10-2009   151.285
- , 14.2    2-10-2009   151.286
- , 14.3    2-10-2009   151.287
- , 14.4    2-10-2009   151.288
- , 14.5    2-10-2009   151.289
- , 14.6    2-10-2009   151.290
- , 14.7    2-10-2009   151.291
- , 14.8    2-10-2009   151.305
- , 14.9    2-10-2009   151.306
- , 14.10   2-10-2009   151.307
- , 14.11   2-10-2009   151.999
- , 14.12   2-10-2009   151.308
- , 14.13   2-10-2009   151.309
- , 14.14   2-10-2009   151.310
- , 14.15   2-10-2009   151.311
- , 14.16   2-10-2009   151.312
- , 14.17   2-10-2009   151.325
- , 14.18   2-10-2009   151.326
- , 14.19   2-10-2009   151.327
- , 14.20   2-10-2009   151.328
- , 14.21   2-10-2009   151.329
- , 14.22   2-10-2009   151.330
- , 14.23   2-10-2009   151.331
- , 14.24   2-10-2009   151.332
- , 14.25   2-10-2009   151.333
- , 14.26   2-10-2009   151.334
- , 14.27   2-10-2009   151.335
- , 14.28   2-10-2009   151.336
- , 14.29   2-10-2009   151.337
- , 14.30   2-10-2009   151.350
- , 14.31   2-10-2009   151.351
- , 14.32   2-10-2009   151.352
- , 14.33   2-10-2009   151.353
- , 14.34   2-10-2009   151.354
- , 14.35   2-10-2009   151.355
- , 14.36   2-10-2009   151.356
- , 14.37   2-10-2009   151.357
- , 14.38   2-10-2009   151.358
- , 14.39   2-10-2009   151.370
- , 14.40   2-10-2009   151.371
- , 14.41   2-10-2009   151.372
- , 14.42   2-10-2009   151.373
- , 14.43   2-10-2009   151.374
- , 14.44   2-10-2009   151.375
- , 14.45   2-10-2009   151.376
- , 14.46   2-10-2009   151.377
                        110.04,
                        151.037,
                        151.162 
-           8-12-2014   151.165,
                        151.167,
                        151.181,
                        151.210
-           6-9-2015    91.06
-           11-10-2015  94.07
-           4-14-2015   151.070 
                        151.077
                        91.02,
                        151.037,
-           7-11-2017   151.164,
                        151.168,
                        151.197,
                        151.373
-           11-12-2017  94.99
-           7-10-2018   91.06
-           2-11-2020   90.01
-           3-10-2020   151.164
                        152.01 
                        152.05,
                        152.10 
                        152.16,
                        152.20 
-           5-12-2020   152.24,
                        152.30 
                        152.38,
                        152.40,
                        152.41,
                        152.99
-           1-19-2021   151.016
                        10.18,
                        10.99,
                        36.03,
                        93.45,
                        150.02,
                        151.002,
                        151.003,
                        151.016,
                        151.023,
                        151.037,
                        151.050 
                        151.053,
-           -- -2021    151.070,
                        151.072,
                        151.075,
                        151.076,
                        151.162,
                        151.163,
                        151.271,
                        151.287,
                        151.288,
                        151.307,
                        151.325,
                        151.326,
                        151.999
-           -6-8-2021   151.214
                        151.016,
                        151.112,
                        151.162 
-           -5-10-2022  151.164,
                        151.166 
                        151.168,
                        151.181
-           -7-6-2022   151.166
                        151.024,
                        151.025,
                        151.035,
                        151.037,
                        151.072 
                        151.076,
                        151.094,
                        151.126,
                        151.162 
                        151.165,
-           -7-6-2022   151.196,
                        151.197,
                        151.232,
                        151.265,
                        151.268 
                        151.270,
                        151.327,
                        151.328,
                        151.333,
                        151.999,
                        152.22,
                        152.99
-           2-14-2023   151.037
-           2-14-2023   151.160
                        151.037,
-           5-30-2023   151.245 -
                        151.251
                        151.037,
-           2023        151.112,
                        151.113, 151.182
                        30.01,
                        32.03,
                        33.01,
                        35.15 -
                        35.19,
                        75.02,
                        91.08,
                        94.01,
                        94.04,
                        94.08,
                        94.99,
                        110.04,
                        110.05,
                        151.037,
-           2024        151.072,
                        151.073,
                        151.076,
                        151.091,
                        151.094,
                        151.140,
                        151.164 -
                        151.168,
                        151.181,
                        151.195,
                        151.212,
                        151.217,
                        151.231,
                        151.232,
                        151.269
                        76.01 -
-           2-13-2024   76.16,
                        76.99
                        93.01 ,  
                        93.02,
                        93.15,
-           2-13-2024   93.30,
                        93.31,
                        93.45 -
                        93.51
- , § 2    10-8-2024   151.037
- , § 3    10-8-2024   151.210
-           6-10-2025   91.07
-           8-12-2025   151.181
                       
 
